    “There’s  a  shortage  of  clear  thinking  about  hard  problems.  Our

universities produce precious little of it, but you can find an abundant supply

in the writings of Frédéric Bastiat, the clearest, most sensible economist who

ever wrote. Bastiat can be understood by a Nobel Prize winner, a taxi driver,

a student, an entrepreneur . . . even a politician! Read this book and get set

for a life-changing experience.”

  —Tom  G.  Palmer,  author  of  Realizing  Freedom:  Libertarian  Theory,

History, and Practice


What Your Professors Won’t Tell You What Your Professors

Won’t Tell You


Selected Works of Frédéric Bastiat

Foreword by F.A. Hayek

Closing Essay by Tom G. Palmer

Students For Liberty Jameson Books, Inc.
Published  by  Students  For  Liberty  /  Jameson  Books,  Inc.  Reprinted  with  the  permission  of  the
Foundation for Economic Education. www.FEE.org
  Edited by Clark Ruper
Copyediting by Hannah Mead and Charles King Cover design by Valerie Crain
Book design by Cox-King Multimedia: www.ckmm.com Bastiat translated by Seymour Cain
  For information and other requests please write Students For Liberty, PO Box 17321, Arlington,
VA 22216, or Jameson Books, Inc., 722 Columbus Street, P.O. Box 738, Ottawa, Illinois 61350.
ISBN 978-0-89803-169-0 Printed in the United States of AmericaContents


Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix Foreword (F.A. Hayek) .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii

What Is Seen and What Is Not Seen (Frédéric Bastiat) . . . . 1

  1. The Broken Window . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

2. The Demobilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

3. Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

4. Theaters and Fine Arts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

5. Public Works. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

6. Middlemen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

7. Restraint of Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

8. Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

9. Credit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

10. Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

11. Thrift and Luxury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

12. The Right to Employment and the Right to Profit . 44

A Petition (Frédéric Bastiat) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47

A Negative Railroad (Frédéric Bastiat) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52

The Balance of Trade (Frédéric Bastiat) . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

Twenty Myths about Markets (Tom G. Palmer). . . . . . . . 57

  Ethical Criticisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

Economic Criticisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60

Hybrid Ethical/Economic Criticisms . . . . . . . . . . . 72

Overly Enthusiastic Defenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82


Introduction


  The  Economics  of  Freedom  is  a  joint  project  of  the  Atlas  Economic

Research Foundation and Students For Liberty. Like Atlas, we at SFL believe

that ideas know no borders. Our affiliates around the world work to promote

free and just societies. We are young idealists who know that liberty is not

only beautiful and inspiring, but that it works in practice. We, the youth, are

taking up the task of educating ourselves and our fellow students about the

great  issues  of  freedom,  justice,  prosperity,  and  peace.  We  build  onfoundations  built  by  generations  of  thinkers,  entrepreneurs,  activists,  and

scholars.

  This movement is diverse. Our members speak many languages, profess

many  religions,  and  come  from  many  nations,  but  we  are  united  by  our

common principles: economic freedom to choose how to provide for oneself,

social freedom to choose how to live one’s life, and intellectual and academic

freedom. We believe that freedom does not come in pieces, but rather that it

is a single and indivisible concept that must be defended at all times.

  Why  The  Economics  of  Freedom?  Because  at  present,  fallacious

economic thought is being used to justify the steady erosion of our freedoms.

The examples are plentiful: “stimulus packages” that pile debt on top of debt;

increased military spending in the name of “job creation”; foolish destruction

of  wealth  (“cash  for  clunkers”)  to  benefit  powerful  industries;  trade

obstructions (quotas and tariffs) that benefit the few at the expense of the

many and undermine international peace; phony “regulations” that do not

make  things  “regular,”  but  instead  disrupt  and  disorder  economies;  and

confiscation,  nationalization,  and  plunder.  All  are  in  vogue  among  the

political classes.

  Our generation is not the first to be confronted by such fallacies. Frédéric

Bastiat destroyed the very same economic fallacies many generations ago.

Bastiat was a nineteenth century French political economist who dedicated

the  last  years  of  his  short  life  to  proving  that  government  by  its  nature

possesses neither the moral authority to intervene in our freedom nor the

practical ability to create prosperity through its intervention.

  The Economics of Freedom presents some of Bastiat’s most important

essays. They reveal a sharp mind systematically debunking one fallacy after

another and a moral conscience that recoiled from violence and tyranny. To

read and understand “What Is Seen and What Is Not Seen” is to contemplate

the world in a new light. It is one of the most important essays ever written in

economics. In addition to Bastiat’s writings, this book includes two essays

that show the importance of Bastiat’s ideas and then update and apply them

to more contemporary issues.

  The Foreword to Bastiat’s essays was written by the 1974 Nobel Laureate

in economic science, F.A. Hayek. Hayek was not only a pioneer of economic

thought who gained fame for his work showing why socialism fails and how

markets  utilize  dispersed  knowledge  (see  his  essay  on  “The  Use  of

Knowledge in Society,” which is available online at www.econlib.org, andhis  Nobel  lecture,  which  is  available  at  NobelPrize.org).  He  was  also  a

forceful champion of liberty. The Road to Serfdom, published in 1944 in

England, has become a classic of political thought, as have The Constitution

of Liberty and Law, Legislation, and Liberty.

  The concluding essay, “Twenty Myths about Markets” by Dr. Tom G.

Palmer, was first delivered in 2007 in Nairobi, Kenya, at a meeting of the

Mont Pelerin Society, the international society that Hayek founded in 1947.

Dr. Palmer is a senior fellow at the Cato Institute and vice president of the

Atlas Economic Research Foundation, a worldwide network of think tanks.

Palmer formulates, considers, and refutes the myths that pass for wisdom,

including even some “overly enthusiastic defenses” of markets that misstate

their nature.

  The academy is, perhaps unsurprisingly, full of people who think that

they are smart enough to run the lives of others. They are not. Hence the

subtitle of this volume: “What Your Professors Won’t Tell You.” While your

teachers  likely  value  freedom,  they  too  often  overlook  the  broader

implications of government intervention, particularly in the economic sphere.

Because they overestimate their own intellectual powers, they ignore the
x

    “unintended consequences” of intervention into the voluntary interactions

of others. Nor do they understand that the theories they propound are too

often  deployed  by  special  interests,  which  are  better  at  manipulating  and

abusing power than are university professors. That is why we at Students For

Liberty have taken up this cause, because if we do not advocate liberty in all

of its forms, who will?

  We  believe  that  a  free  society  demands  respect  for  the  freedom  of

everyone  to  pursue  his  or  her  own  goals  and  to  trade  ideas,  goods,  and

services on voluntarily agreed-to terms. When all enjoy equal freedom and

our interactions are voluntary, the result is not chaos, but order; not poverty,

but plenty; not conflict, but cooperation.

  We hope this book has made it into the hands of a curious student with an

open  mind.  If  you  find  the  ideas  of  this  book  interesting,  you  can  visit

www.studentsforliberty.org to learn more about the student movement for

liberty and join the fight for a free academy and a free society.


Foreword


by F.A. Hayek  Even those who may question the eminence of Frédéric Bastiat as an

economic  theorist  will  grant  that  he  was  a  publicist  of  genius.  Joseph

Schumpeter  calls  him  “the  most  brilliant  economic  journalist  who  ever

lived.” For the purpose of introducing the present volume, which contains

some of the most successful of his writings for the general public, we might

well leave it at that. One might even grant Schumpeter’s harsh assessment of

Bastiat that “he was not a theorist” without seriously diminishing his stature.

It is true that when, at the end of his extremely short career as a writer, he

attempted to provide a theoretical justification for his general conceptions, he

did not satisfy the professionals. It would indeed have been a miracle if a man

who, after only five years as a regular writer on public affairs, attempted in a

few months, and with a mortal illness rapidly closing in on him, to defend the

points on which he differed from established doctrine, had fully succeeded in

this too. Yet one may ask whether it was not only his early death at the age of

forty-nine that prevented him. His polemical writings, which in consequence

are the most important ones he has left, certainly prove that he had an insight

into what was significant and a gift for going to the heart of the matter that

would  have  provided  him  with  ample  material  for  real  contributions  to

science.

  Nothing illustrates this better than the celebrated title of the first essay in

the  present  volume.  “What  is  seen  and  what  is  not  seen  in  political

economy!” No one has ever stated more clearly in a single phrase the central

difficulty of a rational economic policy and, I would like to add, the decisive

argument for economic freedom. It is the idea compressed into these few

words that made me use the word “genius” in the opening sentence. It is

indeed a text around which one might expound a whole system of libertarian

economic policy. And though it constitutes the title for only the first essay in

this volume, it provides the leading idea for all. Bastiat illustrates its meaning

over and over again in refuting the current
xiii

  fallacies  of  his  time.  I  shall  later  indicate  that,  though  the  views  he

combats are today usually advanced only in a more sophisticated guise, they

have basically not changed very much since Bastiat’s time. But first I want to

say a few words about the more general significance of his central idea.

  This is simply that if we judge measures of economic policy solely by

their  immediate  and  concretely  foreseeable  effects,  we  shall  not  only  not

achieve  a  viable  order  but  shall  be  certain  progressively  to  extinguish

freedom  and  thereby  prevent  more  good  than  our  measures  will  produce.Freedom is important in order that all the different individuals can make full

use of the particular circumstances of which only they know. We therefore

never know what beneficial actions we prevent if we restrict their freedom to

serve their fellows in whatever manner they wish. All acts of interference,

however, amount to such restrictions. They are, of course, always undertaken

to achieve some definite objective. Against the foreseen direct results of such

actions of government we shall in each individual case be able to balance

only the mere probability that some unknown but beneficial actions by some

individuals will be prevented. In consequence, if such decisions are made

from case to case and not governed by an attachment to freedom as a general

principle, freedom is bound to lose in almost every case. Bastiat was indeed

right in treating freedom of choice as a moral principle that must never be

sacrificed to considerations of expediency; because there is perhaps no aspect

of freedom that would not be abolished if it were to be respected only where

the concrete damage caused by its abolition can be pointed out.

    Bastiat directed his arguments against certain ever-recurring fallacies as

they were employed in his time. Few people would employ them today quite

as naively as it was still possible to do then. But let the reader not deceive

himself  that  these  same  fallacies  no  longer  play  an  important  role  in

contemporary  economic  discussion:  they  are  today  expressed  merely  in  a

more sophisticated form and are therefore more difficult to detect. The reader

who  has  learnt  to  recognize  these  stock  fallacies  in  their  simpler

manifestations  will  at  least  be  on  his  guard  when  he  finds  the  same

conclusions derived from what appears to be a more scientific argument. It is

characteristic of much of recent economics that by ever new arguments it has

tried to vindicate those very prejudices which are so attractive because the

maxims that follow from them are so pleasant or convenient: spending is a

good thing, and saving is bad; waste benefits and economy harms the mass of

the people; money will do more good in the hands of the government than in

those of the people; it is the duty of government to see that everybody gets

what he deserves; etc., etc.

  None  of  these  ideas  has  lost  any  of  its  power  in  our  time.  The  only

difference is that Bastiat, in combating them, was on the whole fighting on

the side of the professional economists against popular beliefs exploited by

interested  parties,  while  similar  proposals  are  today  propagated  by  an

influential school of economists in a most impressive and, to the layman,

largely  unintelligible  garb.  It  is  doubtful  whether  there  is  one  among  thefallacies which one might have hoped Bastiat had killed once and for all that

has not experienced its resurrection. I shall give only one example. To an

account  of  Bastiat’s  best-known  economic  fable,  The  Petition  of  the

Candlemakers against the Competition of the Sun, in which it is demanded

that  windows  should  be  prohibited  because  of  the  benefit  which  the

prosperity of the candlemakers would confer on everyone else, a well-known

French textbook of the history of economics adds in its latest edition the

following footnote: “It should be noted that according to Keynes—on the

assumption of underemployment and in accordance with the theory of the

multiplier—this argument of the candlemakers is literally and fully valid.”

  The attentive reader will notice that, while Bastiat grapples with so many

economic panaceas which are familiar to us, one of the main dangers of our

time does not appear in his pages. Though he has to deal with various queer

proposals for using credit which were current in his time, straight inflation

through  a  government  deficit  seemed  in  his  age  not  a  major  danger.  An

increase  of  expenditure  means  for  him  necessarily  and  immediately  an

increase in taxation. The reason is that, as among all people who have gone

through a major inflation within living memory, a continuous depreciation of

money was not a thing with which people would have put up with in his day.

So  if  the  reader  should  be  inclined  to  feel  superior  to  the  rather  simple

fallacies that Bastiat often finds
xv

  it necessary to refute, he should remember that in some other respects his

compatriots of more than a hundred years ago were considerably wiser than

our generation.

F.A. Hayek


What Is Seen and What Is Not Seen


by Frédéric Bastiat

  In the economic sphere an act, a habit, an institution, a law produces not

only one effect, but a series of effects. Of these effects, the first alone is

immediate; it appears simultaneously with its cause; it is seen. The other

effects emerge only subsequently; they are not seen; we are fortunate if we

foresee them.

  There is only one difference between a bad economist and a good one: the

bad  economist  confines  himself  to  the  visible  effect;  the  good  economist

takes into account both the effect that can be seen and those effects that mustbe foreseen.

  Yet this difference is tremendous, for it almost always happens that when

the  immediate  consequence  is  favorable,  the  later  consequences  are

disastrous, and vice versa. Whence it follows that the bad economist pursues

a small present good that will be followed by a great evil to come, while the

good economist pursues a great good to come, at the risk of a small present

evil.

  The same thing, of course, is true of health and morals. Often, the sweeter

the  first  fruit  of  a  habit,  the  more  bitter  are  its  later  fruits:  for  example,

debauchery, sloth, prodigality. When a man is impressed by the effect that is

seen  and  has  not  yet  learned  to  discern  the  effects  that  are  not  seen,  he

indulges  in  deplorable  habits,  not  only  through  natural  inclination,  but

deliberately.

  This explains man’s necessarily painful evolution. Ignorance surrounds

him  at  his  cradle;  therefore,  he  regulates  his  acts  according  to  their  first

consequences, the only ones that, in his infancy, he can see. It is only after a

long time that he learns to take account of the others. Two very different

masters teach him this lesson: experience and foresight. Experience teaches

efficaciously but brutally. It instructs us in all the effects of an act by making

us feel them, and we cannot fail to learn eventually, from having been burned

ourselves, that fire burns. I should prefer, insofar as possible, to replace this

rude  teacher  with  one  more  gentle:  foresight.  For  that  reason  I  shall

investigate  the  consequences  of  several  economic  phenomena,  contrasting

those that are seen with those that are not seen.

1. The Broken Window

  Have  you  ever  been  witness  to  the  fury  of  that  solid  citizen,  James

Goodfellow, when his incorrigible son has happened to break a pane of glass?

If  you  have  been  present  at  this  spectacle,  certainly  you  must  also  have

observed that the onlookers, even if there are as many as thirty of them, seem

with one accord to offer the unfortunate owner the selfsame consolation: “It’s

an  ill  wind  that  blows  nobody  some  good.  Such  accidents  keep  industry

going. Everybody has to make a living. What would become of the glaziers if

no one ever broke a window?”

  Now, this formula of condolence contains a whole theory that it is a good

idea for us to expose, flagrante delicto, in this very simple case, since it is

exactly  the  same  as  that  which,  unfortunately,  underlies  most  of  our

economic institutions.  Suppose that it will cost six francs to repair the damage. If you mean that

the  accident  gives  six  francs’  worth  of  encouragement  to  the  aforesaid

industry, I agree. I do not contest it in any way; your reasoning is correct. The

glazier will come, do his job, receive six francs, congratulate himself, and

bless in his heart the careless child. That is what is seen.

  But if, by way of deduction, you conclude, as happens only too often, that

it is good to break windows, that it helps to circulate money, that it results in

encouraging industry in general, I am obliged to cry out: That will never do!

Your theory stops at what is seen. It does not take account of what is not

seen.

  It is not seen that, since our citizen has spent six francs for one thing, he

will not be able to spend them for another. It is not seen that if he had not had

a windowpane to replace, he would have replaced, for example, his worn-out

shoes or added another book to his library. In brief, he would have put his six

francs to some use or other for which he will not now have them.

  Let  us  next  consider  industry  in  general.  The  window  having  been

broken, the glass industry gets six francs’ worth of encouragement; that is

what is seen.

  If the window had not been broken, the shoe industry (or some other)

would have received six francs’ worth of encouragement; that is what is not

seen.

  And if we were to take into consideration what is not seen, because it is a

negative factor, as well as what is seen, because it is a positive factor, we

should understand that there is no benefit to industry in general or to national

employment as a whole, whether windows are broken or not broken.

  Now let us consider James Goodfellow.

On the first hypothesis, that of the broken window, he spends six francs and

has, neither more nor less than before, the enjoyment of one window.

On the second, that in which the accident did not happen, he would have

spent six francs for new shoes and would have had the enjoyment of a pair of

shoes as well as of a window.

Now, if James Goodfellow is part of society, we must conclude that society,

considering its labors and its enjoyments, has lost the value of the broken

window.

From  which,  by  generalizing,  we  arrive  at  this  unexpected  conclusion:

“Society  loses  the  value  of  objects  unnecessarily  destroyed,”  and  at  this

aphorism, which will make the hair of the protectionists stand on end: “Tobreak, to destroy, to dissipate is not to encourage national employment,” or

more briefly: “Destruction is not profitable.”

What will the Moniteur industriel say to this, or the disciples of the estimable

M. de Saint-Chamans, who has calculated with such precision what industry

would gain from the burning of Paris, because of the houses that would have

to be rebuilt?

I am sorry to upset his ingenious calculations, especially since their spirit has

passed into our legislation. But I beg him to begin them again, entering what

is not seen in the ledger beside what is seen.

The reader must apply himself to observe that there are not only two people,

but  three,  in  the  little  drama  that  I  have  presented.  The  one,  James

Goodfellow,  represents  the  consumer,  reduced  by  destruction  to  one

enjoyment instead of two. The other, under the figure of the glazier, shows us

the  producer  whose  industry  the  accident  encourages.  The  third  is  the

shoemaker (or any other manufacturer) whose industry is correspondingly

discouraged by the same cause. It is this third person who is always in the

shadow, and who, personifying what is not seen, is an essential element of

the problem. It is he who makes us understand how absurd it is to see a profit

in destruction. It is he who will soon teach us that it is equally absurd to see a

profit in trade restriction, which is, after all, nothing more nor less than partial

destruction. So, if you get to the bottom of all the arguments advanced in

favor  of  restrictionist  measures,  you  will  find  only  a  paraphrase  of  that

common cliché: “What would become of the glaziers if no one ever broke

any windows?”

2. The Demobilization

  A nation is in the same case as a man. When a man wishes to give himself

a satisfaction, he has to see whether it is worth what it costs. For a nation,

security is the greatest of blessings. If, to acquire it, a hundred thousand men

must be mobilized, and a hundred million francs spent, I have nothing to say.

It is an enjoyment bought at the price of a sacrifice.

  Let there be no misunderstanding, then, about the point I wish to make in

what I have to say on this subject.

A  legislator  proposes  to  discharge  a  hundred  thousand  men,  which  will

relieve the taxpayers of a hundred million francs in taxes.

Suppose  we  confine  ourselves  to  replying  to  him:  “These  one  hundred

thousand men and these one hundred million francs are indispensable to our

national security. It is a sacrifice; but without this sacrifice France would betorn by internal factions or invaded from without.” I have no objection here

to this argument, which may be true or false as the case may be, but which

theoretically  does  not  constitute  any  economic  heresy.  The  heresy  begins

when the sacrifice itself is represented as an advantage, because it brings

profit to someone.

Now, if I am not mistaken, no sooner will the author of the proposal have

descended from the platform, than an orator will rush up and say:

“Discharge a hundred thousand men! What are you thinking of ? What will

become of them? What will they live on? On their earnings? But do you not

know  that  there  is  unemployment  everywhere?  That  all  occupations  are

oversupplied?  Do  you  wish  to  throw  them  on  the  market  to  increase  the

competition and to depress wage rates? Just at the moment when it is difficult

to earn a meager living, is it not fortunate that the state is giving bread to a

hundred  thousand  individuals?  Consider  further  that  the  army  consumes

wine, clothes, and weapons, that it thus spreads business to the factories and

the  garrison  towns,  and  that  it  is  nothing  less  than  a  godsend  to  its

innumerable  suppliers.  Do  you  not  tremble  at  the  idea  of  bringing  this

immense industrial activity to an end?”

This speech, we see, concludes in favor of maintaining a hundred thousand

soldiers, not because of the nation’s need for the services rendered by the

army, but for economic reasons. It is these considerations alone that I propose

to refute.

A hundred thousand men, costing the taxpayers a hundred million francs, live

as well and provide as good a living for their suppliers as a hundred million

francs will allow; that is what is seen.

But  a  hundred  million  francs,  coming  from  the  pockets  of  the  taxpayers,

ceases to provide a living for these taxpayers and their suppliers, to the extent

of a hundred million francs; that is what is not seen. Calculate, figure, and tell

me where there is any profit for the mass of the people.

I will, for my part, tell you where the loss is, and to simplify things, instead

of speaking of a hundred thousand men and a hundred million francs, let us

talk about one man and a thousand francs.

Here we are in the village of A. The recruiters make the rounds and muster

one man. The tax collectors make their rounds also and raise a thousand

francs. The man and the sum are transported to Metz, the one destined to

keep the other alive for a year without doing anything. If you look only at

Metz, yes, you are right a hundred times; the procedure is very advantageous.But if you turn your eyes to the village of A, you will judge otherwise, for,

unless you are blind, you will see that this village has lost a laborer and the

thousand francs that would remunerate his labor, and the business which,

through the spending of these thousand francs, he would spread about him.

At first glance it seems as if the loss is compensated. What took place at the

village now takes place at Metz, and that is all there is to it. But here is where

the loss is. In the village a man dug and labored: he was a worker; at Metz he

goes through “Right dress!” and “Left dress!”: he is a soldier. The money

involved and its circulation are the same in both cases: but in one there were

three hundred days of productive labor; in the other there are three hundreds

days of unproductive labor, on the supposition, of course, that a part of the

army is not indispensable to public security.

Now  comes  demobilization.  You  point  out  to  me  a  surplus  of  a  hundred

thousand workers, intensified competition and the pressure that it exerts on

wage rates. That is what you see.

But here is what you do not see. You do not see that to send home a hundred

thousand soldiers is not to do away with a hundred million francs, but to

return that money to the taxpayers. You do not see that to throw a hundred

thousand workers on the market in this way is to throw in at the same time

the  hundred  million  francs  destined  to  pay  for  their  labor;  that,  as  a

consequence, the same measure that increases the supply of workers also

increases the demand; from which it follows that your lowering of wages is

illusory. You do not see that before, as well as after, the demobilization there

are a hundred million francs corresponding to the hundred thousand men; that

the  whole  difference  consists  in  this:  that  before,  the  country  gives  the

hundred  million  francs  to  the  hundred  thousand  men  for  doing  nothing;

afterwards, it gives them the money for working. Finally, you do not see that

when  a  taxpayer  gives  his  money,  whether  to  a  soldier  in  exchange  for

nothing  or  to  a  worker  in  exchange  for  something,  all  the  more  remote

consequences of the circulation of this money are the same in both cases:

only,  in  the  second  case  the  taxpayer  receives  something;  in  the  first  he

receives nothing. Result: a dead loss for the nation.

The sophism that I am attacking here cannot withstand the test of extended

application, which is the touchstone of all theoretical principles. If, all things

considered, there is a national profit in increasing the size of the army, why

not call the whole male population of the country to the colors?

3. Taxes  Have you ever heard anyone say: “Taxes are the best investment; they are

a life-giving dew. See how many families they keep alive, and follow in

imagination their indirect effects on industry; they are infinite, as extensive as

life itself.”

  To combat this doctrine, I am obliged to repeat the preceding refutation.

Political  economy  knows  very  well  that  its  arguments  are  not  diverting

enough for anyone to say about them: Repetita placent; repetition pleases. So,

like Basile, political economy has “arranged” the proverb for its own use,

quite convinced that, from its mouth, Repetita docent; repetition teaches.

  The advantages that government officials enjoy in drawing their salaries

are what is seen. The benefits that result for their suppliers are also what is

seen. They are right under your nose.

  But the disadvantage that the taxpayers try to free themselves from is

what is not seen, and the distress that results from it for the merchants who

supply them is something further that is not seen, although it should stand out

plainly enough to be seen intellectually.

  When a government official spends on his own behalf one hundred sous

more, this implies that a taxpayer spends on his own behalf one hundred sous

the less. But the spending of the government official is seen, because it is

done; while that of the taxpayer is not seen, because—alas!—he is prevented

from doing it.

  You compare the nation to a parched piece of land and the tax to a life-

giving rain. So be it. But you should also ask yourself where this rain comes

from, and whether it is not precisely the tax that draws the moisture from the

soil and dries it up.

  You should ask yourself further whether the soil receives more of this

precious water from the rain than it loses by the evaporation?

What is quite certain is that, when James Goodfellow counts out a hundred

sous  to  the  tax  collector,  he  receives  nothing  in  return.  When,  then,  a

government official, in spending these hundred sous, returns them to James

Goodfellow, it is for an equivalent value in wheat or in labor. The final result

is a loss of five francs for James Goodfellow.

It is quite true that often, nearly always if you will, the government official

renders an equivalent service to James Goodfellow. In this case there is no

loss on either side; there is only an exchange. Therefore, my argument is not

in any way concerned with useful functions. I say this: If you wish to create a

government  office,  prove  its  usefulness.  Demonstrate  that  to  JamesGoodfellow it is worth the equivalent of what it costs him by virtue of the

services it renders him. But apart from this intrinsic utility, do not cite, as an

argument in favor of opening the new bureau, the advantage that it constitutes

for the bureaucrat, his family, and those who supply his needs; do not allege

that it encourages employment.

When James Goodfellow gives a hundred sous to a government official for a

really useful service, this is exactly the same as when he gives a hundred sous

to a shoemaker for a pair of shoes. It is a case of give-and-take, and the score

is  even.  But  when  James  Goodfellow  hands  over  a  hundred  sous  to  a

government official to receive no service for it or even to be subjected to

inconveniences, it is as if he were to give his money to a thief. It serves no

purpose to say that the official will spend these hundred sous for the great

profit of our national industry; the more the thief can do with them, the more

James Goodfellow could have done with them if he had not met on his way

either the extralegal or the legal parasite.

Let us accustom ourselves, then, not to judge things solely by what is seen,

but rather by what is not seen.

Last year I was on the Finance Committee, for in the Constituent Assembly

the  members  of  the  opposition  were  not  systematically  excluded  from  all

committees. In this the framers of the Constitution acted wisely. We have

heard M. Thiers say: “I have spent my life fighting men of the legitimist party

and of the clerical party. Since, in the face of a common danger, I have come

to know them and we have had heart-to-heart talks, I see that they are not the

monsters I had imagined.”

Yes, enmities become exaggerated and hatreds are intensified between parties

that do not mingle; and if the majority would allow a few members of the

minority to penetrate into the circles of the committees, perhaps it would be

recognized on both sides that their ideas are not so far apart, and above all

that their intentions are not so perverse, as supposed.

However that may be, last year I was on the Finance Committee. Each time

that one of our colleagues spoke of fixing at a moderate figure the salaries of

the President of the Republic, of cabinet ministers, and of ambassadors, he

would be told:

“For the good of the service, we must surround certain offices with an aura of

prestige  and  dignity.  That  is  the  way  to  attract  to  them  men  of  merit.

Innumerable unfortunate people turn to the President of the Republic, and he

would be in a painful position if he were always forced to refuse them help.A certain amount of ostentation in the ministerial and diplomatic salons is

part of the machinery of constitutional governments, etc., etc.”

Whether or not such arguments can be controverted, they certainly deserve

serious scrutiny. They are based on the public interest, rightly or wrongly

estimated; and, personally, I can make more of a case for them than many of

our Catos, moved by a narrow spirit of niggardliness or jealousy.

But what shocks my economist’s conscience, what makes me blush for the

intellectual renown of my country, is when they go on from these arguments

(as they never fail to do) to this absurd banality (always favorably received):

“Besides, the luxury of high officials of the government encourages the arts,

industry, and employment. The Chief of State and his ministers cannot give

banquets  and  parties  without  infusing  life  into  all  the  veins  of  the  body

politic. To reduce their salaries would be to starve industry in Paris and, at

the same time, throughout the nation.”

For heaven’s sake, gentlemen, at least respect arithmetic, and do not come

before the National Assembly of France and say, for fear that, to its shame, it

will not support you, that an addition gives a different sum depending upon

whether it is added from top to bottom or from bottom to top.

Well, then, suppose I arrange to have a navvy dig me a ditch in my field for

the sum of a hundred sous. Just as I conclude this agreement, the tax collector

takes my hundred sous from me and has them passed on to the Minister of the

Interior. My contract is broken, but the Minister will add another dish at his

dinner. On what basis do you dare to affirm that this official expenditure is an

addition to the national industry? Do you not see that it is only a simple

transfer of consumption and of labor? A cabinet minister has his table more

lavishly set, it is true; but a farmer has his field less well drained, and this is

just as true. A Parisian caterer has gained a hundred sous, I grant you; but

grant me that a provincial ditchdigger has lost five francs. All that one can

say is that the official dish and the satisfied caterer are what is seen; the

swampy field and the excavator out of work are what is not seen.

Good Lord! What a lot of trouble to prove in political economy that two and

two make four; and if you succeed in doing so, people cry, “It is so clear that

it is boring.” Then they vote as if you had never proved anything at all.

4. Theaters and Fine Arts

  Should the state subsidize the arts?

There is certainly a great deal to say on this subject pro and 

con.In favor of the system of subsidies, one can say that the arts

broaden, elevate, and poetize the soul of a nation; that they draw

it away from material preoccupations, giving it a feeling for the 

beautiful, and thus react favorably on its manners, its customs, its 

morals, and even on its industry. One can ask where music would 

be in France without the Théâtre-Italien and the Conservatory; 

dramatic art without the Théâtre-Français; painting and sculpture

without our collections and our museums. One can go further 

and ask whether, without the centralization and consequently 

the subsidizing of the fine arts, there would have developed that 

exquisite taste which is the noble endowment of French labor and 

sends its products out over the whole world. In the presence of such

results would it not be the height of imprudence to renounce this 

moderate assessment on all the citizens, which, in the last analysis, 

is what has achieved for them their pre-eminence and their glory 

in the eyes of Europe?

To these reasons and many others, whose power I do not contest, one can

oppose many no less cogent. There is, first of all,

one could say, a question of distributive justice. Do the rights of 

the legislator go so far as to allow him to dip into the wages of 

the artisan in order to supplement the profits of the artist? M. de Lamartine

said: “If you take away the subsidy of a theater, where are you going to stop

on this path, and will you not be logically required to do away with your

university  faculties,  your  museums,  your  institutes,  your  libraries?”  One

could reply: If you wish to subsidize all that is good and useful, where are

you going to stop on that path, and will you not logically be required to set up

a  civil  list  for  agriculture,  industry,  commerce,  welfare,  and  education?

Furthermore, is it certain that subsidies favor the progress of the arts? It is a

question that is far from being resolved, and we see with our own eyes that

the  theaters  that  prosper  are  those  that  live  on  their  own  profits.  Finally,

proceeding to higher considerations, one may observe that needs and desires

give rise to one another and keep soaring into regions more and more rarefied

in  proportion  as  the  national  wealth  permits  their  satisfaction;  that  the

government  must  not  meddle  in  this  process,  since,  whatever  may  be

currently  the  amount  of  the  national  wealth,  it  cannot  stimulate  luxury

industries by taxation without harming essential industries, thus reversing the

natural advance of civilization. One may also point out that this artificialdislocation  of  wants,  tastes,  labor,  and  population  places  nations  in  a

precarious and dangerous situation, 

leaving them without a solid base.

These are some of the reasons alleged by the adversaries of state 

intervention concerning the order in which citizens believe they

should satisfy their needs and their desires, and thus direct their 

activity. I confess that I am one of those who think that the choice, 

the impulse, should come from below, not from above, from the 

citizens, not from the legislator; and the contrary doctrine seems 

to me to lead to the annihilation of liberty and of human dignity. But, by an

inference as false as it is unjust, do you know what

the economists are now accused of ? When we oppose subsidies, 

we are charged with opposing the very thing that it was proposed 

to subsidize and of being the enemies of all kinds of activity, because we

want these activities to be voluntary and to seek their 

proper reward in themselves. Thus, if we ask that the state not 

intervene, by taxation, in religious matters, we are atheists. If we

ask that the state not intervene, by taxation, in education, then

we hate enlightenment. If we say that the state should not give, by

taxation, an artificial value to land or to some branch of industry, then we are

the enemies of property and of labor. If we think that the state should not

subsidize artists, we are barbarians who judge 

the arts useless.

I protest with all my power against these inferences. Far from 

entertaining the absurd thought of abolishing religion, education, 

property, labor, and the arts when we ask the state to protect the 

free development of all these types of human activity without 

keeping them on the payroll at one another’s expense, we believe, 

on the contrary, that all these vital forces of society should develop

harmoniously under the influence of liberty and that none of them

should become, as we see has happened today, a source of trouble, 

abuses, tyranny, and disorder.

Our adversaries believe that an activity that is neither subsidized

nor regulated is abolished. We believe the contrary. Their faith 

is in the legislator, not in mankind. Ours is in mankind, not in

the legislator.

Thus, M. de Lamartine said: “On the basis of this principle, weshould have to abolish the public expositions that bring wealth

and honor to this country.”

I reply to M. de Lamartine: From your point of view, not to

subsidize is to abolish, because, proceeding from the premise that 

nothing exists except by the will of the state, you conclude that 

nothing lives that taxes do not keep alive. But I turn against you 

the example that you have chosen, and I point out to you that 

the greatest, the noblest, of all expositions, the one based on the 

most liberal, the most universal conception, and I can even use 

the word “humanitarian,” which is not here exaggerated, is the 

exposition now being prepared in London, the only one in which 

no government meddles and which no tax supports.

Returning to the fine arts, one can, I repeat, allege weighty 

reasons for and against the system of subsidization. The reader 

understands that, in accordance with the special purpose of this 

essay, I have no need either to set forth these reasons or to decide 

between them.

But M. de Lamartine has advanced one argument that I cannot 

pass over in silence, for it falls within the very carefully defined 

limits of this economic study. He has said:

The economic question in the matter of theaters can be summed up in one

word: employment. The nature of the employment matters little; it is of a

kind just as productive and fertile as any other kind. The theaters, as you

know, support by wages no less than eighty thousand workers of all kinds—

painters, masons, decorators, costumers, architects, etc., who are the very life

and industry of many quarters of this capital, and they should have this claim

upon your sympathies!

Your sympathies? Translate: your subsidies. And further on:

  The pleasures of Paris provide employment and consumers’ goods for the

provincial departments, and the luxuries of the rich are the wages and the

bread of two hundred thousand workers of all kinds, living on the complex

industry of the theaters throughout the Republic, and receiving from these

noble pleasures, which make France illustrious, their own livelihood and the

means of providing the necessities of life for their families and their children.

It is to them that you give these sixty thousand francs. [Very good! Very

good! Much applause.]

  For  my  part,  I  am  forced  to  say:  Very  bad!  Very  bad!  confining,  ofcourse, the burden of this judgment to the economic argument which we are

here concerned with.

  Yes, it is, at least in part, to the workers in the theaters that the sixty

thousand francs in question will go. A few scraps might well get lost on the

way. If one scrutinized the matter closely, one might even discover that most

of the pie will find its way elsewhere. The workers will be fortunate if there

are a few crumbs left for them! But I should like to assume that the entire

subsidy will go to the painters, decorators, costumers, hairdressers, etc. That

is what is seen.

  But where does it come from? This is the other side of the coin, just as

important to examine as its face. What is the source of these 60,000 francs?

And where would they have gone if a legislative vote had not first directed

them to the rue de Rivoli and from there to the rue de Grenelle? That is what

is not seen.

    Surely, no one will dare maintain that the legislative vote has caused this

sum to hatch out from the ballot box; that it is a pure addition to the national

wealth; that, without this miraculous vote, these sixty thousand francs would

have remained invisible and impalpable. It must be admitted that all that the

majority can do is to decide that they will be taken from somewhere to be

sent somewhere else, and that they will have one destination only by being

deflected from another.

  This being the case, it is clear that the taxpayer who will have been taxed

one franc will no longer have this franc at his disposal. It is clear that he will

be deprived of a satisfaction to the tune of one franc, and that the worker,

whoever he is, who would have procured this satisfaction for him, will be

deprived of wages in the same amount.

  Let us not, then, yield to the childish illusion of believing that the vote of

May 16 adds anything whatever to national well-being and employment. It

reallocates possessions, it reallocates wages, and that is all.

  Will it be said that for one kind of satisfaction and for one kind of job it

substitutes satisfactions and jobs more urgent, more moral, more rational? I

could do battle on this ground. I could say: In taking sixty thousand francs

from  the  taxpayers,  you  reduce  the  wages  of  plowmen,  ditchdiggers,

carpenters, and blacksmiths, and you increase by the same amount the wages

of singers, hairdressers, decorators, and costumers. Nothing proves that this

latter class is more important than the other. M. de Lamartine does not make

this  allegation.  He  says  himself  that  the  work  of  the  theaters  is  just  asproductive as, just as fruitful as, and not more so than, any other work, which

might  still  be  contested;  for  the  best  proof  that  theatrical  work  is  not  as

productive as other work is that the latter is called upon to subsidize the

former.

  But this comparison of the intrinsic value and merit of the different kinds

of work forms no part of my present subject. All that I have to do here is to

show that, if M. de Lamartine and those who have applauded his argument

have seen on the one hand the wages earned by those who supply the needs

of the actors, they should see on the other the earnings lost by those who

supply the needs of the taxpayers; if they do not, they are open to ridicule for

mistaking a reallocation for a gain. If they were logical in their doctrine, they

would ask for infinite subsidies; for what is true of one franc and of sixty

thousand francs is true, in identical circumstances, of a billion francs.

  When  it  is  a  question  of  taxes,  gentlemen,  prove  their  usefulness  by

reasons with some foundation, but not with that lamentable assertion: “Public

spending keeps the working class alive.” It makes the mistake of covering up

a fact that it is essential to know: namely, that public spending is always a

substitute for private spending, and that consequently it may well support one

worker in place of another but adds nothing to the lot of the working class

taken as a whole. Your argument is fashionable, but it is quite absurd, for the

reasoning is not correct.

5. Public Works

  Nothing is more natural than that a nation, after making sure that a great

enterprise will profit the community, should have such an enterprise carried

out with funds collected from the citizenry. But I lose patience completely, I

confess, when I hear alleged in support of such a resolution this economic

fallacy: “Besides, it is a way of creating jobs for the workers.”

  The state opens a road, builds a palace, repairs a street, digs a canal; with

these projects it gives jobs to certain workers. That is what is seen. But it

deprives certain other laborers of employment. That is what is not seen.

  Suppose a road is under construction. A thousand laborers arrive every

morning, go home every evening, and receive their wages; that is certain. If

the road had not been authorized, if funds for it had not been voted, these

good people would have neither found this work nor earned these wages; that

again is certain.

  But  is  this  all?  Taken  all  together,  does  not  the  operation  involve

something else? At the moment when M. Dupin pronounces the sacramentalwords:  “The  Assembly  has  adopted  .  .  .”  do  millions  of  francs  descend

miraculously on a moonbeam into the coffers of M. Fould and M. Bineau?

For  the  process  to  be  complete,  does  not  the  state  have  to  organize  the

collection of funds as well as their expenditure? Does it not have to get its tax

collectors into the country and its taxpayers to make their contribution?

  Study the question, then, from its two aspects. In noting what the state is

going to do with the millions of francs voted, do not neglect to note also what

the taxpayers would have done—and can no longer do—with these same

millions. You see, then, that a public enterprise is a coin with two sides. On

one, the figure of a busy worker, with this device: What is seen; on the other,

an unemployed worker, with this device: What is not seen.

  The sophism that I am attacking in this essay is all the more dangerous

when applied to public works, since it serves to justify the most foolishly

prodigal enterprises. When a railroad or a bridge has real utility, it suffices to

rely on this fact in arguing in its favor. But if one cannot do this, what does

one do? One has recourse to this mumbo jumbo: “We must create jobs for the

workers.”

  This means that the terraces of the Champ-de-Mars are ordered first to be

built up and then to be torn down. The great Napoleon, it is said, thought he

was doing philanthropic work when he had ditches dug and then filled in. He

also  said:  “What  difference  does  the  result  make?  All  we  need  is  to  see

wealth spread among the laboring classes.”

  Let us get to the bottom of things. Money creates an illusion for us. To

ask for cooperation, in the form of money, from all the citizens in a common

enterprise is, in reality, to ask of them actual physical co-operation, for each

one of them procures for himself by his labor the amount he is taxed. Now, if

we were to gather together all the citizens and exact their services from them

in order to have a piece of work performed that is useful to all, this would be

understandable; their recompense would consist in the results of the work

itself. But if, after being brought together, they were forced to build roads on

which no one would travel, or palaces that no one would live in, all under the

pretext of providing work for them, it would seem absurd, and they would

certainly be justified in objecting: We will have none of that kind of work.

We would rather work for ourselves.

    Having the citizens contribute money, and not labor, changes nothing in

the general results. But if labor were contributed, the loss would be shared by

everyone.  Where  money  is  contributed,  those  whom  the  state  keeps  busyescape their share of the loss, while adding much more to that which their

compatriots already have to suffer.

  There is an article in the Constitution which states: “Society assists and

encourages the development of labor . . . through the establishment by the

state, the departments, and the municipalities, of appropriate public works to

employ idle hands.”

As  a  temporary  measure  in  a  time  of  crisis,  during  a  severe  winter,  this

intervention on the part of the taxpayer could have good effects. It acts in the

same way as insurance. It adds nothing to the number of jobs nor to total

wages, but it takes labor and wages from ordinary times and doles them out,

at a loss it is true, in difficult times.

As  a  permanent,  general,  systematic  measure,  it  is  nothing  but  a  ruinous

hoax, an impossibility, a contradiction, which makes a great show of the little

work that it has stimulated, which is what is seen, and conceals the much

larger amount of work that it has precluded, which is what is not seen.

6. Middlemen

  Society  is  the  aggregate  of  all  the  services  that  men  perform  for  one

another  by  compulsion  or  voluntarily,  that  is  to  say,  public  services  and

private services.

  The first, imposed and regulated by the law, which is not always easy to

change when necessary, can long outlive their usefulness and still retain the

name of public services, even when they are no longer anything but public

nuisances. The second are in the domain of the voluntary, i.e., of individual

responsibility. Each gives and receives what he wishes, or what he can, after

bargaining. These services are always presumed to have a real utility, exactly

measured by their comparative value.

  That is why the former are so often static, while the latter obey the law of

progress.

While  the  exaggerated  development  of  public  services,  with  the  waste  of

energies that it entails, tends to create a disastrous parasitism in society, it is

rather strange that many modern schools of economic thought, attributing this

characteristic to voluntary, private services, seek to transform the functions

performed by the various occupations.

These  schools  of  thought  are  vehement  in  their  attack  on  those  they  call

middlemen. They would willingly eliminate the capitalist, the banker, the

speculator, the entrepreneur, the businessman, and the merchant, accusing

them of interposing themselves between producer and consumer in order tofleece  them  both,  without  giving  them  anything  of  value.  Or  rather,  the

reformers would like to transfer to the state the work of the middlemen, for

this work cannot be eliminated.

The sophism of the socialists on this point consists in showing the public

what  it  pays  to  the  middlemen  for  their  services  and  in  concealing  what

would have to be paid to the state. Once again we have the conflict between

what strikes the eye and what is evidenced only to the mind, between what is

seen and what is not seen.

It was especially in 1847 and on the occasion of the famine that the socialist

schools succeeded in popularizing their disastrous theory. They knew well

that the most absurd propaganda always has some chance with men who are

suffering; malesuada fames.

Then, with the aid of those high-sounding words: Exploitation of man by

man, speculation in hunger, monopoly, they set themselves to blackening the

name of business and throwing a veil over its benefits.

“Why,” they said, “leave to merchants the task of getting foodstuffs from the

United States and the Crimea? Why cannot the state, the departments, and the

municipalities  organize  a  provisioning  service  and  set  up  warehouses  for

stockpiling? They would sell at net cost, and the people, the poor people,

would  be  relieved  of  the  tribute  that  they  pay  to  free—i.e.,  selfish,

individualistic, anarchical—trade.”

The tribute that the people pay to business, is what is seen. The tribute that

the people would have to pay to the state or to its agents in the socialist

system, is what is not seen.

What is this so-called tribute that people pay to business? It is this: that two

men  render  each  other  a  service  in  full  freedom  under  the  pressure  of

competition and at a price agreed on after bargaining.

When the stomach that is hungry is in Paris and the wheat that can satisfy it is

in Odessa, the suffering will not cease until the wheat reaches the stomach.

There are three ways to accomplish this: the hungry men can go themselves

to find the wheat; they can put their trust in those who engage in this kind of

business; or they can levy an assessment on themselves and charge public

officials with the task.

Of these three methods, which is the most advantageous?

In  all  times,  in  all  countries,  the  freer,  the  more  enlightened,  the  more

experienced  men  have  been,  the  oftener  have  theyvoluntarily  chosen  the

second. I confess that this is enough in my eyes to give the advantage to it.My mind refuses to admit that mankind at large deceives itself on a point that

touches it so closely.

However, let us examine the question.

For thirty-six million citizens to depart for Odessa to get the wheat that they

need  is  obviously  impracticable.  The  first  means  is  of  no  avail.  The

consumers  cannot  act  by  themselves;  they  are  compelled  to  turn  to

middlemen, whether public officials or merchants.

However,  let  us  observe  that  the  first  means  would  be  the  most  natural.

Fundamentally, it is the responsibility of whoever is hungry to get his own

wheat. It is a task that concerns him; it is a service that he owes to himself. If

someone else, whoever he may be, performs this service for him and takes

the task on himself, this other person has a right to compensation. What I am

saying here is that the services of middlemen involve a right to remuneration.

However that may be, since we must turn to what the socialists call a parasite,

which of the two—the merchant or the public official—is the less demanding

parasite?

Business (I assume it to be free, or else what point would there be in my

argument?)  is  forced,  by  its  own  self-interest,  to  study  the  seasons,  to

ascertain day by day the condition of the crops, to receive reports from all

parts of the world, to foresee needs, to take precautions. It has ships all ready,

associates everywhere, and its immediate self-interest is to buy at the lowest

possible price, to economize on all details of operation, and to attain the

greatest  results  with  the  least  effort.  Not  only  French  merchants,  but

merchants the whole world over are busy with provisioning France for the

day of need, and if self-interest compels them to fulfill their task at the least

expense, competition among them no less compels them to let the consumers

profit  from  all  the  economies  realized.  Once  the  wheat  has  arrived,  the

businessman has an interest in selling it as soon as possible to cover his risks,

realize his profits, and begin all over again, if there is an opportunity. Guided

by the comparison of prices, private enterprise distributes food all over the

world, always beginning at the point of greatest scarcity, that is, where the

need is felt the most. It is thus impossible to imagine an organization better

calculated  to  serve  the  interests  of  the  hungry,  and  the  beauty  of  this

organization, not perceived by the socialists, comes precisely from the fact

that it is free, i.e., voluntary. True, the consumer must pay the businessman

for his expenses of cartage, of transshipment, of storage, of commissions,

etc., but under what system does the one who consumes the wheat avoidpaying the expenses of shipping it to him? There is, besides, the necessity of

paying also for service rendered, but, so far as the share of the middleman is

concerned, it is reduced to a minimum by competition; and as to its justice, it

would be strange for the artisans of Paris not to work for the merchants of

Marseilles, when the merchants of Marseilles work for the artisans of Paris.

If,  according  to  the  socialist  plan,  the  state  takes  the  place  of  private

businessmen in these transactions, what will happen? Pray, show me where

there will be any economy for the public. Will it be in the retail price? But

imagine  the  representatives  of  forty  thousand  municipalities  arriving  at

Odessa on a given day, the day when the wheat is needed; imagine the effect

on the price. Will the economy be effected in the shipping expenses? But will

fewer  ships,  fewer  sailors,  fewer  trans-shipments,  fewer  warehouses  be

needed, or are we to be relieved of the necessity for paying for all these

things? Will the saving be effected in the profits of the businessmen? But did

your representatives and public officials go to Odessa for nothing? Are they

going to make the journey out of brotherly love? Will they not have to live?

Will not their time have to be paid for? And do you think that this will not

exceed a thousand times the two or three percent that the merchant earns, a

rate that he is prepared to guarantee?

And then, think of the difficulty of levying so many taxes to distribute so

much  food.  Think  of  the  injustices  and  abuses  inseparable  from  such  an

enterprise. Think of the burden of responsibility that the government would

have to bear.

The socialists who have invented these follies, and who in days of distress

plant them in the minds of the masses, generously confer on themselves the

title of “forward-looking” men, and there is a real danger that usage, that

tyrant of language, will ratify both the word and the judgment it implies.

“Forward-looking” assumes that these gentlemen can see ahead much further

than ordinary people; that their only fault is to be too much in advance of

their century; and that, if the time has not yet arrived when certain private

services, allegedly parasitical, can be eliminated, the fault is with the public,

which is far behind socialism. To my mind and knowledge, it is the contrary

that is true, and I do not know to what barbaric century we should have to

return to find on this point a level of understanding comparable to that of the

socialists.

The modern socialist factions ceaselessly oppose free association in present-

day society. They do not realize that a free society is a true association muchsuperior to any of those that they concoct out of their fertile imaginations.

Let us elucidate this point with an example:

For a man, when he gets up in the morning, to be able to put on a suit of

clothes, a piece of land has had to be enclosed, fertilized, drained, cultivated,

planted with a certain kind of vegetation; flocks of sheep have had to feed on

it; they have had to give their wool; this wool has had to be spun, woven,

dyed,  and  converted  into  cloth;  this  cloth  has  had  to  be  cut,  sewn,  and

fashioned  into  a  garment.  And  this  series  of  operations  implies  a  host  of

others; for it presupposes the use of farming implements, of sheepfolds, of

factories, of coal, of machines, of carriages, etc.

If society were not a very real association, anyone who wanted a suit of

clothes  would  be  reduced  to  working  in  isolation,  that  is,  to  performing

himself the innumerable operations in this series, from the first blow of the

pickaxe  that  initiates  it  right  down  to  the  last  thrust  of  the  needle  that

terminates it.

But thanks to that readiness to associate which is the distinctive characteristic

of our species, these operations have been distributed among a multitude of

workers,  and  they  keep  subdividing  themselves  more  and  more  for  the

common  good  to  the  point  where,  as  consumption  increases,  a  single

specialized operation can support a new industry. Then comes the distribution

of the proceeds, according to the portion of value each one has contributed to

the total work. If this is not association, I should like to know what is.

Note that, since not one of the workers has produced the smallest particle of

raw material from nothing, they are confined to rendering each other mutual

services,  to  aiding  each  other  for  a  common  end;  and  that  all  can  be

considered,  each  group  in  relation  to  the  others,  as  middlemen.  If,  for

example, in the course of the operation, transportation becomes important

enough to employ one person; spinning, a second; weaving, a third; why

should the first one be considered more of a parasite than the others? Is there

no need for transportation? Does not someone devote time and trouble to the

task? Does he not spare his associates this time and trouble? Are they doing

more than he, or just something different? Are they not all equally subject, in

regard to their pay, that is, their share of the proceeds, to the law that restricts

it to the price agreed upon after bargaining? Do not this division of labor and

these arrangements, decided upon in full liberty, serve the common good? Do

we,  then,  need  a  socialist,  under  the  pretext  of  planning,  to  come  and

despotically destroy our voluntary arrangements, put an end to the division oflabor,  substitute  isolated  efforts  for  cooperative  efforts,  and  reverse  the

progress of civilization?

Is association as I describe it here any the less association because everyone

enters and leaves it voluntarily, chooses his place in it, judges and bargains

for himself, under his own responsibility, and brings to it the force and the

assurance of his own self-interest? For association to deserve the name, does

a so-called reformer have to come and impose his formula and his will on us

and concentrate within himself, so to speak, all of mankind?

The  more  one  examines  these  “forward-looking”  schools  of  thought,  the

more one is convinced that at bottom they rest on nothing but ignorance

proclaiming itself infallible and demanding despotic power in the name of

this infallibility.

I hope that the reader will excuse this digression. It is perhaps not entirely

useless at the moment when, coming straight from the books of the Saint-

Simonians, of the advocates of phalansteries, and of the admirers of Icaria,

tirades against the middlemen fill the press and the Assembly and seriously

menace the freedom of labor and exchange.

7. Restraint of Trade

  Mr. Protectionist (it was not I who gave him that name; it was M. Charles

Dupin) devoted his time and his capital to converting ore from his lands into

iron. Since Nature had been more generous with the Belgians, they sold iron

to the French at a better price than Mr. Protectionist did, which meant that all

Frenchmen, or France, could obtain a given quantity of iron with less labor

by buying it from the good people of Flanders. Therefore, prompted by their

self-interest,  they  took  full  advantage  of  the  situation,  and  every  day  a

multitude of nailmakers, metalworkers, cartwrights, mechanics, blacksmiths,

and plowmen could be seen either going themselves or sending middlemen to

Belgium to obtain their supply of iron. Mr. Protectionist did not like this at

all.

  His first idea was to stop this abuse by direct intervention with his own

two  hands.  This  was  certainly  the  least  he  could  do,  since  he  alone  was

harmed. I’ll take my carbine, he said to himself. I’ll put four pistols in my

belt, I’ll fill my cartridge box, I’ll buckle on my sword, and, thus equipped,

I’ll  go  to  the  frontier.  There  I’ll  kill  the  first  metalworker,  nailmaker,

blacksmith, mechanic, or locksmith who comes seeking his own profit rather

than mine. That’ll teach him a lesson!

  At the moment of leaving, Mr. Protectionist had a few second thoughtsthat somewhat tempered his bellicose ardor. He said to himself: First of all, it

is  quite  possible  that  the  buyers  of  iron,  my  fellow  countrymen  and  my

enemies, will take offense, and, instead of letting themselves be killed, they

might kill me. Furthermore, even if all my servants marched out, we could

not guard the whole frontier. Finally, the entire proceeding would cost me too

much, more than the result would be worth.

Mr. Protectionist was going to resign himself sadly just to being free like

everyone else, when suddenly he had a brilliant idea.

  He remembered that there is a great law factory in Paris. What is a law?

he asked himself. It is a measure to which, when once promulgated, whether

it is good or bad, everyone has to conform. For the execution of this law, a

public police force is organized, and to make up the said public police force,

men and money are taken from the nation.

  If, then, I manage to get from that great Parisian factory a nice little law

saying: “Belgian iron is prohibited,” I shall attain the following results: The

government will replace the few servants that I wanted to send to the frontier

with  twenty  thousand  sons  of  my  recalcitrant  metalworkers,  locksmiths,

nailmakers, blacksmiths, artisans, mechanics, and plowmen. Then, to keep

these twenty thousand customs officers in good spirits and health, there will

be  distributed  to  them  twenty-five  million  francs  taken  from  these  same

blacksmiths, nailmakers, artisans, and plowmen. Organized in this way, the

protection will be better accomplished; it will cost me nothing; I shall not be

exposed to the brutality of brokers; I shall sell the iron at my price; and I shall

enjoy the sweet pleasure of seeing our great people shamefully hoaxed. That

will teach them to be continually proclaiming themselves the precursors and

the promoters of all progress in Europe. It will be a smart move, and well

worth the trouble of trying!

  So Mr. Protectionist went to the law factory. (Another time, perhaps, I

shall tell the story of his dark, underhanded dealings there; today I wish to

speak only of the steps he took openly and for all to see.) He presented to

their excellencies, the legislators, the following argument:

  “Belgian iron is sold in France at ten francs, which forces me to sell mine

at the same price. I should prefer to sell it at fi fteen and cannot because of

this confounded Belgian iron. Manufacture a law that says: ‘Belgian iron

shall  no  longer  enter  France.’  Immediately  I  shall  raise  my  price  by  five

francs, with the following consequences:

  “For each hundred kilograms of iron that I shall deliver to the public,instead of ten francs I shall get fifteen; I shall enrich myself more quickly; I

shall extend the exploitation of my mines; I shall employ more men. My

employees and I will spend more, to the great advantage of our suppliers for

miles around. These suppliers, having a greater market, will give more orders

to industry, and gradually this activity will spread throughout the country.

This lucky hundred-sou piece that you will drop into my coffers, like a stone

that is thrown into a lake, will cause an infinite number of concentric circles

to radiate great distances in every direction.”

  Charmed by this discourse, enchanted to learn that it is so easy to increase

the wealth of a people simply by legislation, the manufacturers of laws voted

in favor of the restriction. “What is all this talk about labor and saving?” they

said. “What good are these painful means of increasing the national wealth,

when a decree will do the job?”

  And,  in  fact,  the  law  had  all  the  consequences  predicted  by  Mr.

Protectionist, but it had others too; for, to do him justice, he had not reasoned

falsely, but incompletely. In asking for a privilege, he had pointed out the

effects that are seen, leaving in the shadow those that are not seen. He had

shown only two people, when actually there are three in the picture. It is for

us to repair this omission, whether involuntary or premeditated.

  Yes, the five-franc piece thus legislatively rechanneled into the coffers of

Mr. Protectionist constitutes an advantage for him and for those who get jobs

because of it. And if the decree had made the five-franc piece come down

from  the  moon,  these  good  effects  would  not  be  counterbalanced  by  any

compensating bad effects. Unfortunately, the mysterious hundred sous did

not come down from the moon, but rather from the pocket of a metalworker,

a nailmaker, a cartwright, a blacksmith, a plowman, a builder, in a word,

from James Goodfellow, who pays it out today without receiving a milligram

of iron more than when he was paying ten francs. It at once becomes evident

that this certainly changes the question, for, quite obviously, the profit of Mr.

Protectionist  is  counterbalanced  by  the  loss  of  James  Goodfellow,  and

anything that Mr. Protectionist will be able to do with this five-franc piece for

the encouragement of domestic industry, James Goodfellow could also have

done. The stone is thrown in at one point in the lake only because it has been

prohibited by law from being thrown in at another.

  Hence, what is not seen counterbalances what is seen; and the outcome of

the whole operation is an injustice, all the more deplorable in having been

perpetrated by the law.  But this is not all. I have said that a third person was always left in the

shadow. I must make him appear here, so that he can reveal to us a second

loss of five francs. Then we shall have the results of the operation in its

entirety.

  James Goodfellow has fifteen francs, the fruit of his labors. (We are back

at the time when he is still free.) What does he do with his fifteen francs? He

buys  an  article  of  millinery  for  ten  francs,  and  it  is  with  this  article  of

millinery  that  he  pays  (or  his  middleman  pays  for  him)  for  the  hundred

kilograms of Belgian iron. He still has five francs left. He does not throw

them into the river, but (and this is what is not seen) he gives them to some

manufacturer or other in exchange for some satisfaction—for example, to a

publisher for a copy of the Discourse on Universal History by Bossuet.

Thus, he has encouraged domestic industry to the amount of fifteen francs, to

wit:

10 francs to the Parisian milliner 5 francs to the publisher

And as for James Goodfellow, he gets for his fifteen francs two objects of

satisfaction, to wit:

1. A hundred kilograms of iron 2. A book

Comes the decree.

  What happens to James Goodfellow? What happens to domestic industry?

James Goodfellow, in giving his fifteen francs to the last centime to Mr.

Protectionist for a hundred kilograms of iron, has nothing now but the use of

this iron. He loses the enjoyment of a book or of any other equivalent object.

He loses five francs. You agree with this; you cannot fail to agree; you cannot

fail to agree that when restraint of trade raises prices, the consumer loses the

difference.

But it is said that domestic industry gains the difference.

No, it does not gain it; for, since the decree, it is encouraged only as much as

it was before, to the amount of fifteen francs.

Only,  since  the  decree,  the  fifteen  francs  of  James  Goodfellow  go  to

metallurgy, while before the decree they were divided between millinery and

publishing.

The force that Mr. Protectionist might exercise by himself at the frontier and

that which he has the law exercise for him can be judged quite differently

from the moral point of view. There are people who think that plunder loses

all its immorality as soon as it becomes legal. Personally, I cannot imagine a

more alarming situation. However that may be, one thing is certain, and thatis that the economic results are the same.

You may look at the question from any point of view you like, but if you

examine it dispassionately, you will see that no good can come from legal or

illegal plunder. We do not deny that it may bring for Mr. Protectionist or his

industry, or if you wish for domestic industry, a profit of five francs. But we

affirm that it will also give rise to two losses: one for James Goodfellow, who

pays fifteen francs for what he used to get for ten, the other for domestic

industry, which no longer receives the difference. Make your own choice of

which of these two losses compensates for the profit that we admit. The one

you do not choose constitutes no less a dead loss.

Moral: To use force is not to produce, but to destroy. Heavens! If to use force

were to produce, France would be much richer than she is.

8. Machines

  “A curse on machines! Every year their increasing power condemns to

pauperism millions of workers, taking their jobs away from them, and with

their  jobs  their  wages,  and  with  their  wages  their  bread!  A  curse  on

machines!”

  That is the cry rising from ignorant prejudice, and whose echo resounds

in the newspapers.

But to curse machines is to curse the human mind!

What puzzles me is that it is possible to find anyone at all who can be content

with such a doctrine.

For, in the last analysis, if it is true, what is its strictly logical consequence? It

is that activity, well-being, wealth, and happiness are possible only for stupid

nations, mentally static, to whom God has not given the disastrous gift of

thinking, observing, contriving, inventing, obtaining the greatest results with

the  least  trouble.  On  the  contrary,  rags,  miserable  huts,  poverty,  and

stagnation are the inevitable portion of every nation that looks for and finds

in  iron,  fire,  wind,  electricity,  magnetism,  the  laws  of  chemistry  and

mechanics—in  a  word,  in  the  forces  of  Nature—an  addition  to  its  own

resources, and it is indeed appropriate to say with Rousseau: “Every man who

thinks is a depraved animal.”

But this is not all. If this doctrine is true, and as all men think and invent—as

all, in fact, from first to last, and at every minute of their existence, seek to

make the forces of Nature cooperate with them, to do more with less, to

reduce their own manual labor or that of those whom they pay, to attain the

greatest possible sum of satisfactions with the least possible amount of work—we must conclude that all mankind is on the way to decadence, precisely

because of this intelligent aspiration toward progress that seems to torment

every one of its members.

Hence, it would have to be established statistically that the inhabitants of

Lancaster, fleeing that machine-ridden country, go in search of employment

to Ireland, where machines are unknown; and, historically, that the shadow of

barbarism darkens the epochs of civilization, and that civilization flourishes

in times of ignorance and barbarism.

Evidently there is in this mass of contradictions something that shocks us and

warns us that the problem conceals an element essential to its solution that

has not been sufficiently brought to light.

The whole mystery consists in this: Behind what is seen lies what is not seen.

I am going to try to shed some light on it. My demonstration can be nothing

but a repetition of the preceding one, for the problem is the same.

Men have a natural inclination, if they are not prevented by force, to go for a

bargain—that  is,  for  something  that,  for  an  equivalent  satisfaction,  spares

them  labor—whether  this  bargain  comes  to  them  from  a  capable  foreign

producer or from a capable mechanical producer.

The theoretical objection that is raised against this inclination is the same in

both cases. In one as in the other, the reproach is made that it apparently

makes for a scarcity of jobs. However, its actual effect is not to make jobs

scarce, but to free men’s labor for other jobs.

And that is why, in practice, the same obstacle—force—is set up against it in

both  cases.  The  legislator  prohibits  foreign  competition  and  forbids

mechanical  competition.  For  what  other  means  can  there  be  to  stifle  an

inclination natural to all men than to take away their freedom?

In many countries, it is true, the legislator strikes at only one of these types of

competition and confines himself to grumbling about the other. This proves

only that in these countries the legislator is inconsistent.

That should not surprise us. On a false path there is always inconsistency; if

this were not so, mankind would be destroyed. We have never seen and never

shall  see  a  false  principle  carried  out  completely.  I  have  said  elsewhere:

Absurdity is the limit of inconsistency. I should like to add: It is also its

proof.

Let us go on with our demonstration; it will not be lengthy.

James Goodfellow had two francs that he let two workers earn.

But now suppose that he devises an arrangement of ropes and weights thatwill shorten the work by half.

Then he obtains the same satisfaction, saves a franc, and discharges a worker.

He discharges a worker: that is what is seen.

Seeing only this, people say: “See how misery follows civilization! See how

freedom  is  fatal  to  equality!  The  human  mind  has  made  a  conquest,  and

immediately  another  worker  has  forever  fallen  into  the  abyss  of  poverty.

Perhaps James Goodfellow can still continue to have both men work for him,

but he cannot give them more than ten sous each, for they will compete with

one another and will offer their services at a lower rate. This is how the rich

get richer and the poor become poorer. We must remake society.”

A fine conclusion, and one worthy of the initial premise!

Fortunately, both premise and conclusion are false, because behind the half of

the phenomenon that is seen is the other half that is not seen.

The  franc  saved  by  James  Goodfellow  and  the  necessary  effects  of  this

saving are not seen.

Since, as a result of his own invention, James Goodfellow no longer spends

more than one franc for manual labor in the pursuit of a given satisfaction, he

has another franc left over.

If,  then,  there  is  somewhere  an  idle  worker  who  offers  his  labor  on  the

market, there is also somewhere a capitalist who offers his idle franc. These

two elements meet and combine.

And it is clear as day that between the supply of and the demand for labor,

between the supply of and the demand for wages, the relationship has in no

way changed.

The invention and the worker, paid with the first franc, now do the work

previously accomplished by two workers.

The second worker, paid with the second franc, performs some new work.

What has then been changed in the world? There is one national satisfaction

the more; in other words, the invention is a gratuitous conquest, a gratuitous

profit for mankind.

From the form in which I have given my demonstration we could draw this

conclusion:

“It is the capitalist who derives all the benefits flowing from the invention of

machines.  The  laboring  class,  even  though  it  suffers  from  them  only

temporarily, never profits from them, since, according to what you yourself

say, they reallocate a portion of the nation’s industry without diminishing it,

it is true, but also without increasing it.”It is not within the province of this essay to answer all objections. Its only

object  is  to  combat  an  ignorant  prejudice,  very  dangerous  and  extremely

widespread.  I  wished  to  prove  that  a  new  machine,  in  making  a  certain

number of workers available for jobs, necessarily makes available at the same

time the money that pays them. These workers and this money get together

eventually to produce something that was impossible to produce before the

invention; from which it follows that the final result of the invention is an

increase in satisfactions with the same amount of labor.

Who reaps this excess of satisfactions?

Yes,  at  first  it  is  the  capitalist,  the  inventor,  the  first  one  who  uses  the

machine successfully, and this is the reward for his genius and daring. In this

case, as we have just seen, he realizes a saving on the costs of production,

which, no matter how it is spent (and it always is), gives employment to just

as many hands as the machine has made idle.

But soon competition forces him to lower his selling price by the amount of

this saving itself.

And then it is no longer the inventor who reaps the benefits of the invention;

it is the buyer of the product, the consumer, the public, including the workers

—in a word, it is mankind.

And what is not seen is that the saving, thus procured for all the consumers,

forms a fund from which wages can be drawn, replacing what the machine

has drained off.

Thus (taking up again the foregoing example), James Goodfellow obtains a

product by spending two francs for wages.

Thanks to his invention, the manual labor now costs him only one franc.

As long as he sells the product at the same price, there is one worker the

fewer employed in making this special product: that is what is seen; but there

is one worker the more employed by the franc James Goodfellow has saved:

that is what is not seen.

When,  in  the  natural  course  of  events,  James  Goodfellow  is  reduced  to

lowering by one franc the price of the product, he no longer realizes a saving;

then  he  no  longer  releases  a  franc  for  national  employment  in  new

production. But whoever acquires it, i.e., mankind, takes his place. Whoever

buys the product pays one franc less, saves a franc, and necessarily hands

over this saving to the fund for wages; this is again what is not seen.

Another  solution  to  this  problem,  one  founded  on  the  facts,  has  been

advanced.Some  have  said:  “The  machine  reduces  the  expenses  of  production  and

lowers  the  price  of  the  product.  The  lowering  of  the  price  stimulates  an

increase in consumption, which necessitates an increase in production, and,

finally, the use of as many workers as before the invention—or more.” In

support of this argument they cite printing, spinning, the press, etc.

This demonstration is not scientific.

We should have to conclude from it that, if the consumption of the special

product  in  question  remains  stationary  or  nearly  so,  the  machine  will  be

harmful to employment. This is not so.

Suppose that in a certain country all the men wear hats. If with a machine the

price of hats can be reduced by half, it does not necessarily follow that twice

as many hats will be bought.

Will it be said, in that case, that a part of the national labor force has been

made idle? Yes, according to ignorant reasoning. No, according to mine; for,

even though in that country no one were to buy a single extra hat, the entire

fund for wages would nevertheless remain intact; whatever did not go to the

hat industry would be found in the saving realized by all consumers and

would go to pay wages for the whole of the labor force that the machine had

rendered unnecessary and to stimulate a new development of all industries.

And this is, in fact, the way things happen. I have seen newspapers at 80

francs; now they sell for 48. This is a saving of 32 francs for the subscribers.

It is not certain, at least it is not inevitable, that the 32 francs continue to go

into journalism; but what is certain, what is inevitable, is that if they do not

take this direction, they will take another. One franc will be used to buy more

newspapers, another for more food, a third for better clothes, a fourth for

better furniture.

Thus, all industries are interrelated. They form a vast network in which all the

lines communicate by secret channels. What is saved in one profits all. What

is important is to understand clearly that never, never are economies effected

at the expense of jobs and wages.

9. Credit

At  all  times,  but  especially  in  the  last  few  years,  people  have  dreamt  of

universalizing wealth by universalizing credit.

  I  am  sure  I  do  not  exaggerate  in  saying  that  since  the  February

Revolution,  the  Paris  presses  have  spewed  forth  more  than  ten  thousand

brochures extolling this solution of the social problem.

  This  solution,  alas,  has  as  its  foundation  merely  an  optical  illusion,insofar as an illusion can serve as a foundation for anything.

These  people  begin  by  confusing  hard  money  with  products;  then  they

confuse paper money with hard money; and it is from these two confusions

that they profess to derive a fact.

In this question it is absolutely necessary to forget money, coins, bank notes,

and the other media by which products pass from hand to hand, in order to

see only the products themselves, which constitute the real substance of a

loan.

For when a farmer borrows fifty francs to buy a plow, it is not actually the

fifty francs that is lent to him; it is the plow.

And when a merchant borrows twenty thousand francs to buy a house, it is

not the twenty thousand francs he owes; it is the house.

Money makes its appearance only to facilitate the arrangement among several

parties.

Peter may not be disposed to lend his plow, but James may be willing to lend

his money. What does William do then? He borrows the money from James,

and with this money he buys the plow from Peter.

But actually nobody borrows money for the sake of the money itself. We

borrow money to get products.

Now, in no country is it possible to transfer from one hand to another more

products than there are.

Whatever  the  sum  of  hard  money  and  bills  that  circulates,  the  borrowers

taken  together  cannot  get  more  plows,  houses,  tools,  provisions,  or  raw

materials than the total number of lenders can furnish.

For let us keep well in mind that every borrower presupposes a lender, that

every borrowing implies a loan.

This much being granted, what good can credit institutions do? They can

make it easier for borrowers and lenders to find one another and reach an

understanding. But what they cannot do is to increase instantaneously the

total number of objects borrowed and lent.

However, the credit organizations would have to do just this in order for the

end of the social reformers to be attained, since these gentlemen aspire to

nothing less than to give plows, houses, tools, provisions, and raw materials

to everyone who wants them.

And how do they imagine they will do this?

By giving to loans the guarantee of the state.

Let us go more deeply into the matter, for there is something here that is seenand something that is not seen. Let us try to see both.

Suppose that there is only one plow in the world and that two farmers want it.

Peter is the owner of the only plow available in France. John and James wish

to borrow it. John, with his honesty, his property, and his good name, offers

guarantees.  One  believes  in  him;  he  has  credit.  James  does  not  inspire

confidence or at any rate seems less reliable. Naturally, Peter lends his plow

to John.

But now, under socialist inspiration, the state intervenes and says to Peter:

“Lend your plow to James. We will guarantee you reimbursement, and this

guarantee is worth more than John’s, for he is the only one responsible for

himself, and we, though it is true we have nothing, dispose of the wealth of

all the taxpayers; if necessary, we will pay back the principal and the interest

with their money.”

So Peter lends his plow to James; this is what is seen.

And the socialists congratulate themselves, saying, “See how our plan has

succeeded. Thanks to the intervention of the state, poor James has a plow. He

no longer has to spade by hand; he is on the way to making his fortune. It is a

benefit for him and a profit for the nation as a whole.”

Oh no, gentlemen, it is not a profit for the nation, for here is what is not seen.

It is not seen that the plow goes to James because it did not go to John.

It is not seen that if James pushes a plow instead of spading, John will be

reduced to spading instead of plowing.

Consequently, what one would like to think of as an additional loan is only

the reallocation of a loan.

Furthermore,  it  is  not  seen  that  this  reallocation  involves  two  profound

injustices: injustice to John, who, after having merited and won credit by his

honesty  and  his  energy,  sees  himself  deprived;  injustice  to  the  taxpayers,

obligated to pay a debt that does not concern them.

Will it be said that the government offers to John the same opportunities it

does to James? But since there is only one plow available, two cannot be lent.

The  argument  always  comes  back  to  the  statement  that,  thanks  to  the

intervention of the state, more will be borrowed than can be lent, for the plow

represents here the total of available capital.

True, I have reduced the operation to its simplest terms; but test by the same

touchstone the most complicated governmental credit institutions, and you

will be convinced that they can have but one result: to reallocate credit, not to

increase it. In a given country and at a given time, there is only a certain sumof available capital, and it is all placed somewhere. By guaranteeing insolvent

debtors, the state can certainly increase the number of borrowers, raise the

rate of interest (all at the expense of the taxpayer), but it cannot increase the

number of lenders and the total value of the loans.

Do not impute to me, however, a conclusion from which I beg Heaven to

preserve me. I say that the law should not artificially encourage borrowing;

but I do not say that it should hinder it artificially. If in our hypothetical

system or elsewhere there should be obstacles to the diffusion and application

of credit, let the law remove them; nothing could be better or more just. But

that, along with liberty, is all that social reformers worthy of the name should

ask of the law.

10. Algeria

  Four orators are all trying to be heard in the Assembly. At first they speak

all at once, then one after the other. What have they said? Very beautiful

things,  surely,  about  the  power  and  grandeur  of  France,  the  necessity  of

sowing in order to reap, the brilliant future of our vast colony, the advantage

of redistributing our surplus population, etc., etc.; masterpieces of eloquence,

always ornamented with this conclusion:

  “Vote  fifty  million  francs  (more  or  less)  to  build  ports  and  roads  in

Algeria so that we can transport colonists there, build houses for them, and

clear fields for them. If you do this, you will have lifted a burden from the

shoulders  of  the  French  worker,  encouraged  employment  in  Africa,  and

increased trade in Marseilles. It would be all profit.”

  Yes, that is true, if we consider the said fifty million francs only from the

moment when the state spends them, if we look at where they go, and not

whence they come, if we take into account only the good that they will do

after they leave the coffers of the tax collectors, and not the harm that has

been brought about, or, beyond that, the good that has been prevented, by

causing them to enter the government coffers in the first place. Yes, from this

limited point of view, everything is profit. The house built in Barbary is what

is  seen;  the  port  laid  out  in  Barbary  is  what  is  seen;  the  jobs  created  in

Barbary are what is seen; a certain reduction in the labor force in France is

what is seen; great business activity in Marseilles, still what is seen.

  But there is something else that is not seen. It is that the fifty millions

spent by the state can no longer be spent as they would have been by the

taxpayers. From all the benefits attributed to public spending we must deduct

all the harm caused by preventing private spending—at least if we are not togo so far as to say that James Goodfellow would have done nothing with the

five-franc pieces he had fairly earned and that the tax took away from him; an

absurd assertion, for if he went to the trouble of earning them, it was because

he  hoped  to  have  the  satisfaction  of  using  them.  He  would  have  had  his

garden fenced and can no longer do so; this is what is not seen. He would

have had his field marled and can no longer do so: this is what is not seen. He

would have added to his tools and can no longer do so: this is what is not

seen. He would be better fed, better clothed; he would have had his sons

better educated; he would have increased the dowry of his daughter; and he

can no longer do so: this is what is not seen. He would have joined a mutual-

aid society and can no longer do so: this is what is not seen. On the one hand,

the satisfactions that have been taken away from him and the means of action

that have been destroyed in his hands; on the other hand, the work of the

ditchdigger, the carpenter, the blacksmith, the tailor, and the schoolmaster of

his village which he would have encouraged and which is now nonexistent:

this is still what is not seen.

  Our citizens are counting a great deal on the future prosperity of Algeria;

granted. But let them also calculate the paralysis that in the meantime will

inevitably strike France. People show me business flourishing in Marseilles;

but if it is transacted with the product of taxation, I shall, on the other hand,

point out an equal amount of business destroyed in the rest of the country.

They say: “A colonist transported to Barbary is relief for the population that

remains in the country.” I reply: “How can that be if, in transporting this

colonist to Algeria, we have also transported two or three times the capital

that would have kept him alive in France?”

  The only end I have in view is to make the reader understand that, in all

public spending, behind the apparent good there is an evil more difficult to

discern. To the best of my ability, I should like to get my reader into the habit

of seeing the one and the other and of taking account of both.

  When a public expenditure is proposed, it must be examined on its own

merits, apart from its allegedly beneficial effect in increasing the number of

jobs available, for any improvement in this direction is illusory. What public

spending does in this regard, private spending would have done to the same

extent. Therefore, the employment issue is irrelevant.

  It is not within the province of this essay to evaluate the intrinsic worth of

the public expenditures devoted to Algeria.

But  I  cannot  refrain  from  making  one  general  observation.  It  is  that  apresumption of economic benefit is never appropriate for expenditures made

by way of taxation. Why? Here is the reason.

In  the  first  place,  justice  always  suffers  from  it  somewhat.  Since  James

Goodfellow has sweated to earn his hundred-sou piece with some satisfaction

in view, he is irritated, to say the least, that the tax intervenes to take this

satisfaction away from him and give it to someone else. Now, certainly it is

up to those who levy the tax to give some good reasons for it. We have seen

that the state gives a detestable reason when it says: “With these hundred

sous I am going to put some men to work,” for James Goodfellow (as soon as

he has seen the light) will not fail to respond: “Good Lord! With a hundred

sous I could have put them to work myself.”

Once this argument on the part of the state has been disposed of, the others

present themselves in all their nakedness, and the debate between the public

treasury and poor James is very much simplified. If the state says to him: “I

shall take a hundred sous from you to pay the policemen who relieve you of

the necessity for guarding your own security, to pave the street you traverse

every day, to pay the magistrate who sees to it that your property and your

liberty are respected, to feed the soldier who defends our frontiers,” James

Goodfellow will pay without saying a word, or I am greatly mistaken. But if

the state says to him: “I shall take your hundred sous to give you one sou as a

premium in case you have cultivated your field well, or to teach your son

what you do not want him to learn, or to allow a cabinet minister to add a

hundred-and-first dish to his dinner; I shall take them to build a cottage in

Algeria, not to mention taking a hundred sous more to support a colonist

there and another hundred sous to support a soldier to guard the colonist and

another hundred sous to support a general to watch over the soldier, etc.,

etc.,” it seems to me that I hear poor James cry out: “This legal system very

strongly  resembles  the  law  of  the  jungle!”  And  as  the  state  foresees  the

objection, what does it do? It confuses everything; it advances a detestable

argument that ought not to have any influence on the question: it speaks of

the effect of the hundred sous on employment; it points to the cook and to the

tradesman who supplies the needs of the minister; it shows us a colonist, a

soldier, a general, living on the five francs; it shows us, in short, what is seen.

As long as James Goodfellow has not learned to put next to this what is not

seen, he will be duped. That is why I am forced to teach him by loud and long

repetition.

From the fact that public expenditures reallocate jobs without increasing themthere  results  against  such  expenditures  a  second  and  grave  objection.  To

reallocate jobs is to displace workers and to disturb the natural laws that

govern the distribution of population over the earth. When fifty million francs

are left to the taxpayers, since the latter are situated throughout the country,

the money fosters employment in the forty thousand municipalities of France;

it acts as a bond that holds each man to his native land; it is distributed to as

many workers as possible and to all imaginable industries. Now, if the state,

taking these fifty millions from the citizens, accumulates them and spends

them at a given place, it will draw to this place a proportional quantity of

labor  it  has  transferred  from  other  places,  a  corresponding  number  of

expatriated  workers,  a  floating  population,  declassed,  and,  I  daresay,

dangerous when the money is used up! But this is what happens (and here I

return to my subject): this feverish activity, blown, so to speak, into a narrow

space, attracts everyone’s eye and is what is seen; the people applaud, marvel

at  the  beauty  and  ease  of  the  procedure,  and  demand  its  repetition  and

extension. What is not seen is that an equal number of jobs, probably more

useful, have been prevented from being created in the rest of France. 11.

Thrift and Luxury

  It  is  not  only  in  the  matter  of  public  expenditures  that  what  is  seen

eclipses  what  is  not  seen.  By  leaving  in  the  shadow  half  of  the  political

economy, this phenomenon of the seen and the unseen induces a false moral

standard.  It  leads  nations  to  view  their  moral  interests  and  their  material

interests as antagonistic. What could be more discouraging or more tragic?

Observe:

  There is no father of a family who does not take it as his duty to teach his

children order, good management, economy, thrift, moderation in spending.

  There is no religion that does not inveigh against ostentation and luxury.

That is all well and good; but, on the other hand, what is more popular than

these adages:

“To hoard is to dry up the veins of the people.”

  “The luxury of the great makes for the comfort of the little fellow.”

“Prodigals ruin themselves, but they enrich the state.”

“It is with the surplus of the rich that the bread of the poor is made.”

    Certainly there is a flagrant contradiction here between the moral idea and

the economic idea. How many eminent men, after having pointed out this

conflict, look upon it with equanimity! This is what I have never been able to

understand; for it seems to me that one can experience nothing more painfulthan to see two opposing tendencies in the heart of man. Mankind will be

degraded by the one extreme as well as by the other! If thrifty, it will fall into

dire want; if prodigal, it will fall into moral bankruptcy!

    Fortunately, these popular maxims represent thrift and luxury in a false

light, taking account only of the immediate consequences that are seen and

not of the more remote effects that are not seen. Let us try to rectify this

incomplete view.

  Mondor and his brother Ariste, having divided their paternal inheritance,

each  have  an  income  of  fifty  thousand  francs  a  year.  Mondor  practices

philanthropy  in  the  fashionable  way.  He  is  a  spendthrift.  He  replaces  his

furniture several times a year, changes his carriages every month; people talk

about the ingenious devices to which he resorts to get rid of his money faster;

in brief, he makes the high livers of Balzac and Alexander Dumas look pale

by comparison.

  What a chorus of praises always surround him! “Tell us about Mondor!

Long live Mondor! He is the benefactor of the workingman. He is the good

angel  of  the  people!  It  is  true  that  he  wallows  in  luxury;  he  splashes

pedestrians with mud; his own dignity and human dignity in general suffer

somewhat from it. . . . But what of it? If he does not make himself useful by

his  own  labor,  he  does  so  by  means  of  his  wealth.  He  puts  money  into

circulation. His courtyard is never empty of tradesmen who always leave

satisfied. Don’t people say that coins are round so that they can roll?”

  Ariste has adopted a quite different plan of life. If he is not an egoist, he

is  at  least  an  individualist;  for  he  is  rational  in  his  spending,  seeks  only

moderate and reasonable enjoyments, thinks of the future of his children; in a

word, he saves.

  And now I want you to hear what the crowd says about him! “What good

is this mean rich man, this penny-pincher? Undoubtedly there is something

impressive  and  touching  in  the  simplicity  of  his  life;  furthermore,  he  is

humane,  benevolent,  and  generous.  But  he  calculates.  He  does  not  run

through his whole income. His house is not always shining with lights and

swarming with people. What gratitude do the carpetmakers, the coachmakers,

the horse dealers, and the confectioners owe to him?”

These judgments, disastrous to morality, are founded on the fact that there is

one  thing  that  strikes  the  eye:  the  spending  of  the  prodigal  brother;  and

another thing that escapes the eye: the equal or even greater spending of the

economical brother.But things have been so admirably arranged by the divine Inventor of the

social order that in this, as in everything, political economy and morality, far

from clashing, are in harmony, so that the wisdom of Ariste is not only more

worthy, but even more profitable, than the folly of Mondor.

And  when  I  say  more  profitable,  I  do  not  mean  only  more  profitable  to

Ariste,  or  even  to  society  in  general,  but  more  profitable  to  present-day

workers, to the industry of the age.

To  prove  this,  it  suffices  to  set  before  the  mind’s  eye  those  hidden

consequences of human actions that the bodily eye does not see.

Yes, the prodigality of Mondor has effects visible to all eyes: everyone can

see  his  berlines,  his  landaus,  his  phaetons,  the  delicate  paintings  on  his

ceilings, his rich carpets, the splendor of his mansion. Everyone knows that

he  runs  his  thoroughbreds  in  the  races.  The  dinners  that  he  gives  at  his

mansion in Paris fascinate the crowd on the boulevard, and people say to one

another: “There’s a fine fellow, who, far from saving any of his income, is

probably making a hole in his capital.” This is what is seen.

It is not as easy to see, from the viewpoint of the interest of the workers, what

becomes  of  Ariste’s  income.  If  we  trace  it,  however,  we  shall  assure

ourselves that all of it, down to the last centime, goes to give employment to

the workers, just as certainly as the income of Mondor. There is only this

difference: The foolish spending of Mondor is bound to decrease continually

and  to  reach  a  necessary  end;  the  wise  spending  of  Ariste  will  go  on

increasing year by year.

And if this is the case, certainly the public interest is in accord with morality.

Ariste spends for himself and his house twenty thousand francs a year. If this

does not suffice to make him happy, he does not deserve to be called wise.

He is touched by the ills that weigh on the poor; he feels morally obligated to

relieve them somewhat and devotes ten thousand francs to acts of charity.

Among businessmen, manufacturers, and farmers he has friends who, for the

moment,  find  themselves  financially  embarrassed.  He  inquires  about  their

situation in order to come to their aid prudently and efficaciously and sets

aside for this work another ten thousand francs. Finally, he does not forget

that he has daughters to provide dowries for, sons to assure a future for, and,

consequently, he imposes on himself the duty of saving and investing ten

thousand francs a year.

This, then, is how he uses his income:

  1. Personal expenses 20,000 francs2. Charity 10,000 francs

3. Help to friends 10,000 francs

4. Savings 10,000 francs If we review each of these items, we shall see that

not a centime escapes going into the support of national industry.

1.  Personal  expenses.  These,  for  workmen  and  shopkeepers,  have  effects

absolutely  identical  to  an  equal  amount  spent  by  Mondor.  This  is  self-

evident; let us not discuss it further.

2. Charity. The ten thousand francs devoted to this end will support industry

just  as  much;  they  will  go  to  the  baker,  the  butcher,  the  tailor,  and  the

furniture dealer, except that the bread, the meat, the clothes do not serve the

needs of Ariste directly, but of those whom he has substituted for himself.

Now, this simple substitution of one consumer for another has no effect at all

on industry in general. Whether Ariste spends a hundred sous or asks a poor

person to spend it in his place is all one.

3. Help to friends. The friend to whom Ariste lends or gives ten thousand

francs does not receive them in order to bury them; that would be contrary to

our hypothesis. He uses them to pay for merchandise or to pay off his debts.

In the first case, industry is encouraged. Will anyone dare say that there is

more gained from Mondor’s purchase of a thoroughbred for ten thousand

francs than from a purchase by Ariste or his friends of ten thousand francs’

worth of cloth? If this sum serves to pay a debt, all that results is that a third

person appears, the creditor, who will handle the ten thousand francs, but

who will certainly use them for something in his business, his factory, or his

exploitation of natural resources. He is just one more intermediary between

Ariste and the workers. The names change, the spending remains, and so does

the encouragement of industry.

4. Savings. There remain the ten thousand francs saved; and it is here that,

from  the  point  of  view  of  encouragement  of  the  arts,  industry,  and  the

employment of workers, Mondor appears superior to Ariste, although morally

Ariste shows himself a little superior to Mondor.

It is not without actual physical pain that I see such contradictions appear

between  the  great  laws  of  Nature.  If  mankind  were  reduced  to  choosing

between  the  two  sides,  one  of  which  hurts  its  interests  and  the  other  its

conscience, we should have to despair for its future. Happily this is not so. To

see Ariste regain his economic as well as his moral superiority, we need only

understand  this  consoling  axiom,  which  is  not  the  less  true  for  having  a

paradoxical appearance: To save is to spend.What  is  Ariste’s  object  in  saving  ten  thousand  francs?  Is  it  to  hide  two

thousand hundred-sou pieces in a hole in his garden? No, certainly not. He

intends to increase his capital and his income. Consequently, this money that

he does not use to buy personal satisfactions he uses to buy pieces of land, a

house, government bonds, industrial enterprises; or perhaps he invests it with

a broker or a banker. Follow the money through all these hypothetical uses,

and  you  will  be  convinced  that,  through  the  intermediary  of  sellers  or

borrowers, it will go to support industry just as surely as if Ariste, following

the example of his brother, had exchanged it for furniture, jewels, and horses.

For when Ariste buys for ten thousand francs pieces of land or bonds, he does

so because he feels he does not need to spend this sum. This seems to be what

you hold against him.

But,  by  the  same  token,  the  person  who  sells  the  piece  of  land  or  the

mortgage is going to have to spend in some way the ten thousand francs he

receives.

So that the spending is done in either case, whether by Ariste or by those who

are substituted for him.

From the point of view of the working class and of the support given to

industry, there is, then, only one difference between the conduct of Ariste and

that of Mondor. The spending of Mondor is directly accomplished by him

and  around  him;  it  is  seen.  That  of  Ariste,  being  carried  out  partly  by

intermediaries and at a distance, is not seen. But in fact, for anyone who can

connect effects to their causes, that which is not seen is every bit as real as

that which is seen. What proves it is that in both cases the money circulates,

and that no more of it remains in the coffers of the wise brother than in those

of the prodigal.

It is therefore false to say that thrift does actual harm to industry. In this

respect it is just as beneficial as luxury.

But how superior it appears, if our thinking, instead of confining itself to the

passing hour, embraces a long period of time! Ten years have gone by. What

has become of Mondor and his fortune and his great popularity? It has all

vanished. Mondor is ruined; far from pouring fifty thousands francs into the

economy every year, he is probably a public charge. In any case he is no

longer the joy of the shopkeepers; he is no longer considered a promoter of

the arts and of industry; he is no longer any good to the workers, nor to his

descendants, whom he leaves in distress. At the end of the same ten years

Ariste not only continues to put all of his income into circulation, but hecontributes  increasing  income  from  year  to  year.  He  adds  to  the  national

capital, that is to say, the funds that provide wages; and since the demand for

workers  depends  on  the  extent  of  these  funds,  he  contributes  to  the

progressive increase of remuneration of the working class. Should he die, he

will  leave  children  who  will  replace  him  in  this  work  of  progress  and

civilization.

Morally, the superiority of thrift over luxury is incontestable. It is consoling

to think that, from the economic point of view, it has the same superiority for

whoever,  not  stopping  at  the  immediate  effects  of  things,  can  push  his

investigations to their ultimate effects.

12. The Right to Employment and the Right to Profit

“Brothers, assess yourselves to furnish me work at your price.” This is the

right to employment, elementary or first-degree socialism.

  “Brothers, assess yourselves to furnish me work at my price.” This is the

right to profit, refined or second-degree socialism.

Both live by virtue of such of their effects as are seen. They will die from

those of their effects that are not seen.

What is seen is the work and the profit stimulated by the assessments levied

on society. What is not seen is the work and the profits that would come from

this  same  amount  of  money  if  it  were  left  in  the  hands  of  the  taxpayers

themselves.

In 1848 the right to employment showed itself for a moment with two faces.

That was enough to ruin it in public opinion.

One of these faces was called: National workshop.

The other: Forty-five centimes.

Millions went everyday from the rue de Rivoli to the national workshops.

This was the beautiful side of the coin.

But here is what was on the other side. In order for millions of francs to come

out of a coffer, they must first have come into it. That is why the organizers

of the right to employment addressed themselves to the taxpayers.

Now,  the  farmers  said:  “I  must  pay  forty-five  centimes.  Then  I  shall  be

deprived  of  clothes;  I  cannot  marl  my  field;  I  cannot  have  my  house

repaired.”

And the hired hands said: “Since our boss is not going to have any new

clothes, there will be less work for the tailor; since he is not going to have his

field marled, there will be less work for the ditchdigger; since he is not going

to have his house repaired, there will be less work for the carpenter and themason.”

It  was  therefore  proved  that  you  cannot  profit  twice  from  the  same

transaction, and that the work paid for by the government was created at the

expense of work that would have been paid for by the taxpayer. That was the

end of the right to employment, which came to be seen as an illusion as well

as an injustice.

However, the right to profit, which is nothing but an exaggeration of the right

to employment, is still alive and flourishing.

Is  there  not  something  shameful  in  the  role  that  the  protectionist  makes

society play?

He says to society:

“You must give me work, and, what is more, lucrative work. I have foolishly

chosen an industry that leaves me with a loss of ten percent. If you slap a tax

of twenty francs on my fellow citizens and excuse me from paying it, my loss

will be converted into a profit. Now, profit is a right; you owe it to me.”

The society that listens to this sophist, that will levy taxes on itself to satisfy

him, that does not perceive that the loss wiped out in one industry is no less a

loss because others are forced to shoulder it—this society, I say, deserves the

burden placed upon it.

Thus, we see, from the many subjects I have dealt with, that not to know

political economy is to allow oneself to be dazzled by the immediate effect of

a phenomenon; to know political economy is to take into account the sum

total of all effects, both immediate and future.

I could submit here a host of other questions to the same test. But I desist

from doing so, because of the monotony of demonstrations that would always

be  the  same,  and  I  conclude  by  applying  to  political  economy  what

Chateaubriand said of history: There are two consequences in history: one

immediate and instantaneously recognized; the other distant and unperceived

at first. These consequences often contradict each other; the former come

from  our  short-run  wisdom,  the  latter  from  long-run  wisdom.  The

providential  event  appears  after  the  human  event.  Behind  men  rises  God.

Deny as much as you wish the Supreme Wisdom, do not believe in its action,

dispute over words, call what the common man calls Providence “the force of

circumstances” or “reason”; but look at the end of an accomplished fact, and

you will see that it has always produced the opposite of what was expected

when it has not been founded from the first on morality and justice.

(Chateaubriand, Memoirs from beyond the Tomb.)A Petition


by Frédéric Bastiat

  From  the  Manufacturers  of  Candles,  T  apers,  Lanterns,  Candlesticks,

Street Lamps, Snuffers, and Extinguishers, and from the Producers of Tallow,

Oil, Resin, Alcohol, and Generally of Everything Connected with Lighting.

  To the Honorable Members of the Chamber of Deputies. Gentlemen:

You are on the right track. You reject abstract theories and have

  little  regard  for  abundance  and  low  prices.  You  concern  yourselves

mainly with the fate of the producer. You wish to free him from foreign

competition, that is, to reserve the domestic market for domestic industry.

  We come to offer you a wonderful opportunity for applying your—what

shall we call it? Your theory? No, nothing is more deceptive than theory.

Your doctrine? Your system? Your principle? But you dislike doctrines, you

have a horror of systems, and, as for principles, you deny that there are any in

political  economy;  therefore  we  shall  call  it  your  practice—your  practice

without theory and without principle.

  We are suffering from the ruinous competition of a foreign rival who

apparently  works  under  conditions  so  far  superior  to  our  own  for  the

production of light that he is fl o o d i n g the domestic market with it at an

incredibly  low  price;  for  the  moment  he  appears,  our  sales  cease,  all  the

consumers turn to him, and a branch of French industry whose ramifications

are innumerable is all at once reduced to complete stagnation. This rival,

which is none other than the sun, is waging war on us so mercilessly that we

suspect  he  is  being  stirred  up  against  us  by  perfidious  Albion  (excellent

diplomacy nowadays!), particularly because he has for that haughty island a

respect that he does not show for us.

  We ask you to be so good as to pass a law requiring the closing of all

windows, dormers, skylights, inside and outside shutters, curtains, casements,

bull’s-eyes, deadlights, and blinds—in short, all openings, holes, chinks, and

fissures through which the light of the sun is wont to enter houses, to the

detriment of the fair industries with which, we are proud to say, we have

endowed the country, a country that cannot, without betraying ingratitude,

abandon us today to so unequal a combat.

  Be good enough, honorable deputies, to take our request seriously, and do

not reject it without at least hearing the reasons that we have to advance in its

support.  First, if you shut off as much as possible all access to natural light, and

thereby create a need for artificial light, what industry in France will not

ultimately be encouraged?

  If France consumes more tallow, there will have to be more cattle and

sheep, and, consequently, we shall see an increase in cleared fields, meat,

wool, leather, and especially manure, the basis of all agricultural wealth.

  If France consumes more oil, we shall see an expansion in the cultivation

of the poppy, the olive, and rapeseed. These rich yet soil-exhausting plants

will  come  at  just  the  right  time  to  enable  us  to  put  to  profitable  use  the

increased fertility that the breeding of cattle will impart to the land.

  Our moors will be covered with resinous trees. Numerous swarms of bees

will gather from our mountains the perfumed treasures that today waste their

fragrance, like the flowers from which they emanate. Thus, there is not one

branch of agriculture that would not undergo a great expansion.

  The same holds true of shipping. Thousands of vessels will engage in

whaling, and in a short time we shall have a fleet capable of upholding the

honor of France and of gratifying the patriotic aspirations of the undersigned

petitioners, chandlers, etc.

  But  what  shall  we  say  of  the  specialties  of  Parisian  manufacture?

Henceforth you will behold gilding, bronze, and crystal in candlesticks, in

lamps, in chandeliers, in candelabra sparkling in spacious emporia compared

with which those of today are but stalls.

  There is no needy resin-collector on the heights of his sand dunes, no

poor miner in the depths of his black pit, who will not receive higher wages

and enjoy increased prosperity.

  It needs but a little reflection, gentlemen, to be convinced that there is

perhaps  not  one  Frenchman,  from  the  wealthy  stockholder  of  the  Anzin

Company to the humblest vendor of matches, whose condition would not be

improved by the success of our petition.

  We anticipate your objections, gentlemen; but there is not a single one of

them that you have not picked up from the musty old books of the advocates

of free trade. We defy you to utter a word against us that will not instantly

rebound against yourselves and the principle that guides your entire policy.

  Will you tell us that, though we may gain by this protection, France will

not gain at all, because the consumer will bear the expense?

  We have our answer ready:

You no longer have the right to invoke the interests of the consumer. Youhave sacrificed him whenever you have found his interests opposed to those

of the producer. You have done so in order to encourage industry and to

increase employment. For the same reason you ought to do so this time too.

Indeed, you yourselves have anticipated this objection. When told that the

consumer  has  a  stake  in  the  free  entry  of  iron,  coal,  sesame,  wheat,  and

textiles, “Yes,” you reply, “but the producer has a stake in their exclusion.”

Very well! Surely if consumers have a stake in the admission of natural light,

producers have a stake in its interdiction.

“But,” you may still say, “the producer and the consumer are one and the

same  person.  If  the  manufacturer  profits  by  protection,  he  will  make  the

farmer  prosperous.  Contrariwise,  if  agriculture  is  prosperous,  it  will  open

markets for manufactured goods.” Very well! If you grant us a monopoly

over the production of lighting during the day, first of all we shall buy large

amounts of tallow, charcoal, oil, resin, wax, alcohol, silver, iron, bronze, and

crystal,  to  supply  our  industry;  and,  moreover,  we  and  our  numerous

suppliers,  having  become  rich,  will  consume  a  great  deal  and  spread

prosperity into all areas of domestic industry.

Will you say that the light of the sun is a gratuitous gift of Nature, and that to

reject  such  gifts  would  be  to  reject  wealth  itself  under  the  pretext  of

encouraging the means of acquiring it?

But if you take this position, you strike a mortal blow at your own policy;

remember that up to now you have always excluded foreign goods because

and in proportion as they approximate gratuitous gifts. You have only half as

good a reason for complying with the demands of other monopolists as you

have  for  granting  our  petition,  which  is  in  complete  accord  with  your

established  policy;  and  to  reject  our  demands  precisely  because  they  are

better  founded  than  anyone  else’s  would  be  tantamount  to  accepting  the

equation:  +?  =  +–;  in  other  words,  it  would  be  to  heap  absurdity  upon

absurdity.

Labor  and  Nature  collaborate  in  varying  proportions,  depending  upon  the

country and the climate, in the production of a commodity. The part that

Nature  contributes  is  always  free  of  charge;  it  is  the  part  contributed  by

human labor that constitutes value and is paid for.

If an orange from Lisbon sells for half the price of an orange from Paris, it is

because the natural heat of the sun, which is, of course, free of charge, does

for the former what the latter owes to artificial heating, which necessarily has

to be paid for in the market.Thus, when an orange reaches us from Portugal, one can say that it is given to

us half free of charge, or, in other words, at half price as compared with those

from Paris.

Now, it is precisely on the basis of its being semigratuitous (pardon the word)

that  you  maintain  it  should  be  barred.  You  ask:  “How  can  French  labor

withstand the competition of foreign labor when the former has to do all the

work, whereas the latter has to do only half, the sun taking care of the rest?”

But if the fact that a product is half free of charge leads you to exclude it

from competition, how can its being totally free of charge induce you to

admit it into competition? Either you are not consistent, or you should, after

excluding what is half free of charge as harmful to our domestic industry,

exclude what is totally gratuitous with all the more reason and with twice the

zeal.

To take another example: When a product—coal, iron, wheat, or textiles—

comes to us from abroad, and when we can acquire it for less labor than if we

produced it ourselves, the difference is a gratuitous gift that is conferred upon

us. The size of this gift is proportionate to the extent of this difference. It is a

quarter, a half, or three-quarters of the value of the product if the foreigner

asks of us only three-quarters, one-half, or one-quarter as high a price. It is as

complete as it can be when the donor, like the sun in providing us with light,

asks nothing from us. The question, and we pose it formally, is whether what

you desire for France is the benefit of consumption free of charge or the

alleged advantages of onerous production. Make your choice, but be logical;

for as long as you ban, as you do, foreign coal, iron, wheat, and textiles, in

proportion as their price approaches zero, how inconsistent it would be to

admit the light of the sun, whose price is zero all day long!


A Negative Railroad


by Frédéric Bastiat

  I have said that as long as one has regard, as unfortunately happens, only

to the interest of the producer, it is impossible to avoid running counter to the

general  interest,  since  the  producer,  as  such,  demands  nothing  but  the

multiplication of obstacles, wants, and efforts.

  I  find  a  remarkable  illustration  of  this  in  a  Bordeaux  newspaper.  M.

Simiot raises the following question:

Should there be a break in the tracks at Bordeaux on the railroadfrom Paris to Spain?

  He  answers  the  question  in  the  affirmative  and  offers  a  number  of

reasons, of which I propose to examine only this:

There should be a break in the railroad from Paris to Bayonne at Bordeaux;

for,  if  goods  and  passengers  are  forced  to  stop  at  that  city,  this  will  be

profitable for boatmen, porters, owners of hotels, etc.

Here again we see clearly how the interests of those who perform services are

given priority over the interests of the consumers.

But if Bordeaux has a right to profit from a break in the tracks, and if this

profit is consistent with the public interest, then Angoulême, Poitiers, Tours,

Orléans,  and,  in  fact,  all  the  intermediate  points,  including  Ruffec,

Châtellerault, etc., etc., ought also to demand breaks in the tracks, on the

ground of the general interest—in the interest, that is, of domestic industry—

for the more there are of these breaks in the line, the greater will be the

amount paid for storage, porters, and cartage at every point along the way. By

this means, we shall end by having a railroad composed of a whole series of

breaks in the tracks, i.e., a negative railroad.

Whatever  the  protectionists  may  say,  it  is  no  less  certain  that  the  basic

principle of restriction is the same as the basic principle of breaks in the

tracks: the sacrifice of the consumer to the producer, of the end to the means.


The Balance of Trade


by Frédéric Bastiat

The balance of trade is an article of faith.

  We know what it consists in: if a country imports more than it exports, it

loses the difference. Conversely, if its exports exceed its imports, the excess

is to its profit. This is held to be an axiom, and laws are passed in accordance

with it.

  On  this  hypothesis,  M.  Mauguin  warned  us  the  day  before  yesterday,

citing statistics, that France carries on a foreign trade in which it has managed

to  lose,  out  of  good  will,  without  being  required  to  do  so,  two  hundred

million francs a year.

  “You have lost by your trade, in eleven years, two billion francs. Do you

understand what that means?”

Then, applying his infallible rule to the facts, he told us: “In 1847 you sold

605 million francs’ worth of manufactured products, and you bought only152 millions’ worth. Hence, you gained 450 million.

“You bought 804 millions’ worth of raw materials, and you sold only 114

million; hence, you lost 690 million.”

This is an example of the dauntless naïveté of following an absurd premise to

its logical conclusion. M. Mauguin has discovered the secret of making even

Messrs. Darblay and Lebeuf laugh at the expense of the balance of trade. It is

a great achievement, of which I cannot help being jealous.

Allow me to assess the validity of the rule according to which M. Mauguin

and  all  the  protectionists  calculate  profits  and  losses.  I  shall  do  so  by

recounting two business transactions which I have had the occasion to engage

in.

I was at Bordeaux. I had a cask of wine which was worth 50 francs; I sent it

to  Liverpool,  and  the  customhouse  noted  on  its  records  an  export  of  50

francs.

At Liverpool the wine was sold for 70 francs. My representative converted

the 70 francs into coal, which was found to be worth 90 francs on the market

at Bordeaux. The customhouse hastened to record an import of 90 francs.

Balance of trade, or the excess of imports over exports: 40 francs.

These 40 francs, I have always believed, putting my trust in my books, I had

gained. But M. Mauguin tells me that I have lost them, and that France has

lost them in my person.

And why does M. Mauguin see a loss here? Because he supposes that any

excess of imports over exports necessarily implies a balance that must be

paid in cash. But where is there in the transaction that I speak of, which

follows the pattern of all profitable commercial transactions, any balance to

pay? Is it, then, so difficult to understand that a merchant compares the prices

current  in  different  markets  and  decides  to  trade  only  when  he  has  the

certainty, or at least the probability, of seeing the exported value return to

him increased? Hence, what M. Mauguin calls loss should be called profit.

A few days after my transaction I had the simplicity to experience regret; I

was sorry I had not waited. In fact, the price of wine fell at Bordeaux and

rose at Liverpool; so that if I had not been so hasty, I could have bought at 40

francs and sold at 100 francs. I truly believed that on such a basis my profit

would have been greater. But I learn from M. Mauguin that it is the loss that

would have been more ruinous.

My second transaction had a very different result.

I had had some truffles shipped from Périgord which cost me 100 francs; theywere destined for two distinguished English cabinet ministers for a very high

price, which I proposed to turn into pounds sterling. Alas, I would have done

better to eat them myself (I mean the truffles, not the English pounds or the

Tories). All would not have been lost, as they were, for the ship that carried

them off sank on its departure. The customs officer, who had noted on this

occasion an export of 100 francs, never had any re-import to enter in this

case.

Hence, M. Mauguin would say, France gained 100 francs; for it was, in fact,

by this sum that the export, thanks to the shipwreck, exceeded the import. If

the affair had turned out otherwise, if I had received 200 or 300 francs’ worth

of English pounds, then the balance of trade would have been unfavorable,

and France would have been the loser.

From the point of view of science, it is sad to think that all the commercial

transactions which end in loss according to the businessmen concerned show

a profit according to that class of theorists who are always declaiming against

theory.

But from the point of view of practical affairs, it is even sadder, for what is

the result?

Suppose that M. Mauguin had the power (and to a certain extent he has, by

his votes) to substitute his calculations and desires for the calculations and

desires of businessmen and to give, in his words, “a good commercial and

industrial organization to the country, a good impetus to domestic industry.”

What would he do?

M. Mauguin would suppress by law all transactions that consist in buying at a

low domestic price in order to sell at a high price abroad and in converting

the proceeds into commodities eagerly sought after at home; for it is precisely

in these transactions that the imported value exceeds the exported value.

Conversely, he would tolerate, and, indeed, he would encourage, if necessary

by subsidies (from taxes on the public), all enterprises based on the idea of

buying  dearly  in  France  in  order  to  sell  cheaply  abroad;  in  other  words,

exporting what is useful to us in order to import what is useless. Thus, he

would leave us perfectly free, for example, to send off cheeses from Paris to

Amsterdam, in order to bring back the latest fashions from Amsterdam to

Paris; for in this traffic the balance of trade would always be in our favor.

Yet, it is sad and, I dare add, degrading that the legislator will not let the

interested parties decide and act for themselves in these matters, at their peril

and risk. At least then everyone bears the responsibility for his own acts; hewho makes a mistake is punished and is set right. But when the legislator

imposes and prohibits, should he make a monstrous error in judgment, that

error must become the rule of conduct for the whole of a great nation. In

France we love freedom very much, but we hardly understand it. Oh, let us

try to understand it better! We shall not love it any the less.

M.  Mauguin  has  stated  with  imperturbable  aplomb  that  there  is  not  a

statesman in England who does not accept the doctrine of the balance of

trade. After having calculated the loss which, according to him, results from

the  excess  of  our  imports,  he  cried  out:  “If  a  similar  picture  were  to  be

presented to the English, they would shudder, and there is not a member in

the House of Commons who would not feel that his seat was threatened.”

For my part, I affirm that if someone were to say to the House of Commons:

“The total value of what is exported from the country exceeds the total value

of what is imported,” it is then that they would feel threatened; and I doubt

that a single speaker could be found who would dare to add: “The difference

represents a profit.”

In England they are convinced that it is important for the nation to receive

more than it gives. Moreover, they have observed that this is the attitude of

all businessmen; and that is why they have taken the side of laissez faire and

are committed to restoring free trade.


Twenty Myths about Markets


By Tom G. Palmer

  When thinking about the merits and the limitations of solving problems of

social  coordination  through  market  mechanisms,  it’s  useful  to  clear  away

some common myths. By myths I mean those statements that simply pass for

obviously true, without any need for argument or evidence. They’re the kind

of thing you hear on the radio, from friends, from politicians—they just seem

to be in the air. They are repeated as if they’re a kind of deeper wisdom. The

danger  is  that,  because  they  are  so  widespread,  they  are  not  subjected  to

critical examination. That is what I propose to do here.

  Most, but not all, such myths are spread by those who are hostile to free

markets.

A few are spread in much smaller circles by people who are perhaps too

enthusiastic about free markets.

What follows are twenty such myths, grouped into four categories:  Ethical Criticisms;

Economic Criticisms;

Hybrid Ethical-Economic Criticisms; and Overly Enthusiastic Defenses.

Ethical Criticisms

1. Markets Are Immoral or Amoral

  Markets make people think only about the calculation of advantage, pure

and simple. There’s no morality in market exchange, no commitment to what

makes  us  distinct  as  humans:  our  ability  to  think  not  only  about  what’s

advantageous to us, but about what is right and what is wrong, what is moral

and what is immoral.

  A more false claim would be hard to imagine. For there to be exchange

there has to be respect for justice. People who exchange differ from people

who merely take; exchangers show respect for the rightful claims of other

people. The reason that people engage in exchange in the first place is that

they want what others have but are constrained by morality and law from

simply taking it. An exchange is a change from one allocation of resources to

another; that means that any exchange is measured against a baseline, such

that if no exchange takes place, the parties keep what they already have. The

framework for exchange requires a sound foundation in justice. Without such

moral and legal foundations, there can be no exchange.

  Markets are not merely founded on respect for justice, however. They are

also founded on the ability of humans to take into account, not only their own

desires, but the desires of others, to put themselves in the places of others. A

restaurateur who didn’t care what his diners wanted would not be in business

long. If the guests are made sick by the food, they won’t come back. If the

food fails to please them, they won’t come back. He will be out of business.

Markets provide incentives for participants to put themselves in the position

of others, to consider what their desires are, and to try to see things as they

see them.

Markets  are  the  alternative  to  violence.  Markets  make  us  social.  Markets

remind us that other people matter, too.

2. Markets Promote Greed and Selfishness

  People in markets are just trying to find the lowest prices or make the

highest profits. As such, they’re motivated only by greed and selfishness, not

by concern for others.

  Markets neither promote nor dampen selfishness or greed. They make it

possible for the most altruistic, as well as the most selfish, to advance theirpurposes  in  peace.  Those  who  dedicate  their  lives  to  helping  others  use

markets  to  advance  their  purposes,  no  less  than  those  whose  goal  is  to

increase their store of wealth. Some of the latter even accumulate wealth for

the purpose of increasing their ability to help others. George Soros and Bill

Gates are examples of the latter; they earn huge amounts of money, at least

partly  in  order  to  increase  their  ability  to  help  others  through  their  vast

charitable activities.

  A Mother Teresa wants to use the wealth available to her to feed, clothe,

and comfort the greatest number of people. Markets allow her to find the

lowest prices for blankets, for food, and for medicines to care for those who

need her assistance. Markets allow the creation of wealth that can be used to

help the unfortunate and facilitate the charitable to maximize their ability to

help others. Markets make possible the charity of the charitable.

  A common mistake is to identify the purposes of people with their “self-

interest,” which is then in turn confused with “selfishness.” The purposes of

people  in  the  market  are  indeed  purposes  of  selves,  but  as  selves  with

purposes we are also concerned about the interests and well-being of others—

our  family  members,  our  friends,  our  neighbors,  and  even  total  strangers

whom we will never meet. And as noted above, markets help to condition

people to consider the needs of others, including total strangers.

  As has often been pointed out, the deepest foundation of human society is

not  love  or  even  friendship.  Love  and  friendship  are  the  fruits  of  mutual

benefit through cooperation, whether in small or in large groups. Without

such  mutual  benefit,  society  would  simply  be  impossible.  Without  the

possibility of mutual benefit, Tom’s good would be June’s bad, and vice

versa, and they could never be cooperators, never be colleagues, never be

friends.  Cooperation  is  tremendously  enhanced  by  markets,  which  allow

cooperation even among those who are not personally known to each other,

who don’t share the same religion or language, and who may never meet. The

existence of potential gains from trade and the facilitation of trade by well-

defined  and  legally  secure  property  rights  make  possible  charity  among

strangers, and love and friendship across borders.

Economic Criticisms

3. Reliance on Markets Leads to Monopoly

  Without government intervention, reliance on free markets would lead to

a few big firms selling everything. Markets naturally create monopolies, as

marginal producers are squeezed out by firms that seek nothing but their ownprofits, whereas governments are motivated to seek the public interest and

will act to restrain monopolies.

    Governments  can—and  all  too  often  do—give  monopolies  to  favored

individuals or groups; that is, they prohibit others from entering the market

and competing for the custom of customers. That’s what a monopoly means.

The  monopoly  may  be  granted  to  a  government  agency  itself  (as  in  the

monopolized postal services in many countries) or it may be granted to a

favored firm, family, or person.

  Do  free  markets  promote  monopolization?  There’s  little  or  no  good

reason to think so and many reasons to think not. Free markets rest on the

freedom of persons to enter the market, to exit the market, and to buy from or

sell to whomever they please. If firms in markets with freedom of entry make

above average profits, those profits attract rivals to compete those profits

away. Some of the literature of economics offers descriptions of hypothetical

situations in which certain market conditions could lead to persistent “rents,”

that is, income in excess of opportunity cost, defined as what the resources

could earn in other uses. But concrete examples are extremely hard to find,

other  than  relatively  uninteresting  cases  such  as  ownership  of  unique

resources (for example, a painting by Rembrandt). In contrast, the historical

record is simply full of examples of governments granting special privileges

to their supporters.

  Freedom to enter the market and freedom to choose from whom to buy

promote consumer interests by eroding those temporary rents that the first to

offer a good or service may enjoy. In contrast, endowing governments with

power to determine who may or may not provide goods and services creates

the  monopolies—the  actual,  historically  observed  monopolies—that  are

harmful to consumers and that restrain the productive forces of mankind on

which human betterment rests. If markets routinely led to monopolies, we

would not expect to see so many people going to government to grant them

monopolies at the expense of their less powerful competitors and customers.

They could get their monopolies through the market, instead.

  It’s always worth remembering that government itself seeks to exercise a

monopoly;  it’s  a  classic  defining  characteristic  of  a  government  that  it

exercises a monopoly on the exercise of force in a given geographic area.

Why should we expect such a monopoly to be more friendly to competition

than the market itself, which is defined by the freedom to compete?

4.  Markets  Depend  on  Perfect  Information,  Requiring  GovernmentRegulation to Make Information Available

  For  markets  to  be  efficient,  all  market  participants  have  to  be  fully

informed of the costs of their actions. If some have more information than

others,  such  asymmetries  will  lead  to  inefficient  and  unjust  outcomes.

Government has to intervene to provide the information that markets lack and

to create outcomes that are both efficient and just.

    Information, like every other thing we want, is always costly, that is, we

have to give something up to get more of it. Information is itself a product

that  is  exchanged  on  markets;  for  example,  we  buy  books  that  contain

information  because  we  value  the  information  in  the  book  more  than  we

value  what  we  give  up  for  it.  Markets  do  not  require  for  their  operation

perfect  information,  any  more  than  democracies  do.  The  assumption  that

information  is  costly  to  market  participants  but  costless  to  political

participants is unrealistic in extremely destructive ways. Neither politicians

nor voters have perfect information. Significantly, politicians and voters have

less  incentive  to  acquire  the  right  amount  of  information  than  do  market

participants, because they aren’t spending their own money. For example,

when  spending  money  from  the  public  purse,  politicians  don’t  have  the

incentive to be as careful or to acquire as much information as people do

when they are spending their own money.

A  common  argument  for  state  intervention  rests  on  the  informational

asymmetries  between  consumers  and  providers  of  specialized  services.

Doctors are almost always more knowledgeable about medical matters than

are patients, for example; that’s why we go to doctors, rather than just curing

ourselves.  Because  of  that,  it  is  alleged  that  consumers  have  no  way  of

knowing which doctors are more competent, or whether they are getting the

right treatment, or whether they are paying too much. Licensing by the state

may then be proposed as the answer; by issuing a license, it is sometimes

said,  people  are  assured  that  the  doctor  will  be  qualified,  competent,  and

upright. The evidence from studies of licensure, of medicine and of other

professions,  however,  shows  quite  the  opposite.  Whereas  markets  tend  to

generate gradations of certification, licensing is binary; you are licensed, or

you are not. Moreover, it’s common in licensed professions that the license is

revoked  if  the  licensed  professional  engages  in  “unprofessional  conduct,”

which is usually defined as including advertising! But advertising is one of

the  means  that  markets  have  evolved  to  provide  information—about  the

availability  of  products  and  services,  about  relative  qualities,  and  aboutprices. Licensure is not the solution to cases of informational asymmetry; it is

the cause.

  5. Markets Only Work When an Infinite Number of People With Perfect

Information Trade Undifferentiated Commodities

  Market  efficiency,  in  which  output  is  maximized  and  profits  are

minimized, requires that no one is a price-setter, that is, that no buyer or

seller, by entering or exiting the market, will affect the price. In a perfectly

competitive market, no individual buyer or seller can have any impact on

prices.  Products  are  all  homogenous  and  information  about  products  and

prices is costless. But real markets are not perfectly competitive, which is

why government is required to step in and correct things.

  Abstract  models  of  economic  interaction  can  be  useful,  but  when

normatively  loaded  terms  such  as  “perfect”  are  added  to  theoretical

abstractions, a great deal of harm can be done. If a certain condition of the

market is defined as “perfect” competition, then anything else is “imperfect”

and needs to be improved, presumably by some agency outside of the market.

In fact, “perfect” competition is simply a mental model, from which we can

deduce  certain  interesting  facts,  such  as  the  role  of  profits  in  directing

resources (when they’re higher than average, competitors will shift resources

to  increase  supply,  undercut  prices,  and  reduce  profits)  and  the  role  of

uncertainty  in  determining  the  demand  to  hold  cash  (since  if  information

were costless, everyone would invest all their money and arrange it to be

cashed out just at the moment that they needed to make investments, from

which we can conclude that the existence of cash is a feature of a lack of

information). “Perfect” competition is no guide to how to improve markets;

it’s  a  poorly  chosen  term  for  a  mental  model  of  market  processes  that

abstracts from real world conditions of competition.

  For  the  state  to  be  the  agency  that  would  move  markets  to  such

“perfection,” we would expect that it, too, would be the product of “perfect”

democratic policies, in which infinite numbers of voters and candidates have

no  individual  impact  on  policies,  all  policies  are  homogenous,  and

information  about  the  costs  and  benefits  of  policies  is  costless.  That  is

manifestly never the case.

  The  scientific  method  of  choosing  among  policy  options  requires  that

choices be made from among actually available options. Both political choice

and market choice are “imperfect” in all the ways specified above, so choice

should be made on the basis of a comparison of real—not “perfect”—marketprocesses and political processes.

  Real markets generate a plethora of ways of providing information and

generating  mutually  beneficial  cooperation  among  market  participants.

Markets provide the framework for people to discover information, including

forms  of  cooperation.  Advertising,  credit  bureaus,  reputation,  commodity

exchanges, stock exchanges, certification boards, and many other institutions

arise  within  markets  to  serve  the  goal  of  facilitating  mutually  beneficial

cooperation. Rather than discarding markets because they aren’t perfect, we

should look for more ways to use the market to improve the imperfect state of

human welfare.

  Finally, competition is better understood, not as a state of the market, but

as a process of rivalrous behavior. When entrepreneurs are free to enter the

market to compete with others and customers are free to choose from among

producers, the rivalry among producers for the custom of customers leads to

behavior favorable to those customers.

6. Markets Cannot Possibly Produce Public (Collective) Goods

  If I eat an apple, you can’t; consumption of an apple is purely rivalrous. If

I show a movie and don’t want other people to see it, I have to spend money

to  build  walls  to  keep  out  non-payers.  Some  goods,  those  for  which

consumption  is  non-rival  and  exclusion  is  costly,  cannot  be  produced  in

markets, as everyone has an incentive to wait for others to produce them. If

you produce a unit, I can just consume it, so I have no incentive to produce it.

The  same  goes  for  you.  The  publicness  of  such  goods  requires  state

provision, as the only means to provide them. Such goods include not only

defense and provision of a legal system, but also education, transportation,

health care, and many other such goods. Markets can never be relied on to

produce such goods, because non-payers would free-ride off of those who

pay, and since everyone would want to be a free-rider, nobody would pay.

Thus, only government can produce such goods.

  The public goods justification for the state is one of the most commonly

misapplied  of  economic  arguments.  Whether  goods  are  rivalrous  in

consumption or not is often not an inherent feature of the good, but a feature

of the size of the consuming group: a swimming pool may be non-rivalrous

for two people, but quite rivalrous for two hundred people. And costs of

exclusion are applicable to all goods, public or private: if I want to keep you

from eating my apples, I may have to take some action to protect them, such

as building a fence. Many goods that are non-rivalrous in consumption, suchas a professional football game (if you see it, it doesn’t mean that I can’t see

it, too), are produced only because entrepreneurs invest in means to exclude

non-payers.

  Besides not being an inherent feature of the goods per se, the alleged

publicness of many goods is a feature of the political decision to make the

goods available on a nonexclusive and even non-priced basis. If the state

produces “freeways,” it’s hard to see how private enterprise could produce

“freeways,” that is, zeropriced transportation, that could compete. But notice

that the “freeway” isn’t really free, since it’s financed through taxes (which

have a particularly harsh form of exclusion from enjoyment, known as jail),

and also that the lack of pricing is the primary reason for inefficient use

patterns,  such  as  traffic  jams,  which  reflect  a  lack  of  any  mechanism  to

allocate scarce resources (space in traffic) to their most highly valued uses.

Indeed, the trend around the world has been toward pricing of roads, which

deeply undercuts the public goods argument for state provision of roads.

  Many  goods  that  are  allegedly  impossible  to  provide  in  markets  have

been,  or  are  at  present,  provided  through  market  mechanisms—  from

lighthouses to education to policing to transportation, which suggests that the

common invocation of alleged publicness is unjustified, or at least overstated.

  A common form of the argument that certain goods are allegedly only

producible through state action is that there are “externalities” that are not

contracted  for  through  the  price  mechanism.  Thus,  widespread  education

generates  public  benefits  beyond  the  benefits  to  the  persons  who  are

educated, allegedly justifying state provision and financing through general

tax revenues. But despite the benefits to others, which may be great or small,

the benefits to the persons educated are so great for them that they induce

sufficient investment in education. Public benefits don’t always generate the

defection  of  free-riders.  In  fact,  as  a  wealth  of  research  is  demonstrating

today, when states monopolize education they often fail to produce it for the

poorest  of  the  poor,  who  nonetheless  perceive  the  benefits  to  them  of

education  and  invest  substantial  percentages  of  their  meager  incomes  to

educate  their  children.  Whatever  externalities  may  be  generated  by  their

children’s education does not stop them from paying their own money to

procure education for their children.

  Finally, it should be remembered that virtually every argument alleging

the impossibility of efficient production of public goods through the market

applies at least equally strongly—and in many cases much more strongly—tothe likelihood that the state will produce public goods. The existence and

operation of a just and law-governed state is itself a public good, that is, the

consumption of its benefits is non-rivalrous (at least among the citizenry) and

it would be costly to exclude non-contributors to its maintenance (such as

informed  voters)  from  the  enjoyment  of  its  benefits.  The  incentives  for

politicians and voters to produce just and efficient government are not very

impressive, certainly when placed next to the incentives that entrepreneurs

and  consumers  have  to  procure  public  goods  through  cooperation  in  the

marketplace. That does not mean that the state should never have any role in

producing public goods, but it should make citizens less willing to cede to the

state additional responsibilities for providing goods and services. In fact, the

more responsibilities are given to the state, the less likely it is to be able to

produce those public goods, such as defense of the rights of its citizens from

aggression, at which it might enjoy special advantages.

7. Markets Don’t Work (or Are Inefficient) When There Are Negative or

Positive Externalities

  Markets only work when all of the effects of action are born by those who

make the decisions. If people receive benefits without contributing to their

production, markets will fail to produce the right amount. Similarly, if people

receive “negative benefits,” that is, if they are harmed and those costs are not

taken into account in the decision to produce the goods, markets will benefit

some at the expense of others, as the benefits of the action go to one set of

parties and the costs are borne by another.

  The mere existence of an externality is no argument for having the state

take over some activity or displace private choices. Fashionable clothes and

good  grooming  generate  plenty  of  positive  externalities,  as  others  admire

those who are well clothed or groomed, but that’s no reason to turn choice of

or  provision  of  clothing  and  grooming  over  to  the  state.  Gardening,

architecture,  and  many  other  activities  generate  positive  externalities  on

others, but people undertake to beautify their gardens and their buildings just

the same. In all those cases, the benefits to the producers alone—including

the approbation of those on whom the positive externalities are showered—

are sufficient to induce them to produce the goods. In other cases, such as the

provision of television and radio broadcasts, the public good is “tied” to the

provision  of  other  goods,  such  as  advertising  for  firms;  the  variety  of

mechanisms  to  produce  public  goods  is  as  great  as  the  ingenuity  of  the

entrepreneurs who produce them.  More commonly, however, it’s the existence of negative externalities that

leads  people  to  question  the  efficacy  or  justice  of  market  mechanisms.

Pollution is the most commonly cited example. If a producer can produce

products profitably because he imposes the costs of production on others who

have not consented to be a part of the production process—say, by throwing

huge  amounts  of  smoke  into  the  air  or  chemicals  into  a  river—he  will

probably do so. Those who breathe the polluted air or drink the toxic water

will bear the costs of producing the product, while the producer will get the

benefits from the sale of the product. The problem in such cases, however, is

not  that  markets  have  failed,  but  that  they  are  absent.  Markets  rest  on

property  and  cannot  function  when  property  rights  are  not  defined  or

enforced. Cases of pollution are precisely cases, not of market failure, but of

government failure to define and defend the property rights of others, such as

those who breathe polluted air or drink polluted water.

  When people downwind or downstream have the right to defend their

rights, they can assert their rights and stop the polluters from polluting. The

producer can install at his own expense equipment or technology to eliminate

the pollution (or reduce it to tolerable and non-harmful levels), or offer to pay

the people downwind or downstream for the rights to use their resources

(perhaps offering them a better place to live), or he must stop producing the

product, because he is harming the rights of others who will not accept his

offers, showing that the total costs exceed the benefits. It’s property rights

that  make  such  calculations  possible  and  that  induce  people  to  take  into

account the effects of their actions on others. And it’s markets, that is, the

opportunity to engage in free exchange of rights, that allow all of the various

parties to calculate the costs of actions.

    Negative externalities such as air and water pollution are not a sign of

market failure, but of government’s failure to define and defend the property

rights on which markets rest.

8. The More Complex a Social Order Is, the Less It Can Rely

on Markets and the More It Needs Government Direction

    Reliance on markets worked fine when society was less complicated, but

with the tremendous growth of economic and social connections, government

is necessary to direct and coordinate the actions of so many people.

  If anything, the opposite is true. A simple social order, such as a band of

hunters or gatherers, might be coordinated effectively by a leader with the

power to compel obedience. But as social relations become more complex,reliance on voluntary market exchange becomes more—not less—important.

A complex social order requires the coordination of more information than

any mind or group of minds could master. Markets have evolved mechanisms

to transmit information in a relatively low-cost manner; prices encapsulate

information  about  supply  and  demand  in  the  form  of  units  that  are

comparable among different goods and services, in ways that voluminous

reports  by  government  bureaucracies  cannot.  Moreover,  prices  translate

across languages, social mores, and ethnic and religious divides and allow

people to take advantage of the knowledge possessed by unknown persons

thousands of miles away, with whom they will never have any other kind of

relationship. The more complex an economy and society, the more important

reliance on market mechanisms becomes.

9. Markets Don’t Work in Developing Countries

  Markets work well in countries with well developed infrastructures and

legal systems, but in their absence developing countries simply cannot afford

recourse to markets. In such cases, state direction is necessary, at least until a

highly  developed  infrastructure  and  legal  system  is  developed  that  could

allow room for markets to function.

  In  general,  infrastructure  development  is  a  feature  of  the  wealth

accumulated through markets, not a condition for markets to exist, and the

failure of a legal system is a reason why markets are underdeveloped, but that

failure is a powerful reason to reform the legal system so it could provide the

foundation for the development of markets, not to postpone legal reform and

market  development.  The  only  way  to  achieve  the  wealth  of  developed

countries is to create the legal and institutional foundations for markets so

that entrepreneurs, consumers, investors, and workers can freely cooperate to

create wealth.

  All currently wealthy countries were once very poor, some within living

memory. What needs explanation is not poverty, which is the natural state of

mankind, but wealth. Wealth has to be created and the best way to ensure that

wealth is created is to generate the incentives for people to do so. No system

better than the free market, based on well defined and legally secure property

rights and legal institutions to facilitate exchange, has ever been discovered

for  generating  incentives  for  wealth  creation.  There  is  one  path  out  of

poverty, and that is the path of wealth creation through the free market.

  The term “developing nation” is frequently misapplied when it is applied

to  nations  whose  governments  have  rejected  markets  in  favor  of  centralplanning,  state  ownership,  mercantilism,  protectionism,  and  special

privileges. Such nations are not, in fact, developing at all. The nations that are

developing,  whether  starting  from  relatively  wealthy  or  relatively

impoverished  positions,  are  those  that  have  created  legal  institutions  of

property and contract, freed markets, and limited the powers, the budget, and

the reach of the state power.

10.  Markets  Lead  to  Disastrous  Economic  Cycles,  Such  as  the  Great

Depression

    Reliance on market forces leads to cycles of “boom and bust” as investor

overconfidence feeds on itself, leading to massive booms in investment that

are inevitably followed by contractions of production, unemployment, and a

generally worsening economic condition.

    Economic cycles of “boom and bust” are sometimes blamed on reliance

on markets. The evidence, however, is that generalized overproduction is not

a feature of markets; when more goods and services are produced, prices

adjust and the result is general affluence, not a “bust.” When this or that

industry expands beyond the ability of the market to sustain profitability, a

process  of  self-correction  sets  in,  and  profit  signals  lead  resources  to  be

redirected to other fields of activity. There is no reason inherent in markets

for such correction to apply to all industries; indeed, it is self-contradictory

(for if investment is being taken away from all and redirected to all, then it’s

not being taken away from all in the first place).

    Nonetheless,  prolonged  periods  of  general  unemployment  are  possible

when  governments  distort  price  systems  through  foolish  manipulation  of

monetary systems, a policy error that is often combined with subsidies to

industries that should be contracting and wage and price controls that keep

the market from adjusting, thus prolonging the unemployment. Such was the

case of the Great Depression that lasted from 1929 to the end of World War

II, which economists (such as Nobel Prize winner Milton Friedman) showed

was caused by a massive and sudden contraction in the money supply by the

U.S. Federal Reserve system, which was pursuing politically set goals. The

general contraction was then deepened by the rise in protectionism, which

extended the suffering worldwide, and prolonged greatly by such programs as

the National Recovery Act, programs to keep farm prices high (by destroying

huge  quantities  of  agricultural  products  and  restricting  supply),  and  other

“New  Deal”  programs  that  were  aimed  at  keeping  market  forces  from

correcting  the  disastrous  effects  of  the  government’s  policy  errors.  Morerecent crashes, such as the Asian financial crisis of 1997, have been caused

by imprudent monetary and exchange rate policies that distorted the signals

to investors. Market forces corrected the policy failures of governments, but

the process was not without hardship; the cause of the hardship was not the

medicine  that  cured  the  disease,  but  the  bad  monetary  and  exchange-rate

policies of governments that caused it in the first place.

  With the adoption of more prudent monetary policies by governmental

monetary authorities, such cycles have tended to even out. When combined

with greater reliance on market adjustment processes, the result has been a

reduction in the frequency and severity of economic cycles and long-term and

sustained  improvement  in  those  countries  that  have  followed  policies  of

freedom of trade, budgetary restraint, and the rule of law.

11. Too Much Reliance on Markets Is As Silly As Too Much

Reliance on Socialism: the Best Is the Mixed Economy

  Most  people  understand  that  it’s  unwise  to  put  all  your  eggs  in  one

basket. Prudent investors diversify their portfolios and it’s just as reasonable

to have a diversified “policy portfolio,” as well, meaning a mix of socialism

and markets.

  Prudent investors who don’t have inside information do indeed diversify

their portfolios against risk. If one stock goes down, another may go up, thus

evening out the loss with a gain. Over the long run, a properly diversified

portfolio  will  grow.  But  policies  aren’t  like  that.  Some  have  been

demonstrated time and time gain to fail, while others have been demonstrated

to  succeed.  It  would  make  no  sense  to  have  a  “diversified  investment

portfolio” made up of stocks in firms that are known to be failing and stocks

in firms that are known to be succeeding; the reason for diversification is that

one doesn’t have any special knowledge of which firms are more likely to be

profitable or unprofitable.

    Studies of decades of economic data carried out annually by the Fraser

Institute  of  Canada  and  a  worldwide  network  of  research  institutes  have

shown consistently that greater reliance on market forces leads to higher per

capita incomes, faster economic growth, lower unemployment, longer life

spans, lower infant mortality, falling rates of child labor, greater access to

clean water, health care, and other amenities of modern life, including cleaner

environments,  and  improved  governance,  such  as  lower  rates  of  official

corruption and more democratic accountability. Free markets generate good

results.    Moreover,  there  is  no  “well  balanced”  middle  of  the  road.  State

interventions into the market typically lead to distortions and even crises,

which then are used as excuses for yet more interventions, thus driving policy

one  direction  or  another.  For  example,  a  “policy  portfolio”  that  included

imprudent monetary policy, which increases the supply of money faster than

the  economy  is  growing,  will  lead  to  rising  prices.  History  has  shown

repeatedly  that  politicians  tend  to  respond,  not  by  blaming  their  own

imprudent policies, but by blaming an “overheated economy” or “unpatriotic

speculators” and imposing controls on prices. When prices are not allowed to

be corrected by supply and demand (in this case, the increased supply of

money, which tends to cause the price of money, as expressed in terms of

commodities, to fall), the result is shortages of goods and services, as more

people seek to buy limited supplies of goods at the below-market price than

producers are willing to supply at that price. In addition, the lack of free

markets  leads  people  to  shift  to  black  markets,  under-thetable-bribes  of

officials, and other departures from the rule of law. The resulting mixture of

shortage and corruption then typically induces yet greater tendencies toward

authoritarian assertions of power. The effect of creating a “policy portfolio”

that includes such proven bad policies is to undermine the economy, to create

corruption, and even to undermine constitutional democracy.

Hybrid Ethical/Economic Criticisms

12. Markets Lead to More Inequality than Non-Market Processes

  By definition, markets reward ability to satisfy consumer preferences and

as abilities differ, so incomes will differ. Moreover, by definition, socialism

is a state of equality, so every step toward socialism is a step toward equality.

  If  we  want  to  understand  the  relationships  between  policies  and

outcomes, it should be kept in mind that property is a legal concept; wealth is

an economic concept. The two are often confused, but they should be kept

distinct. Market processes regularly redistribute wealth on a massive scale. In

contrast, unwilling redistribution of property (when undertaken by individual

citizens, it’s known as “theft”) is prohibited under the rules that govern free

markets,  which  require  that  property  be  well  defined  and  legally  secure.

Markets can redistribute wealth, even when property titles remain in the same

hands. Every time the value of an asset (in which an owner has a property

right) changes, the wealth of the asset owner changes. An asset that was

worth 600 Euros yesterday may today be worth only 400 Euros. That’s a

redistribution of 200 Euros of wealth through the market, although there hasbeen no redistribution of property. So markets regularly redistribute wealth

and in the process give owners of assets incentives to maximize their value or

to shift their assets to those who will. That regular redistribution, based on

incentives to maximize total value, represents transfers of wealth on a scale

unthinkable  for  most  politicians.  In  contrast,  while  market  processes

redistribute wealth, political processes redistribute property, by taking it from

some and giving it to others; in the process, by making property less secure,

such redistribution tends to make property in general less valuable, that is, to

destroy wealth. The more unpredictable the redistribution, the greater the loss

of wealth caused by the threat of redistribution of property.

  Equality  is  a  characteristic  that  can  be  realized  along  a  number  of

different dimensions, but generally not across all. For example, people can all

be equal before the law, but if that is the case, it is unlikely that they will

have exactly equal influence over politics, for some who exercise their equal

rights to freedom of speech will be more eloquent or energetic than others,

and thus more influential. Similarly, equal rights to offer goods and services

on free markets may not lead to exactly equal incomes, for some may work

harder or longer (because they prefer income to leisure) than others, or have

special skills for which others will pay extra. On the flip side, the attempt to

achieve through coercion equality of influence or equality of incomes will

entail that some exercise more authority or political power than others, that is,

the power necessary to bring about such outcomes. In order to bring about a

particular pattern of outcomes, someone or some group must have the “God’s

Eye” view of outcomes necessary to redistribute, to see a lack here and a

surplus there and thus to take from here and move to there. As powers to

create equal outcomes are concentrated in the hands of those entrusted with

them, as was the case in the officially egalitarian Soviet Union, those with

unequal  political  and  legal  powers  find  themselves  tempted  to  use  those

powers  to  attain  unequal  incomes  or  access  to  resources.  Both  logic  and

experience show that conscious attempts to attain equal or “fair” incomes, or

some  other  pattern  other  than  what  the  spontaneous  order  of  the  market

generates, are generally self-defeating, for the simple reason that those who

hold  the  power  to  redistribute  property  use  it  to  benefit  themselves,  thus

converting inequality of political power into other sorts of inequality, whether

honors, wealth, or something else. Such was certainly the experience of the

officially communist nations and such is the path currently being taken by

other nations, such as Venezuela, in which total power is being accumulatedin  the  hands  of  one  man,  Hugo  Chavez,  who  demands  such  massively

unequal  power,  ostensibly  in  order  to  create  equality  of  wealth  among

citizens.

    According  to  the  data  in  the  2006  Economic  Freedom  of  the  World

Report, reliance on free markets is weakly correlated to income inequality

(from the least free to the most free economies the world over, divided into

quartiles, the percentage of income received by the poorest ten percent varies

from an average of 2.2 percent to an average of 2.5 percent), but it is very

strongly correlated to the levels of income of the poorest ten percent (from

the  least  free  to  the  most  free  economies  the  world  over,  divided  into

quartiles, the average levels of income received by the poorest ten percent are

$826,  $1,186,  $2,322,  and  $6,519).  Greater  reliance  on  markets  seems  to

have little impact on income distributions, but it does substantially raise the

incomes of the poor and it is likely that many of the poor would certainly

consider that a good thing.

13.  Markets  Cannot  Meet  Human  Needs,  Such  as  Health,  Housing,

Education, and Food

  Goods should be distributed according to principles appropriate to their

nature.  Markets  distribute  goods  according  to  ability  to  pay,  but  health,

housing, education, food, and other basic human needs, precisely because

they are needs, should be distributed according to need, not ability to pay.

  If markets do a better job of meeting human needs than other principles,

that is, if more people enjoy higher standards of living under markets than

under socialism, it seems that the allocation mechanism under markets does a

better  job  of  meeting  the  criterion  of  need,  as  well.  As  noted  above,  the

incomes  of  the  poorest  tend  to  rise  rapidly  with  the  degree  of  market

freedom, meaning that the poor have more resources with which to satisfy

their  needs.  (Naturally,  not  all  needs  are  directly  related  to  income;  true

friendship and love certainly are not. But there is no reason to think that those

are more “equitably” distributed by coercive mechanisms, either, or even that

they can be distributed by such mechanisms.)

    Moreover, while assertions of “need” tend to be rather rubbery claims, as

are assertions of “ability,” willingness to pay is easier to measure. When

people bid with their own money for goods and services, they are telling us

how much they value those goods and services relative to other goods and

services. Food, certainly a more basic need than education or health care, is

provided quite effectively through markets. In fact, in those countries whereprivate  property  was  abolished  and  state  allocation  substituted  for  market

allocation,  the  results  were  famine  and  even  cannibalism.  Markets  meet

human needs for most goods, including those that respond to basic human

needs, better than do other mechanisms.

    Satisfaction of needs requires the use of scarce resources, meaning that

choices  have  to  be  made  about  their  allocation.  Where  markets  are  not

allowed to operate, other systems and criteria for rationing scarce resources

are  used,  such  as  bureaucratic  allocation,  political  pull,  membership  in  a

ruling party, relationship to the president or the main holders of power, or

bribery and other forms of corruption. It is hardly obvious that such criteria

are better than the criteria evolved by markets, nor that they generate more

equality; the experience is rather the opposite.

14. Markets Rest on the Principle of the Survival of the Fittest

  Just like the law of the jungle, red in tooth and claw, the law of the

market means survival of the fittest. Those who cannot produce to market

standards fall by the wayside and are trampled underfoot.

    Invocations of evolutionary principles such as “survival of the fittest” in

the study of living systems and in the study of human social interaction lead

to confusion unless they identify what it is in each case that survives. In the

case of biology, it is the individual animal and its ability to reproduce itself.

A rabbit that is eaten by a cat because it’s too slow to escape isn’t going to

have any more offspring. The fastest rabbits will be the ones to reproduce.

When  applied  to  social  evolution,  however,  the  unit  of  survival  is  quite

different;  it’s  not  the  individual  human  being,  but  the  form  of  social

interaction, such as a custom, an institution, or a firm, that is “selected” in the

evolutionary struggle. When a business firm goes out of business, it “dies”,

that  is  to  say,  that  particular  form  of  social  cooperation  “dies”,  but  that

certainly doesn’t mean that the human beings who made up the firm—as

investors,  owners,  managers,  employees,  and  so  on—die,  as  well.  A  less

efficient form of cooperation is replaced by a more efficient form. Market

competition is decidedly unlike the competition of the jungle. In the jungle

animals compete to eat each other, or to displace each other. In the market,

entrepreneurs and firms compete with each other for the right to cooperate

with consumers and with other entrepreneurs and firms. Market competition

is  not  competition  for  the  opportunity  to  live;  it  is  competition  for  the

opportunity to cooperate.

15. Markets Debase Culture and Art  Art and culture are responses to the higher elements of the human soul

and,  as  such,  cannot  be  bought  and  sold  like  tomatoes  or  shirt  buttons.

Leaving art to the market is like leaving religion to the market, a betrayal of

the inherent dignity of art, as of religion. Moreover, as art and culture are

opened more and more to competition on international markets, the result is

their debasement, as traditional forms are abandoned in the pursuit of the

almighty dollar or euro.

  Most art has been and is produced for the market. Indeed, the history of

art is largely the history of innovation through the market in response to new

technologies, new philosophies, new tastes, and new forms of spirituality.

Art,  culture,  and  the  market  have  been  intimately  connected  for  many

centuries. Musicians charge fees for people to attend their concerts, just as

vegetable mongers charge for tomatoes or tailors charge to replace buttons on

suits. In fact, the creation of wider markets for music, film, and other forms

of art by the creation of records, cassettes, CDs, DVDs, and now iTunes and

mp3 files allows more and more people to be exposed to more and more

varied art, and for artists to create more artistic experiences, to create more

hybrid forms of art, and to earn more income. Unsurprisingly, most of the art

produced in any given year won’t stand the test of time; that creates a false

perspective on the part of those who condemn contemporary art as “trashy,”

in comparison to the great works of the past; what they are comparing are the

best works winnowed out from hundreds of years of production to the mass

of works produced in the past year. Had they included all of the works that

did  not  stand  the  test  of  time  and  were  not  remembered,  the  comparison

would probably look quite different. What accounts for the survival of the

best is precisely the competitive process of markets for art.

  Comparing the entirety of contemporary artistic production with the very

best of the best from past centuries is not the only error people make when

evaluating markets for art. Another error common to observers from wealthy

societies who visit poor societies is the confusion of the poverty of poor

societies with their cultures. When wealthy visitors see people in countries

that are poor-but-growing-economically using cell phones and flipping open

laptops, they complain that their visit is not as “authentic” as the last one. As

people  become  richer  through  market  interactions  made  possible  by

increasing  liberalization  or  globalization,  such  as  the  introduction  of  cell

telephony, antiglobalization activists from rich countries complain that the

poor  are  being  “robbed”  of  their  culture.  But  why  equate  culture  withpoverty? The Japanese went from poverty to wealth and it would be hard to

argue that they are any less Japanese as a result. In fact, their greater wealth

has made possible the spread of awareness of Japanese culture around the

world. In India, as incomes are rising, the fashion industry is responding by

turning to traditional forms of attire, such as the sari, and adapting, updating,

and  applying  to  it  aesthetic  criteria  of  beauty  and  form.  The  very  small

country of Iceland has managed to maintain a high literary culture and their

own theater and movie industry because per capita incomes are quite high,

allowing them to dedicate their wealth to perpetuating and developing their

culture.

  Finally, although religious belief is not “for sale,” free societies do leave

religion  to  the  same  principles—equal  rights  and  freedom  of  choice—as

those at the foundation of the free market. Churches, mosques, synagogues,

and  temples  compete  with  each  other  for  adherents  and  for  support.

Unsurprisingly, those European countries that provide official state support

of churches tend to have very low church participation, whereas countries

without  state  support  of  religion  tend  to  have  higher  levels  of  church

participation. The reason is not so hard to understand: churches that have to

compete for membership and support have to provide services—sacramental,

spiritual, and communal—to members, and that greater attention to the needs

of the membership tends to create more religiosity and participation. Indeed,

that’s  why  the  official  established  state  church  of  Sweden  lobbied  to  be

disestablished  in  the  year  2000;  as  an  unresponsive  part  of  the  state

bureaucracy,  the  church  was  losing  connection  with  its  members  and

potential members and was, in effect, dying.

  There is no contradiction between the market and art and culture. Market

exchange is not the same as artistic experience or cultural enrichment, but it

is a helpful vehicle for advancing both.

16. Markets Only Benefit the Rich and Talented

  The rich get richer and the poor get poorer. If you want to make a lot of

money, you have to start out with a lot. In the race of the market for profits,

those who start out ahead reach the finish line first.

  Market processes aren’t races, which have winners and losers. When two

parties voluntarily agree to exchange, they do so because they both expect to

benefit, not because they hope they will win and the other will lose. Unlike in

a race, in an exchange, if one person wins, it doesn’t mean that the other has

to lose. Both parties gain. The point is not to “beat” the other, but to gainthrough voluntary cooperative exchange; in order to induce the other person

to exchange, you have to offer a benefit to him or her, as well.

  Being  born  to  wealth  may  certainly  be  a  good  thing,  something  the

citizens of wealthy countries probably do not appreciate as much as do those

who seek to emigrate from poor countries to rich countries; the latter usually

understand the benefits of living in a wealthy society better than those who

are born to it. But within a free market, with freedom of entry and equal

rights for all buyers and sellers, those who were good at meeting market

demands  yesterday  may  not  be  the  same  as  those  who  will  be  good  at

meeting market demand tomorrow. Sociologists refer to the “circulation of

elites” that characterizes free societies; rather than static elites that rest on

military power, caste membership, or tribal or family connection, the elites of

free societies—including artistic elites, cultural elites, scientific elites, and

economic elites—are open to new members and rarely pass on membership

to the children of members, many of whom move from the upper classes to

the middle classes.

  Wealthy societies are full of successful people who left behind countries

where markets are severely restricted or hampered by special favors for the

powerful, by protectionism, and by mercantilistic monopolies and controls,

where  opportunities  for  advancement  in  the  market  are  limited.  They  left

those societies with little or nothing and found success in more open and

marketoriented societies, such as the USA, the United Kingdom, and Canada.

What  was  the  difference  between  the  societies  they  left  and  those  they

joined?: freedom to compete in the market. How sad for poor countries it is

that  the  mercantilism  and  restrictions  in  their  home  countries  drive  them

abroad, so they can not stay at home and enrich their neighbors and friends

by putting their entrepreneurial drive to work.

    Generally, in countries with freer markets, the greatest fortunes are made,

not by satisfying the desires of the rich, but by satisfying the desires of the

more  modest  classes.  From  Ford  Motors  to  Sony  to  Wal-Mart,  great

companies that generate great fortunes tend to be those that cater, not to the

tastes of the richest, but to the lower and middle classes.

  Free markets tend to be characterized by a “circulation of elites,” with no

one guaranteed a place or kept from entering by accident of birth. The phrase

“the rich get richer and the poor get poorer” applies, not to free markets, but

to mercantilism and political cronyism, that is, to systems in which proximity

to power determines wealth. Under markets, the more common experience isthat  the  rich  do  well  (but  may  not  stay  “rich”  by  the  standards  of  their

society) and the poor get a lot richer, with many moving into the middle and

upper  classes.  At  any  given  moment,  by  definition  20  percent  of  the

population will be in the lowest quintile of income and 20 percent will be in

the highest quintile. But it does not follow either that those quintiles will

measure the same amount of income (as incomes of all income groups rise in

expanding economies) or that the income categories will be filled by the same

people. The categories are rather like rooms in a hotel or seats on a bus; they

are filled by someone, but not always by the same people. When income

distributions in market-oriented societies are studied over time, a great deal of

income mobility is revealed, with remarkable numbers of people moving up

and down in the income distributions. What is most important, however, is

that prosperous market economies see all incomes rise, from the lowest to the

highest.

17. When Prices Are Liberalized and Subject to Market Forces, They Just Go

Up

  The fact is that when prices are left to market forces, without government

controls, they just go up, meaning that people can afford less and less. Free-

market pricing is just another name for high prices.

  Prices that are controlled at below market levels do tend to rise, at least

over the short time, when they are freed. But there is much more to the story

than that. For one thing, some controlled prices are kept above the market

level, so that when they are freed, they tend to fall. Moreover, when looking

at money prices that are controlled by state power, it’s important to remember

that the money that changes hands over the table is not usually the only price

paid by those who successfully purchase the goods. If the goods are rationed

by queuing, then the time spent waiting in line is a part of what people have

to spend to get the goods. (Notably, however, that waiting time represents

pure waste, since it’s not time that is somehow transferred to producers to

induce them to make more of the goods to satisfy the unmet demand.) If

corrupt officials have their hands open, there are also the payments under the

table that have to be added to the payment that is made over the table. The

sum of the legal payment, the illegal bribes, and the time spent waiting in

lines when maximum prices are imposed by the state on goods and services is

quite  often  higher  than  the  price  that  people  would  agree  on  through  the

market. Moreover, the money spent on bribes and the time spent on waiting

are wasted—they are spent by consumers but not received by producers, sothey provide no incentive for producers to produce more and thereby alleviate

the shortage caused by price controls.

  While money prices may go up in the short term when prices are freed,

the  result  is  to  increase  production  and  diminish  wasteful  rationing  and

corruption, with the result that total real prices— expressed in terms of a

basic commodity, human labor time—goes down. The amount of time that a

person had to spend laboring to earn a loaf of bread in 1800 was a serious

fraction of his or her laboring day; as wages have gone up and up and up and

up, the amount of working time necessary to buy a loaf of bread has fallen to

just  a  few  minutes  in  wealthy  countries.  Measured  in  terms  of  labor,  the

prices of all other goods have fallen dramatically, with one exception: labor

itself.  As  labor  productivity  and  wages  rise,  hiring  human  labor  becomes

more expensive, which is why modestly well off people in poor countries

commonly have servants, whereas even very wealthy people in rich countries

find it much cheaper to buy machines to wash their clothes and dishes. The

result of free markets is a fall in the price of everything else in terms of labor,

and a rise in the price of labor in terms of everything else.

  18. Privatization and Marketization in Post-Communist Societies Were

Corrupt, Which Shows that Markets Are Corrupting

    Privatization campaigns are almost always rigged. It’s a game that just

awards the best state assets to the most ruthless and corrupt opportunists. The

whole game of privatization and marketization is dirty and represents nothing

more than theftfrom the people.

  A  variety  of  formerly  socialist  states  that  have  created  privatization

campaigns  have  had  quite  varied  outcomes.  Some  have  generated  very

successful market orders. Others have slipped back toward authoritarianism

and  have  seen  the  “privatization”  processes  result  in  new  elites  gaining

control of both the state and private businesses, as in the emerging “Siloviki”

system of Russia. The dirtiness of the dirty hands that profited from rigged

privatization  schemes  was  a  result  of  the  preexisting  lack  of  market

institutions, notably the rule of law that is the foundation for the market.

Creating  those  institutions  is  no  easy  task  and  there  is  no  well-known

generally applicable technique that works in all cases. But the failure in some

cases to fully realize the institutions of the rule of law is no reason not to try;

even in the case of Russia, the deeply flawed privatization schemes that were

instituted  were  an  improvement  over  the  one-party  tyranny  that  preceded

them and that collapsed from its own injustice and inefficiency.  Mere “privatization” in the absence of a functioning legal system is not

the same as creating a market. Markets rest on a foundation of law; failed

privatizations are not failures of the market, but failures of the state to create

the legal foundations for markets.

Overly Enthusiastic Defenses

19. All Relations Among Humans Can Be Reduced to Market Relations

  All actions are taken because the actors are maximizing their own utility.

Even helping other people is getting a benefit for yourself, or you wouldn’t

do it. Friendship and love represent exchanges of services for mutual benefit,

no less than exchanges involving sacks of potatoes. Moreover, all forms of

human interaction can be understood in terms of markets, including politics,

in which votes are exchanged for promises of benefits, and even crime, in

which criminals and victims exchange, in the well-known example, “your

money or your life.”

    Attempting to reduce all actions to a single motivation falsifies human

experience. Parents don’t think about the benefits to themselves when they

sacrifice for their children or rush to their rescue when they’re in danger.

When people pray for salvation or spiritual enlightenment, their motivations

are not quite the same as when they are shopping for clothes. What they do

have in common is that their actions are purposeful, that they are undertaken

to achieve their purposes. But it does not follow logically from that that the

purposes they are striving to achieve are all reducible to commensurable units

of the same substance. Our purposes and motivations may be varied; when

we go to the market to buy a hammer, when we enter an art museum, and

when we cradle a newborn baby, we are realizing very different purposes, not

all of which are well expressed in terms of buying and selling in markets.

  It is true that intellectual constructs and tools can be used to understand

and illuminate a variety of different kinds of interaction. The concepts of

economics, for example, which are used to understand exchanges on markets,

can also be used to understand political science and even religion. Political

choices may have calculable costs and benefits, just like business choices;

political parties or mafia cartels may be compared to firms in the market. But

it does not follow from such applications of concepts that the two choice

situations  are  morally  or  legally  equivalent.  A  criminal  who  offers  you  a

choice between keeping your money and keeping your life is not relevantly

like an entrepreneur who offers you a choice between keeping your money

and using it to buy a commodity, for the simple reason that the criminalforces you to choose between two things to both of which you have a moral

and legal entitlement, whereas the entrepreneur offers you a choice between

two things, to one of which he has an entitlement and to one of which you

have an entitlement. In both cases you make a choice and act purposively, but

in the former case the criminal has forced you to choose, whereas in the latter

case  the  entrepreneur  has  offered  you  a  choice;  the  former  lessens  your

entitlements and the latter offers to increase them, by offering you something

you don’t have but may value more for something you do have but may value

less. Not all human relationships are reducible to the same terms as markets;

at the very least, those that involve involuntary “exchanges” are radically

different, because they represent losses of opportunity and value, rather than

opportunities to gain value.

20. Markets Can Solve All Problems without Government at All

  Government is so incompetent that it can’t do anything right. The main

lesson of the market is that we should always weaken government, because

government is simply the opposite of the market. The less government you

have, the more market you have.

  Those who recognize the benefits of markets should recognize that in

much  of  the  world,  perhaps  all  of  it,  the  basic  problem  is  not  only  that

governments  do  too  much,  but  also  that  they  do  too  little.  The  former

category—things that governments should not do, includes A) activities that

should not be done by anyone at all, such as “ethnic cleansing,” theft of land,

and creating special legal privileges for elites, and B) things that could and

should be done through the voluntary interaction of firms and entrepreneurs

in markets, such as manufacturing automobiles, publishing newspapers, and

running restaurants. Governments should stop doing all of those things. But

as they cease doing what they ought not to do, governments should start

doing some of the things that would in fact increase justice and create the

foundation  for  voluntary  interaction  to  solve  problems.  In  fact,  there  is  a

relation between the two: governments that spend their resources running car

factories  or  publishing  newspapers—or  worse,  confiscating  property  and

creating  legal  privileges  for  the  few—both  undercut  and  diminish  their

abilities  to  provide  truly  valuable  services  that  governments  are  able  to

provide. For example, governments in poorer nations rarely do a good job of

providing clear legal title, not to mention securing property from takings.

Legal  systems  are  frequently  inefficient,  cumbersome,  and  lack  the

independence  and  impartiality  that  are  necessary  to  facilitate  voluntarytransactions.

  For markets to be able to provide the framework for social coordination,

property and contract must be well established in law. Governments that fail

to provide those public benefits keep markets from emerging. Government

can serve the public interest by exercising authority to create law and justice,

not by being weak, but by being legally authoritative and at the same time

limited  in  its  powers.  A  weak  government  is  not  the  same  as  a  limited

government. Weak unlimited governments can be tremendously dangerous

because they do things that ought not to be done but do not have the authority

to enforce the rules of just conduct and provide the security of life, liberty,

and estate that are necessary for freedom and free market exchanges. Free

markets  are  not  the  same  as  the  sheer  absence  of  government.  Not  all

anarchies  are  attractive,  after  all.  Free  markets  are  made  possible  by

efficiently  administered  limited  governments  that  clearly  define  and

impartially enforce rules of just conduct.

  It is also important to remember that there are plenty of problems that

have to be solved through conscious action; it’s not enough to insist that

impersonal market processes will solve all problems. In fact, as Nobel Prize

winning economist Ronald Coase explained in his important work on the

market  and  the  firm,  firms  typically  rely  on  conscious  planning  and

coordination to achieve common aims, rather than on constant recourse to

market  exchanges,  because  going  to  the  market  is  costly.  Each  contract

arranged is costly to negotiate, for example, so long-term contracts are used

instead to reduce contracting costs. In firms, long-term contracts substitute

for  spot-exchanges  and  include  labor  relations  involving  teamwork  and

conscious  direction,  rather  than  constant  bidding  for  particular  services.

Firms—little islands of teamwork and planning—are able to succeed because

they  navigate  within  a  wider  ocean  of  spontaneous  order  through  market

exchanges. (The great error of the socialists was to try to manage the entire

economy like one great firm; it would be a similar error not to recognize the

limited  role  of  conscious  direction  and  teamwork  within  the  wider

spontaneous order of the market.) To the extent that markets can provide the

framework of creation and enforcement of rules of just conduct, advocates of

free markets should promote just that. Private security firms are often better

than state police (and less violent, if for no other reason than that the costs of

violence are not easily shifted to third parties, except by the state); voluntary

arbitration  often  works  far  better  than  state  courts.  But  recognizing  thatentails  recognizing  the  central  role  of  rules  in  creating  markets  and  thus

favoring efficient and just rules, whether provided by government or by the

market, rather than merely being “antigovernment.”

  Finally, it should be remembered that property and market exchange may

not, by themselves, solve all problems. For example, if global warming is in

fact a threat to the entire planet’s ability to sustain life, or if the ozone layer is

being degraded in ways that will be harmful to life, coordinated government

solutions  may  be  the  best,  or  perhaps  the  only,  way  to  avoid  disaster.

Naturally, that does not mean that markets would play no role at all; markets

for rights to carbon dioxide emissions might, for example, help to smooth

adjustments,  but  those  markets  would  first  have  to  be  established  by

coordination among governments. What is important to remember, however,

is that deciding that a tool is not adequate and appropriate for all conceivable

problems  does  not  entail  that  it  is  not  adequate  and  appropriate  for  any

problems. The tool may work very well for some or even most problems.

Property and markets solve many problems and should be relied on to do so;

if they do not solve all, that is no reason to reject them for problems for

which they do offer efficient and just solutions.

  Free markets may not solve every conceivable problem humanity might

face,  but  they  can  and  do  produce  freedom  and  prosperity,  and  there  is

something to be said for that.The Bastiat’s Legacy Essay Contest



1  Grand  Prize:  $1,000  +  Scholarship  to  2010  International

Students For Liberty Conference

1 Second Place Prize: $200 + Scholarship to 2010 International

Students For Liberty Conference

8 Runners Up: $100 each

Essay Topic:


Relate the central theme in one of Bastiat’s essays to a current public policy

issue.


Registration Deadline December 1, 2010

Learn more at

www.StudentsForLiberty.org

Beat Back Socialism: Now Is the Time!


  The Atlas Economic Research Foundation has partnered with Students for

Liberty  to  bring  you  The  Economics  of  Freedom:  What  Your  Professors

Won’t Tell You and the associated essay contest. It’s a part of Atlas’s global

effort to promote sound thinking about public policy and liberty.

  Atlas’s  Property  Not  Plunder:  The  Bastiat  Legacy  program  involves

teams around the globe working in fourteen languages to combat statism,

violence, plunder, and war.

Find out more at www.AtlasNetwork.org





  The Atlas Network spans over 80 countries and includes more than 200

organizations dedicated to liberty.  Atlas organizes training seminars, regional conferences, and many other

programs to empower Intellectual Entrepreneurs who believe in liberty.





  Atlas maintains an online “Think Tank Toolkit,” an interactive Network

Directory, and a Global Events Calendar.







Our  Friends  Are  Working  for  Liberty.  Are  You?  Sponsor  the  Atlas

Network for Freedom!                                                                Durra Elmaki




















                                                                Manuel  d’Araujo Nile
Institue for Center for Mozambican Economic Studies and International Studies  Jamie Story
Grassroots Institute
of Hawaii





















    Mirsulzhan Namazaliev Odile Mauri Central Asian FreeLiberal Network Market Institute for
Latin America  The Atlas Economic Research Foundation is a nonprofit organization that

connects organizations and individuals with ideas and each other to promote

liberty. Atlas accepts no government funding. Atlas relies upon voluntary

contributions from individuals who want to spread the ideas of liberty in the

U.S. and worldwide.

Get involved


www.atlasnetwork.orgStudents For Liberty



A Free Academy, A Free Society

Students  For  Liberty  is  a  network  of  proliberty  students  all

over the world. We work to educate our fellow students on the

ideas of individual, economic, and academic freedom. Students

For Liberty can help you with:

• Leadership training • Tips on how to start a student group •

Finding speakers to host on campus • Obtaining free books for

a reading club • Student Conferences

www.StudentsForLiberty.orgStudents For Liberty Conferences



Do you want to:


  • Learn about the philosophy of liberty?

• Meet fellow students and leaders of liberty?

• Receive training on how to best advance liberty?

Then join us for the

2010 Fall Regional Conferences

  • Boston, MA

• New York City, NY

• Philadelphia, PA

• Atlanta, GA

• Chicago, IL

• Austin, TX

• Phoenix, AZ

• Los Angeles, CA

• San Francisco, CA

2011 International Students For Liberty Conference

  The  world’s  largest  gathering  of  pro-liberty  students  February  18–20,

2011

George Washington University, Washington DC


  www.PoliticalConferences.orgAdditional Resources for Liberty


The Foundation for Economic Education

- www.FEE.org 

- www.TheFreemanOnline.org 

The Cato Institute

- www.Cato.org 

- www.CatoOnCampus.org 

The Institute for Humane Studies 

- www.TheIHS.org 

The Foundation for Individual Rights in Education

- www.TheFire.org 

The Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation

- www.CGKFoundation.org
    Bastiat can be understood by a Nobel Prize winner, a taxi driver, a student, an entrepreneur—even a politician! He unmasks false policies which harm our economy and cause the loss of
jobs—only to benefit favor-seeking special interests.


You Can Help Tell America AboutThe Economics of Freedom

This special abridgement from the Collected Works of the “the most brilliant economic journalist who ever lived” can be a powerful weapon to return our local, state and national
governments to America’s Founders’ promise of free men and free markets.
Please consider giving copies to students, teachers, local political, business and labor associations, the news media and to your conservative activist friends all across America! Knowledge is
power in political debate. This book will give you that power.
Readers will enjoy using its examples to knock down common economic fallacies which “everyone knows are true.” It will help in your personal and business financial planning, and also in
setting your elected officials and media straight when writing them.

Special Bulk Copy Discount Schedule
1 book $ 7.95 25 books $ 95.00 500 books $1,250.00 5 books $25.00 50 books $175.00 1000 books
$2,000.00 10 books $45.00 100 books $325.00
All prices include postage and handling.
  Jameson Books, Inc ORDER TOLL FREE Post Office Box 738 800-426-1357 Ottawa, IL 61350
  www.jamesonbooks.com
Please send me ________ copies of The Economics of Freedom.
Enclosed is my check for $ ________ or please charge my [ ] Mastercard [ ] Visa
      No._____________________________________________ Exp.Date_____________
    Signature_________________________________ Telephone ___________________
            Name___________________________________________________________________
            Address_________________________________________________________________
          City/State/Zip__________________________________________________________
Illinois residents please add 6.5% sales tax. Please allow 2 weeks for delivery.