                                Table of Contents

 


Praise

Title Page

Dedication

PREFACE


Chapter 1 - OVERVIEW: CONVENTIONAL WISDOM

        AFTER THE ICE

      DOGS

        DIALS AND KNOBS

        LINKAGE


Chapter 2 - THE NEANDERTHAL WITHIN

        THE “BIG BANG”

        NEW AND IMPROVED

        FUSION

      HOW DID IT HAPPEN?

        BUT I DON’T WANT TO BE PART NEANDERTHAL!

        EXAMPLES OF INTROGRESSION

        BREEDING EXPERIMENTS

        SKELETAL EVIDENCE

        GENETIC EVIDENCE

        CONCLUSION


Chapter 3 - AGRICULTURE: THE BIG CHANGE

        SETTING THE STAGE

        GENETIC RESPONSE

        YOU ARE WHAT YOU EAT


Chapter 4 - CONSEQUENCES OF AGRICULTURE

        INFECTIOUS DISEASE

        SKIN-DEEP

      DEM BONES        CHEATERS PROSPER

        CHANGING MINDS

        THE MALTHUSIAN TRAP

        UNDER THE YOKE

      WE FOUGHT THE LAW (AND THE LAW WON)

        BOURGEOIS VIRTUES

        MONEY AND MARKETS

        MODERN TIMES


Chapter 5 - GENE FLOW

        GENETIC HISTORY

        BREEDING LIKE RABBITS

      HOW A SWEEP BEGINS

        LIMONE SUL GARDA

        THE GIRL NEXT DOOR

        BARRIERS TO GENE FLOW

        HISTORICAL PATTERNS OF GENE FLOW

        COLONIZATION

        YOU HAVE BEEN IN AFGHANISTAN, I PERCEIVE

        THE LOST TRIBES

      AN ARTHURIAN ROMANCE

        BLUE EYES


Chapter 6 - EXPANSIONS

        THE COLUMBIAN EXPLOSION

        HEART OF DARKNESS

        THE COWBOYS

        THE PROTO-INDO-EUROPEANS

        MILK AND THE KURGANS


Chapter 7 - MEDIEVAL EVOLUTION: HOW THE ASHKENAZI JEWS

GOT THEIR SMARTS

        ASHKENAZI INTELLECTUAL PROMINENCE

        ASHKENAZI HISTORY UP TO 1800

        EMERGENCE OF INTELLECTUAL DIFFERENCES

      A GENETICALLY DISTINCT GROUP

        NOTES ON IQ        ASHKENAZI PSYCHOMETRICS

        THE ASHKENAZI MUTATIONS

        THE BOTTLENECK HYPOTHESIS

        NATURAL SELECTION

      HOW SELECTION HAPPENED


CONCLUSION

NOTES

GLOSSARY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

CREDITS

INDEX

Copyright Page  PRAISE FOR THE 10,000 YEAR EXPLOSION

 



  “Highly accessible . . . [Cochran and Harpending] ‘get it’ when so many

paleoanthropologist specialists don’t seem to . . . a revolutionary explanation

for recent human evolution and biological variation.”

 


—American Journal of Human Biology

 

 


“The 10,000 Year Explosion would be important even if it were only about

population  genetics  and  evolutionary  biology,  but  Gregory  Cochran  and

Henry  Harpending  .  .  .  have  written  something  more.  This  book  is  a

manifesto for and an example of a new kind of history, a biological history,

and not just of the prehistoric era.”

 

 


—SEED

 

 


“It is work destined to launch a thousand careers.”

 


—SEED

 

 


  “Cochran and Harpending’s book has provided the best example to date of

what E. O. Wilson would recognize as consilient history: not history done

just with science in mind or even done scientifically, but history done with

human biology treated as an essential cause and effect of the stories that

history tells, and as a key without which history cannot make sense.”

 —SEED

 

 


“For anyone interested in human evolution, this book is an absolute must

read.”

 


—Choice

 

 


  “There is much here to recommend . . . and their arguments are intriguing

throughout . . . it’s clear that this lively, informative text is not meant to

deceive  (abundant  references  and  a  glossary  also  help)  but  to  provoke

thought, debate and possibly wonder.”

 


—Publishers Weekly

 

 


“A most intriguing deposition, without a trace of ethnic or racial advocacy,

though directed against the proposition that we’re all the same.”

 


—Booklist

 


“Did human evolution come to a screeching halt 50,000 years ago when

Homo  sapiens  emerged  from  Africa,  thus  ensuring  the  psychic  unity  of

mankind? Don’t be silly, say the authors of this latest addition to the fast-

emerging discipline of biohistory. In clear prose backed by a wealth of hard

data, Cochran and Harpending add a biological dimension to the history of

our  species  and  hammer  another  nail  into  the  coffin  lid  of  ‘nothing  but

culture’ anthropology.”

 


—John Derbyshire, author of Prime Obsession 

 


“The  10,000  Year  Explosion  offers  scientists  and  historians  a  new  and

fertile direction for future research and provides the general public with a

better explanation of the past, present, and future of human beings.... I was

motivated to read the entire book in a single marathon session.”

 


—Bruce G. Charlton, MD, Professor of Theoretical Medicine, University

of Buckingham, Editor in Chief of Medical Hypotheses

 

 


“For years, human geneticists have been uncovering a picture of human

evolution.  But  now,  Gregory  Cochran  and  Henry  Harpending  are

encouraging us to ‘fast forward’ the discussion.”

 


—John Hawks, author of Human Evolution

 

 


“For  generations,  scientists  have  seen  culture  as  slowing  or  halting

evolution.  In  this  lively  and  provocative  book,  Cochran  and  Harpending,

interpreting recent genetic evidence, stick a stiff finger into the eye that holds

that  view.  Their  ideas  will  be  intensely  controversial,  but  they  cannot  be

ignored.”

 


—Melvin  Konner,  MD,  PhD,  author  of The  Tangled  Wing and The

Jewish Body

                                 TO OUR FAMILIES

                                     PREFACE

 



For most of the last century, the received wisdom in the social sciences has

been that human evolution stopped a long time ago—in the most up-to-date

version, before modern humans expanded out of Africa some 50,000 years

ago.  This  implies  that  human  minds  must  be  the  same  everywhere—the

“psychic unity of mankind.” It would certainly make life simpler if it were

true. Unfortunately, a recent halt to evolution also implies that human bodies

must be the same everywhere, which is obviously false. Clearly, received

wisdom is wrong, and human evolution continued. In the light of modern

evolutionary  theory,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  it  could  have  been

otherwise.

 


  Since  the  social  sciences—anthropology  in  particular—haven’t  exactly

covered themselves with glory, we have decided to take a new tack in writing

this book, one that takes the implications of evolutionary theory seriously

while  cheerfully  discarding  unproven  anthropological  doctrines.  Our

approach  leans  heavily  on  genetics—and  with  genetic  information

accumulating at an incredible rate, due to the ongoing revolution in molecular

biology, it is an approach that we believe has been very fruitful. At the same

time,  we  make  use  of  paleontology,  archaeology,  and  good  old-fashioned

history to support our arguments. We think that it is mistake to neglect any

relevant information.

 


A lot of our work could be called “genetic history.” It’s a new kind of

history: We share the usual facts, but we use a very different explanatory

framework. Traditional historians tell the stories of battles and kingdoms and

great men. Some study the history of ideas, or of science and technology.

Quantitative  historians  examine  commerce  and  demographic  trends.  We,

however, are interested in the historical factors that have influenced natural

selection in humans, particularly those having to do with the creation and

spread of new, favorable alleles. This means that when a state hires foreign

mercenaries, we are interested in their numbers, their geographic origin, andthe extent to which they settled down and mixed with the local population.

We don’t much care whether they won their battles, as long as they survived

and bred. We’re not particularly interested in their cultural baggage unless it

changes selection pressures or influences gene flow.

 


  Conventional  social  sciences,  such  as  history  and  anthropology,  chiefly

concern  themselves  with  brain  software,  by  which  we  mean  cultural

developments such as mores, mythology, or social structure. Genetic history

addresses changes in the underlying hardware, changes in body and brain,

which also matter. If they didn’t, dogs really could play poker.

 


For an anthropologist, it might be important to look at how farmers in a

certain  region  and  time  period  lived;  for  us,  as  genetic  historians,  the

interesting thing is how natural selection allowed agriculture to come about to

begin with, and how the new pressures of an agricultural lifestyle allowed

changes in the population’s genetic makeup to take root and spread. We take

this same approach whether we are looking at the human revolution of the

Paleolithic  period,  the  agricultural  revolution  of  10,000  years  ago,  or  the

modern  development  of  the  Ashkenazi  Jews  of  Europe,  who  rose  to

intellectual prominence in the West quite recently after experiencing unique

natural-selection pressures during the Middle Ages.

 


We  arrived  at  this  approach  via  different  paths.  Gregory  Cochran  was

trained as a physicist—and following theory where it leads, no matter how

odd, comes naturally to a physicist. Henry Harpending began his graduate

career with enthusiasm for the social sciences. Years of disillusionment with

the status quo in these fields led him to into demography and genetics, areas

where he believes there is real theory with strong links to the rest of the

sciences.

 


  Many colleagues have provided suggestions, ideas, and objections to the

material in this book. We are grateful to all of them for their help and their

criticism. Particularly prominent among these colleagues are John Hawks of

the University of Wisconsin; Robert Moyzis and Eric Wang of the Universityof California at Irvine (Wang is now at Affymetrix Corporation); and Alan

Rogers, Doug Jones, and Renee Pennington of the University of Utah. We

have  also  benefited  from  discussions  with  members  of  the  Human

Biodiversity Internet discussion group run by Steve Sailer.

 


We are indebted to Kristen Hawkes, James O’Connell, Dennis O’Rourke,

and Jon Seger of the University of Utah; Gregory Clark of the University of

California at Davis; Alan Fix of the University of California at Riverside;

Montgomery Slatkin of the University of California at Berkeley; Kim Hill of

Arizona  State  University;  Bruce  Lahn  of  the  University  of  Chicago;  Mel

Konner of Emory University; Jeremy Stone of Catalytic Diplomacy; Razib

Khan of the GNXP Web site; James Lee of Harvard University; Rosalind

Arden of King’s College London; Phil Rushton of the University of Western

Ontario. Parts of this work were supported by the Unz Foundation and by

development  funds  associated  with  the  Thomas  Professorship  at  the

University of Utah.

                                             1

 



              OVERVIEW: CONVENTIONAL WISDOM

 




    There’s been no biological change in humans in 40,000 or 50,000 years.

    Everything we call culture and civilization we’ve built with the same

    body and brain.
                                                                          —Stephen Jay Gould

 




 

    Something  must  have  happened  to  weaken  the  selective  pressure

      drastically.  We  cannot  escape  the  conclusion  that  man’s  evolution

    towards manness suddenly came to a halt.
                                                                                —Ernst Mayr

 


 

 


We intend to make the case that human evolution has accelerated in the past

10,000 years, rather than slowing or stopping, and is now happening about

100 times faster than its long-term average over the 6 million years of our

existence. The pace has been so rapid that humans have changed significantly
                                                                        1
in body and mind over recorded history. Sargon and Imhotep were different

from you genetically as well as culturally. This is a radical idea and hard to

believe—it’s rather like trees growing noticeably as you watch. But as we

will show in the following pages, the evidence is there.

 


  Scientists have long believed that the “great leap forward,” some 40,000 to50,000 years ago in Europe, marked the advent of cultural evolution and the

end of significant biological evolution in humans. At this time, the theory

goes, humans developed culture, as shown by the sophisticated new tools, art,

and  forms  of  personal  decoration  that  emerged  in  the  Upper  Paleolithic.

Culture then freed the human race from the pressures of natural selection: We

made clothes rather than growing fur and built better weapons rather than

becoming stronger.

 


The  argument  that  the  advent  of  behavioral  modernity  somehow  froze
                                                                                2
human evolution is dependent on the notion of a static environment. In other

words,  if  a  population—of  humans,  wolves,  crabgrass,  you  name  it—

experiences a stable environment for a long time, it will eventually become

genetically well matched to that environment. Simple genetic changes then

do  little  to  improve  individual  fitness,  because  the  species  is  close  to  an

optimum. An economist would say that all the $100 bills have already been

picked  up  off  the  sidewalk.  In  that  situation,  evolution  slows  to  a  crawl.

That’s not to say that a stable species has reached perfection, but that its life

strategy is well implemented. For example, hopping may not be as efficient

as walking on all fours (four legs good, two legs bad!), but kangaroos are

good at hopping; their bodies are well suited to their style of locomotion. The

match  of  the  population  to  its  environment  can  never  be  exact,  since

environments  fluctuate,  but  it  can  be  quite  close.  For  example,  there  are

orchids that imitate a bee so closely in appearance and in odor that bees try to

mate with them, and so pollinate the orchids. Some creatures that are well

suited to their environment, such as horseshoe crabs, have managed to stay

much the same for hundreds of millions of years. They’re literally older than

the hills.

 


  However, modern humans have experienced a storm of change over the

past  50,000  years.  We  left  Africa  and  settled  every  continent  other  than

Antarctica. We encountered and displaced archaic humans like Neanderthals

—and  probably  picked  up  genes  from  them  in  the  process.  An  ever-

accelerating cultural explosion from the Upper Paleolithic to the Neolithic

and beyond led to new technologies and new social forms. Indeed, culture

itself has been an increasingly important part of the human environment.

   Geographic expansion (which placed us in new environments) and cultural

innovation both changed the selective pressures humans experienced. The

payoff of many traits changed, and so did optimal life strategy. For example,

when humans hunted big game 100,000 years ago, they relied on close-in

attacks  with  thrusting  spears.  Such  attacks  were  highly  dangerous  and

physically taxing, so in those days, hunters had to be heavily muscled and

have thick bones. That kind of body had its disadvantages—if nothing else, it

required  more  food—but  on  the  whole,  it  was  the  best  solution  in  that

situation.  But  new  weapons  like  the  atlatl  (a  spearthrower)  and  the  bow

effectively stored muscle-generated energy, which meant that hunters could

kill big game without big biceps and robust skeletons. Once that happened,

lightly built people, who were better runners and did not need as much food,

became  competitively  superior.  A  heavy  build  was  yesterday’s  solution:

expensive, but no longer necessary. The Bushmen of southern Africa lived as

hunter-gatherers until very recently, hunting game with bows and poisoned

arrows for thousands of years in that region. They are a small, tough, lean

people, less than five feet tall. It seems likely that the tools made the man—

the bow begat the Bushmen.

 


  With the invention of nets and harpoons, fish became a more important

part of the diet in many areas of the world, and metabolic changes that better

suited humans to that diet were favored. Close-fitting clothing provided better

protection  against  cold,  allowing  people  to  venture  farther  north.  In  cool

areas, people needed fewer physiological defenses against low temperatures,

while in the newly settled colder regions they needed more such defenses,

such as shorter arms and legs, higher basal metabolism, and smaller noses.

With the advent of new methods of food preparation, such as the use of fire

for cooking, teeth began to shrink, and they continued to do so over many

generations. Pottery, which allowed storage of liquid foods, accelerated that

shrinkage. Complex biological functions tend to slowly deteriorate when they

no longer matter, since mutations that interfere with the function no longer

reduce reproductive fitness, and you might think that this would explain these

dental  changes.  However,  this  trend,  which  we  call  “relaxed  selection,”

happens too slowly to be the explanation. Instead, the changes in tooth size

must have been driven by positive advantages—possibly because small teeth

are metabolically cheaper than large ones. 


As the complexity of human speech approached modern levels, there must

have been selection for changes in hearing (both changes in the ear and in

how the brain processes sounds) that allowed better discrimination of speech

sounds.  Think  of  the  potential  advantages  in  being  just  a  bit  better  at

deciphering  a  hard-to-understand  verbal  message  than  other  people:

Eavesdropping can be a life-or-death affair. We have evidence of this, since a
                                                                                    3
number of genes affecting the inner ear show signs of recent selection. Such

genes are easy to recognize, since radical changes in them cause deafness.

Combined with an increased capacity for innovation, complex speech must

also have entailed an increase in the capacity for deception—and must have

resulted in selective pressures for changes in personality and cognition that

helped people resist Paleolithic con men.

 


  There’s a common impression that evolutionary change is inherently very

slow,  so  that  significant  change  always  takes  millions  of  years.  A  more

detailed look at the fossil record, combined with evidence from contemporary

examples  of  natural  selection,  makes  it  clear  that  natural  selection  can

proceed quite rapidly, and that the past consists of long periods of near-stasis

(in populations that were well matched to their environments) interspersed

with occasional periods of very rapid change. Those brief periods of rapid

change are poorly represented in the fossil record, since fossilization is rare.

 


  Stephen  Jay  Gould’s  position  that  50,000  or  100,000  years  is  an  “eye

blink,”  far  too  short  a  time  to  see  “anything  in  the  way  of  evolutionary
                                      4
difference,”  is  simply  incorrect.  We  are  surrounded  by  cases  in  which

selection has caused big changes over shorter time spans, often far shorter;

everything from the dog at your feet to corn on the cob is the product of

recent evolution.

 


The  most  accessible  examples  are  the  products  of  domestication.

Domesticated animals and plants often look and act very different from their

wild ancestors, and in every such case, the changes took place in far less than

100,000 years. For example, dogs were domesticated from wolves around15,000 years ago; they now come in more varied shapes and sizes than any

other mammal.

 
























Gray wolf

 Chihuahua and Great Dane

 


  Their behavior has changed as well: Dogs are good at reading human voice

and gestures, while wolves can’t understand us at all. Male wolves pair-bond

with females and put a lot of effort into helping raise their pups, but male

dogs—well, call them irresponsible. There have been substantial changes in

dogs in just the past couple of centuries: Most of the breeds we know today

are no older than that.

 


In an extreme example, the Russian scientist Dmitri Belyaev succeeded in
                                                              5
developing a domesticated fox in only forty years. In each generation he

selected for tameness (and only tameness); this eventually resulted in foxes

that  were  friendly  and  enjoyed  human  contact,  in  strong  contrast  to  wild

foxes. This strain of tame foxes also changed in other ways: Their coat color

lightened, their skulls became rounder, and some of them were born with

floppy ears. It seems that some of the genes influencing behavior (tamenessin this case) also affect other traits—so when Belyaev selected for tameness,

he automatically got changes in those other traits as well. Many of these

changes have occurred as side effects of domestication in a number of species

—possibly including humans, as we shall see.

 


  Changes in domesticated plants can be just as impressive. Corn, or maize,

which is derived from a wild grass named teosinte, has changed wildly in

only  7,000  years.  It’s  hard  to  believe  that  maize  and  teosinte  are  closely

related.

 


  Such  dramatic  responses  to  selection  aren’t  isolated  cases—they’ve

occurred  in  many  domesticated  species  and  continue  to  occur  today.

Evolutionary genetics predicts that substantial change in almost any trait is

possible in a few tens of generations, and those predictions are confirmed

every day. Selection is used routinely in many kinds of agriculture, and it

works: It grows more corn, lots more. You can’t argue with corn.

 















Teosinte and corn

 


That doesn’t keep some people from trying, though. One argument is that

domesticated animals and plants are examples of artificial selection and so

not relevant. But the process in which some gene variants are favored and

gradually increase in frequency is the essence of evolutionary change for bothnatural  and  artificial  selection.  There  is  no  fundamental  distinction  in  the

process, just a difference in scale. Furthermore, we have on record examples

of entirely natural adaptive change over a few thousand years—the time since

the end of the Ice Age.

                                 AFTER THE ICE


 



The Ice Age ended (or paused, at any rate) some 11,500 years ago. That

caused  dramatic  environmental  changes  in  many  parts  of  the  world,

especially  in  the  Northern  Hemisphere.  The  American  Southwest  turned

warmer and drier, becoming the desert it is today, and as it did, the creosote

bush  appeared  there.  Originally  from  Argentina,  its  seeds  were  probably

transported north by migratory birds. It thrived in the desert, thanks to its

resin-coated leaves; dense lateral roots, which starve out competing plants;

and taproot, which can grow up to 15 feet deep into the earth. A number of

insects now live in and on creosote bushes: Some have become so specialized

that they can eat nothing else. The creosote bush walking-stick looks just like

the creosote stems, while a grasshopper, which even has silvery patches that

match the shine of the plant’s resin, mimics the leaves. All of these creosote-

specialized  insects  in  the  Southwest  have  North  American  ancestors,  not

South American—and so all their specializations have come into existence in
                        6
the past 10,000 years.

 


The end of the Ice Age also brought about a global rise in sea level. Mile-

thick continental ice sheets melted, and the sea level rose hundreds of feet. As

the waters rose, some mountains became islands, isolating small groups of

various species. These islands were too small to sustain populations of large

predators,  and  in  their  absence  the  payoff  for  being  huge  disappeared.

Instead, small elephants had an advantage over large ones, probably because

they  required  less  food  and  reproduced  more  rapidly.  Over  a  mere  5,000

years, elephants shrank dramatically, from an original height of 12 feet to as

little as 3 feet. It is worth noting that elephant generations are roughly twenty

years long, similar to those of humans.

 But  simply  getting  smaller  is  hardly  a  dramatic  example  of  evolution.

Indeed,  John  Tooby  and  Leda  Cosmides  (two  of  the  founders  of  modern

evolutionary psychology) have said that “given the long human generation

time,  and  the  fact  that  agriculture  represents  less  than  1  percent  of  the

evolutionary history of the genus Homo, it is unlikely that we have evolved
                                                                                      7
any complex adaptations to an agricultural (or industrial) way of life.” A

complex adaptation is a characteristic contributing to reproductive fitness that

involves the coordinated actions of many genes. This means that humans

could not have evolved wings, a third eye, or any new and truly complicated

adaptive  behavior  in  that  time  frame.  Tooby  and  Cosmides  have  argued

elsewhere  that,  therefore,  deep  mental  differences  between  human
                            8
populations cannot exist.

 


We  think  that  this  argument  concerning  the  evolution  of  new  complex

adaptations  is  correct,  but  it  underestimates  the  importance  of  simple

adaptations, those that involve changes in one or a few genes. The conclusion

that all humans are effectively the same is unwarranted. We will see not only

that we have been evolving at a rapid rate, but that evolution has taken a

different course in different populations. Over time, we have become more

and  more  unlike  one  another  as  differences  among  populations  have

accumulated.

                                         DOGS


 



Let’s  look  at  dogs  again,  as  they  are  well  understood  examples  of  rapid

evolution. They’ve been domesticated for roughly as long as humans have

farmed, and in that time they have changed a great deal. You can see that dog

behaviors  are  derived  from  the  behavioral  adaptations  of  wolves,  their

ancestral species. There are breeds like the Irish setter that point, and breeds

like  the  Border  collie  that  live  to  herd  other  animals.  Both  breeds  show

elaborations of behaviors we see in wolves. When wolves first scent a prey,

the leading pack members freeze and point rigidly in the direction of the

scent.  Border-collie  herding  instinct  must  also  derive  from  wolf  game-

herding patterns, but it is greatly exaggerated.

 


  Dogs  are  much  more  playful  than  wolves,  and  this  can  probably  be

understood as retention of juvenile behavior (called “neoteny”). Retaining

existing juvenile behavior is accomplished far more easily than evolving a

behavior from scratch. Many of the ways in which dogs interact with humans

can be understood as a new application of behavioral adaptations designed

for a pack—the owner takes on the role of the leader of the pack.

 


  There is no complex behavioral adaptation in dogs without a recognizable

precursor in wolves, but that hardly means that all breeds of dogs are the

same, or close to it. The testimony of accident statistics is stark: Biting—

universal in dogs—is disproportionately distributed among breeds. A survey

of  U.S.  dog  attacks  from  1982  to  2006  found  1  record  of  bodily  harm

attributable  to  Border  collies,  but  1,110  records  attributable  to  pit  bull
      9
terriers.

   While there has probably not been enough time for dogs to develop wholly

new complex adaptations, there has certainly been enough time to lose some,

sometimes in all breeds, but other times only in a subset of dog breeds. Wolf

bitches dig birthing dens; a few breeds of dogs still do, but most do not.

Wolves go into season in a predictable way, at a fixed time of the year; a few

dog breeds do, but most do not. Wolves regurgitate food for weaned cubs, but

dogs no longer do so. Male wolves help care for their offspring, but male

dogs do not. Any adaptation, whether physical or behavioral, that loses its

utility  in  a  new  environment  can  be  lost  rapidly,  especially  if  it  has  any

noticeable cost. Fish in lightless caves lose their sight over a few thousand

years at most—much less time than it took for eyes to evolve in the first

place.

 


In some sense these are evolutionarily shallow changes, mostly involving

loss of function or exaggerations and redirections of function. Although such

changes will not produce gills or sonar, they can accomplish amazing things.

Dogs  are  all  one  species,  but  as  we  have  noted,  they  vary  more  in

morphology than any other mammal and have developed many odd abilities,

including learning abilities: Dog breeds vary greatly in learning speed and

capacity. The number of repetitions required to learn a new command can

vary by factors of ten or more from one breed to another. The typical Border

collie can learn a new command after 5 repetitions and respond correctly 95

percent  of  the  time,  whereas  a  basset  hound  takes  80-100  repetitions  to

achieve a 25 percent accuracy rate.

                               DIALS AND KNOBS


 



In the same way, we expect that most of the recent changes in humans are

evolutionarily shallow, one mutation deep for the most part. Old adaptations

could have been lost in some groups but retained in others. We know of at

least  one  example,  which  we’ll  discuss  in  Chapter  4:  Some  light-skinned

populations, in particular northern Europeans, have lost most of their ability

to produce melanin.

 


  Many  such  changes  can  be  thought  of  as  turning  switches  or  twirling

knobs: Biological processes that were once tightly regulated can be turned on

all the time, as with lactose tolerance; turned off entirely, as with the caspase

12  gene,  which  increases  the  risk  of  sepsis  when  intact  and  which  is
                                    10
inactivated in most populations; or turned off selectively, as with the Duffy

mutation, a malaria defense that keeps a certain receptor molecule from being

expressed on red cells while continuing to be expressed everywhere else.

Some other changes are more like turning up the volume (sometimes all the

way  to  eleven),  as  in  some  groups  that  have  extra  copies  of  the  gene

producing  amylase,  an  enzyme  present  in  saliva  that  aids  in  digesting
      11
starch.

 


In  addition,  some  behaviors  may  be  the  manifestations  of  genetically

influenced alternative behavioral strategies, such as those in a hawk-dove

game,  as  we  discuss  in  Chapter  3:  Recent  natural  selection  might  have

eliminated a particular strategy in some populations or might have materially

changed the frequency of existing strategies. Such strategies probably exist in

many social animals—wolves, for example—and it seems plausible that dogs

exhibit a subset of wolf behavioral strategies, the ones that worked well under

domestication. If some wolves are genetically inclined to try to become packleaders, others are probably natural followers, and dogs likely have higher

frequencies  of  such  “sidekick”  characteristics.  We  expect  that  differences

between human ethnic groups are qualitatively similar to those between dog

breeds—that the differences are evolutionarily shallow, mostly involving loss

of function, exaggerations of already-existing adaptations, neoteny, and so

on.  Although  such  changes  cannot  generate  truly  complex  adaptations,

changes in all those hundreds or thousands of genetic switches and knobs can

still  cause  the  sorts  of  evolutionary  changes  we  see  in  dogs  and  other

domesticated species; and these differences—such as those between Great

Danes and Chihuahuas, or between teosinte and modern maize—are not so

small. In other words, very significant evolutionary changes in response to

agriculture were still possible.

 


  Not  only  are  there  strong  reasons  to  believe  that  significant  human

evolution  over  the  past  50,000  years  is  theoretically  possible,  and  in  fact

likely, but it’s completely obvious that it has taken place, since people look

different. This is especially true of populations separated by great distances

and geographical barriers. These differences are often so great that there is

high contrast in appearance between populations: No Finn could be mistaken

for a Zulu, no Zulu for a Finn. Differences in appearance have a genetic

explanation, so we know that there has been substantial genetic change since

modern humans spread out of Africa—change that has not taken the same

course in every population.

 


It  has  been  said  that  the  differences  between  human  populations  are

superficial, consisting of surface characteristics such as skin color and hair

color rather than changes in liver function or brain development. In a letter to

Vince  Sarich  and  Frank  Miele  in  eSkeptic,  the  e-mail  newsletter  of  the

Skeptics Society, Chuck Lemme said that “our insides do not vary like our
                                                                              12
outsides” and that differences in appearance are only skin-deep.  Lemme

thinks  that  these  superficial  differences  are  probably  driven  by  sexual
                                                            13
selection, which would make them rather like fads. Of course, since experts

can easily determine race from skeletal features, it appears that those skin-

deep differences go all the way to the bone. In fact, recent work has shown

that there are population differences in genes affecting brain development,which we’ll mention in Chapter 4.

 


It  was  natural  for  previous  generations  of  physical  anthropologists  to

concentrate on differences in easily observed characteristics, but that never

implied that all differences would be easily observable. It was the scientists

that were superficial, not the differences.

 


  Some argue that differences between human populations are small and not

very significant. As was eloquently pointed out by Richard Lewontin in 1972,

most  genetic  differences  are  found  within  human  populations  rather  than

between  different  groups.  Approximately  85  percent  of  human  genetic

variation  is  within-group  rather  than  between  groups,  while  15  percent  is

between-group. Lewontin and others have argued that this means that the

genetic  differences  between  human  populations  must  be  smaller  than
                                                        14
differences  within  human  population  groups.  But  genetic  variation  is

distributed in a similar way in dogs: 70 percent of genetic variation is within-

breed,  while  30  percent  is  between-breed.  Using  the  same  reasoning  that

Lewontin applied in his argument about human populations, one would have

to conclude that differences between individual Great Danes must be greater

than the average difference between Great Danes and Chihuahuas. But this is

a conclusion that we are unable to swallow.

 


It  turns  out  that  although  the  distribution  of  genetic  variation  is  as

Lewontin  said,  his  interpretation  was  incorrect.  Information  about  the

distribution of genetic variation tells you essentially nothing about the size or

significance of trait differences. The actual differences we observe in height,

weight, strength, speed, skin color, and so on are real: It is not possible to

argue them away. Genetic statistics do not tell you what sort of differences in

size,  strength,  life  span,  or  disposition  you  can  expect  to  see  between

populations.

 


It turns out that the correlations between these genetic differences matter.

If between-group genetic differences tend to push in a particular direction—

tend to favor a certain trend—they can add up and have large effects. Forexample, there are undoubtedly a number of genes that affect growth in dogs,

in the sense that some variants of those genes enhance growth and others

inhibit it. Even if we find pro- and anti-growth gene variants in both Great

Danes and Chihuahuas, the trend must be different. Growth-favoring variants

must be more common in Great Danes. Even though a particular Great Dane

may  have  a  low-growth  version  of  a  particular  gene,  while  a  particular

Chihuahua has the high-growth version, the sum of the effects of many genes

will almost certainly favor greater growth in the Great Dane. We feel safe in

saying this, since as far as we know, no adult Chihuahua has ever been as big

as any adult Great Dane. In just the same way, on a given day it may rain

more  in  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico,  than  in  Hilo,  Hawaii—but  over  the

course of a year, Hilo is almost certain to be wetter. This has been the case

for every year for which we have records.

 


  More to the point, consider malaria resistance in northern Europeans and

central Africans. Someone from Nigeria may have the sickle-cell mutation (a

known  defense  against  falciparum  malaria),  while  hardly  anyone  from

northern Europe does, but even the majority of Nigerians who don’t carry

sickle  cell  are  far  more  resistant  to  malaria  than  any  Swede.  They  have

malaria-defense versions of many genes. That is the typical pattern you get

from  natural  selection—correlated  changes  in  a  population,  change  in  the

same general direction, all a response to the same selection pressure.

 


For that matter, changes in a single gene can occasionally have a large

effect: We know that terrifying genetic diseases can be caused by a change to

a  single  gene,  and  we  know  that  some  of  the  key  changes  that  occur  in

domestication are caused by mutations in a single gene.

 


For example, wild almonds contain amygdalin, a bitter chemical that turns

into cyanide when the almonds are eaten. Eating a few wild almonds can be

lethal. But in domesticated almond trees, mutations in a single gene block the
                                                            15
synthesis of amygdalin, making the almonds edible.

 


  Such dramatic consequences of small genetic changes are possible becauseDNA is a bit like a recipe or a computer program: A change in a single letter

can sometimes have a huge effect. In a striking example, the most common

kind of dwarfism is caused by a change in a single nucleotide, rather like the

meaning of an entire book changing because of one typographical error. In

principle, differences in a single gene could cause significant trait differences

between human populations.

 


The effect of genetic differences on body and mind must depend on the

importance  of  the  effects  of  the  genes  that  vary  between  populations

compared  to  those  that  vary  within  populations.  Variants  that  have  large

effects will matter more than those that have small effects, right? Lewontin’s

argument assumed that the average impact of variants in those two classes

was  the  same,  which  is  incorrect.  Since  all  humans  have  a  fairly  recent

common ancestry (≈100,000 years), while humans outside of Africa have an

even more recent common ancestry (≈50,000 years), observable differences

between  populations  must  have  evolved  rapidly,  which  can  only  have

happened  if  the  alleles  (gene  variants)  underlying  those  differences  had

strong selective advantages. The alleles that are regional, those underlying the

differences between populations, must also have had important effects on

fitness. That’s what population genetics implies, and genomic information

now confirms it. Most or all of the alleles that are responsible for obvious

differences in appearance between populations—such as the gene variants

causing light skin color or blue eyes—have undergone strong selection. In

these cases, a “big effect” on fitness means anything from a 2 or 3 percent

increase on up. Judging from the rate at which new alleles have increased in

frequency,  this  must  be  the  case  for  genes  that  determine  skin  color

(SLC24A5), eye color (HERC2), lactose tolerance (LCT), and dry earwax
                            16
(ABCC11), of all things.

 


In  many  cases  common  ancestry  is  even  more  recent—for  example,

Amerindians and northern Asians appear to have diverged only 15,000 years

ago or thereabouts. In these populations, selection has had even less time to

operate,  and  observed  differences  must  have  had  even  bigger  impacts  on

fitness.

   Thus, we believe that the obvious differences between racial groups are

linked to gene variants that have recently increased in frequency and had

major  fitness  effects.  Blue  eyes,  found  only  in  Europeans  and  their  near

neighbors,  are  the  result  of  a  new  version  of  the  DNA  that  controls  the

expression of OCA2 that has undergone strong selection, at least in Europe.

Dry earwax is common in China and Korea, rare in Europe, unknown in

Africa:  The  gene  variant  underlying  dry  earwax  is  the  product  of  strong

recent selection. We can confidently predict that many (perhaps most) as yet

unexplained racial differences are also the product of recent selection. For

example, we argue that the epicanthic eyelid fold found in the populations of

northern Asia is most likely the product of strong and recent selection.

 


All this means that just as humans 40,000 years ago were significantly

different from their ancestors 100,000 years ago (much more inventive, in

particular), humans today are different in many ways from our ancestors of

40,000 BC, and, considering the accelerated rate of change, different from

our ancestors of early historical times as well. We can empathize with the

heroes of the Iliad (well, Odysseus at any rate)—but we’re not the same.

 


Before the development of modern molecular biology, there were severe

limitations on our ability to study human evolution. Then, all we had to work

with were the principles of genetics, easily observable differences between

peoples such as skin color, and detailed knowledge of a limited number of

genes,  mostly  blood  proteins  and  those  causing  genetic  diseases  such  as

sickle-cell anemia.

 


But  even  then,  we  knew  from  our  experience  with  animal  and  plant

breeding, along with observation of many examples of rapid evolution in

nature, that there could be significant evolutionary change in 10,000 years or

less. It was also clear that modest genetic differences between groups could

cause big trait differences. Indeed, entirely divergent life strategies can be

caused by differences in a single gene, as we see in fire ants, where ants with

one  version  of  a  pheromone  receptor  live  in  independent  colonies,  each

having a single queen, while those with the other version live in a sprawling
                                    17
metacolony with many queens. Well before the revolution in genomics, itwas clear enough that there could be significant differences between human

populations in almost any trait, despite recent common ancestry. It was clear

that this was entirely compatible with what we knew of genetics, and it was

also  clear  that  at  least  some  such  differences  existed  in  skin  color,  size,

morphology, and metabolism.

 


But as the molecular revolution has unfolded over the past few years, we

have learned a great deal more. Recent studies have shown that many genes

are currently being replaced by new variants, most strongly in Eurasians—

and that those genes favored by recent selection are for the most part different

in different populations. The obvious between-population differences that we

knew of a few years ago were only the tip of the iceberg.

                                       LINKAGE


 



Most of the recent studies have used data from the HapMap, a database of

common patterns of human genetic variation produced by an international

group  of  researchers.  Four  populations  were  selected  for  the  HapMap—

ninety  Nigerians,  ninety  Americans  of  European  ancestry,  forty-five

individuals from Tokyo, and forty-five from Beijing. For some purposes we

will group the Japanese and Chinese together as an “East Asian” sample.

 


The human genome has about 3 billion bases (the four molecular building

blocks that make up DNA) organized into forty-six separate bundles of DNA

called chromosomes. For the most part, DNA sequences are the same in all

humans, but every few hundred bases, a variable site crops up. These are the

only sites in which the bases of DNA are likely to vary from one individual to

another.

 


A  particular  pattern  of  variation  at  these  sites  is  called  a haplotype.

Imagine three successive variable sites—the first can be G or C (representing

guanine or cytosine), the second can be A (adenine) or G, and the third can be

T (thymine) or C. A particular individual might have C in the first site, A in

the second site, and T in the third site—his haplotype would be CAT—while

another  person  has  the  haplotype  cytosine-guanine-thymine,  or  CGT.  A

haplotype is like a hand of poker, while the bases in the variable sites are like

individual cards.

 


And just like cards, haplotypes are shuffled. In each generation, a new

chromosome is assembled from the inherited parental chromosomes in much

the same way that one can cut two decks of cards and assemble a new deck, aprocess we call recombination. There can be multiple cuts: in humans, an

average of one to three per chromosome.

 


This means that haplotypes are partially broken down every generation:

The complete pattern that existed over the whole of the parent’s chromosome

will no longer be intact after recombination. However, smaller parts of that

pattern are likely to remain unchanged, since a chromosome is millions of

bases long and the few breaks that occur are likely to be far away.

 


Over  many  generations,  any  haplotype  will  eventually  be  completely

reshuffled. But if a favorable mutation occurs on a chromosome, people with

that mutation will have more children survive than average, so over time,

more  and  more  people  will  bear  that  mutation.  If  the  advantage  is  large

enough,  the  mutation  can  rapidly  become  common,  before  recombination

completely  reshuffles  its  original  haplotype,  rapidly  enough  that  people

bearing  that  mutation  will  also  carry  the  original  local  haplotype  that

surrounded  it  when  it  first  came  into  existence.  The  longer  the  shared

haplotype, the younger the mutation. It’s as if part of your last hand of cards

showed up again in the new deal: You would guess that there hadn’t been

much shuffling, and you’d be right.

 


The HapMap studies looked for long haplotypes (long unshuffled regions)

that existed in a number of individuals in the dataset. Any such shared pattern

would be a sign of recent strong selection—quite recent, since recombination

eventually breaks down all such patterns.

 


One well-known example is the gene that makes lactase, the enzyme that

digests  milk  sugar.  In  most  humans,  and  in  mammals  generally,  lactase

production  stops  around  the  age  of  weaning,  but  in  many  Europeans  and

some other peoples, production continues throughout life. This adaptation lets

adults drink milk. Lactose-tolerant Europeans carry a particular mutation that

is only a few thousand years old, and so those Europeans also carry much of

the original haplotype. In fact, the shared haplotype around that mutation is

over 1 million bases long. 


  Recent studies have found hundreds of cases of long haplotypes indicating

recent  selection:  Some  have  almost  reached  100  percent  frequency,  more

have intermediate frequencies, and most are regional. Many are very recent:

The rate of origination peaks at about 5,500 years ago in the European and

Chinese samples, and at about 8,500 years ago in the African sample. Again

and  again  over  the  past  few  thousand  years,  a  favorable  mutation  has

occurred in some individual and spread widely, until a significant fraction of

the human race now bears that mutated allele. Sometimes almost everyone in

a large geographic region, such as Europe or East Asia, shares a trait that

goes back to one such allele. The mutation can affect many different things—

skin color, metabolism, defense against infectious disease, central nervous

system features, and any number of other traits and functions.

 


  Since we have sequenced the chimpanzee genome, we know the size of the

genetic difference between chimps and humans. Since we also have decent

estimates of the length of time since the two species split, we know the long-

term rate of genetic change. The rate of change over the past few thousand

years is far greater than this long-term rate over the past few million years, on

the  order  of  100  times  greater.  If  humans  had  always  been  evolving  this

rapidly,  the  genetic  difference  between  us  and  chimpanzees  would  be  far
                          18
larger than it actually is.

 


In addition, we see far more recent alleles at moderate frequencies (20

percent to 70 percent) than we do with frequencies close to 100 percent.

Since a new favored allele spends a long time at low frequencies (starting

with a single copy), a short time at moderate frequencies, and then a long

time  closing  in  on  100  percent,  the  only  explanation  is  that  this  rush  of

selection began quite recently, so that few selected genes are in that final

phase of increase.

 


The  ultimate  cause  of  this  accelerated  evolution  was  the  set  of  genetic

changes that led to an increased ability to innovate. Sophisticated language

abilities may well have been the key. We would say that the new alleles (theproduct of mutation and/or genetic introgression) that led to this increase in

creativity were gateway mutations because innovations they made possible

led to further evolutionary change, just as the development of the first simple

insect wings eventually led to bees, butterflies, and an inordinate number of

beetles.

 


  Every major innovation led to new selective pressures, which led to more

evolutionary change, and the most spectacular of those innovations was the

development of agriculture.

                                             2

 



                    THE NEANDERTHAL WITHIN

 



In their expansion out of Africa, modern humans encountered and eventually

displaced archaic humans such as Neanderthals: You can’t make an omelet

without breaking eggs. Moderns showed up in Europe about 40,000 years

ago, arriving first in areas to the east and north of Neanderthal territory, the

mammoth  steppe  that  Neanderthals  had  failed  to  settle  permanently.  A

superior toolkit—in particular, needles for sewing clothes—may have made

this possible.

 


Later, modern humans moved south and west, displacing the Neanderthals.

This is more or less what one would expect to happen, since the two sister

species were competing for the same kinds of resources—ecological theory

says that one will win out over the other. It took just 10,000 years for modern

humans  to  completely  replace  Neanderthals,  with  the  last  Neanderthals

probably living in what is now southern Spain.

 


  Judging  by  outcomes,  modern  humans  were  competitively  superior  to

Neanderthals, but we don’t know what their key advantage was, any more

than we know what drove the expansion of modern humans out of Africa.

Several explanations have been suggested, and some or all of them may be

correct.

 


One idea is that modern humans had projectile weapons, in contrast to the

thrusting spears used previously. If lightly built modern humans could hunt

just as well as Neanderthals while requiring fewer calories, strongly built

Neanderthals  would  have  become  obsolete.  Even  if  Neanderthals  had

managed to copy that technology, they would have expended more energy inhunts  because  of  their  heavier  bodies.  Finds  of  small  stone  points  in  the

Aurignacian (a culture that existed in Europe between 32,000 and 26,000 BC)

suggest that something like this scenario may have occurred, but the earliest

known spearthrowers, or atlatls, were made considerably later. Another idea

is that modern humans were smarter—which might have been the case, but it

is hard to prove.

 


  Probably the most popular and attractive hypothesis is that modern humans

had developed advanced language capabilities and therefore were able to talk

the Neanderthals to death. This idea has a lot going for it. It’s easy to imagine

ways in which superior language abilities could have conferred advantages,

particularly at the level of the band or tribe. For example, hunter-gatherers

today are well known for having a deep knowledge of the local landscape and

of  the  appearance  and  properties  of  many  local  plants  and  animals.  This

includes knowledge of rare but important events that happened more than a

human  lifetime  ago,  which  may  have  been  particularly  important  in  the

unstable climate of the Ice Age. It is hard to see how that kind of information

transmission  across  generations  would  be  possible  in  the  absence  of

sophisticated language. Without it, there may have been distinct limits on

cultural complexity, which, among other things, would have meant limits on

the sophistication of tools and weapons.

 


  Beginning in Africa, and continuing in the European archaeological record,

we see signs of long-distance trade and exchange among modern and almost-

modern  humans  in  the  form  of  stone  tools  made  out  of  materials  that

originated far away. The Neanderthals never did this: To the extent that such

trade was advantageous, it would have favored moderns over Neanderthals,

and it is easy to imagine how enhanced language abilities would have favored

trade. Those trade contacts (and the underlying language ability) might have

allowed  the  formation  of  large-scale  alliances  (alliances  of  tribes),  and

societies with trade and alliances would have prevailed over opponents that

couldn’t organize in the same way.

 


  Whatever the driving forces, this population replacement was slow, at least

when compared to the time scale of recorded history, and was most likelyundramatic. The distance from Moscow to Madrid is a little over 2,000 miles;

that’s not a lot of ground to cover in 10,000 years. The actual advance of

modern humans in Europe may have taken the form of occasional skirmishes

in which moderns won more often than not. Perhaps modern humans were

better hunters and made big game scarce, so that neighboring Neanderthal

bands  suffered.  Perhaps  moderns,  with  their  less  bulky  bodies  and  more

varied  diet  (including  fish),  were  better  at  surviving  hard  times.  Quite

possibly, the actual advance was made up of a mix of all these patterns.

 


Of course, there are other possibilities. Biological advantages take many

forms, and they don’t have to be admirable—in fact, they can be downright

embarrassing,  disgusting,  or,  worst  of  all,  boring.  One  realistic  and

embarrassing  possibility  is  that  modern  humans  expanding  out  of  Africa

carried with them some disease or parasite that was fairly harmless to them

but deadly to Neanderthals and the hominid populations of East Asia—the

“cootie” theory. There is no direct evidence for this, but then it’s hard to see

how  there  would  be:  Germs  seldom  leave  fossils.  We  know  of  natural

examples of this mechanism, however. White-tailed deer carry a brain worm
                                                            1
that is fairly harmless to them but fatal to moose. So white-tailed deer are

pretty good at displacing moose populations and have been doing so since

their traditional enemies, such as wolves, have mostly disappeared. Another

example:  Since  people  imported  American  gray  squirrels  to  England,  the

native red squirrel has declined dramatically. The gray squirrels carry a virus
                                                                      2
that they survive but that devastates the native red squirrels.

 


We have heard charmingly goofy criticisms of the idea that Neanderthals

were competitively inferior to modern humans. It has been suggested that

such a position is racist. Somehow, saying that a population that split off

from modern humans half a million years ago (one generally considered a

separate species), had some kind of biological disadvantage is beyond the

pale, even though we’re here and Neanderthals are not. For that matter, we’ve

seen people argue that the idea that some genes were picked up from archaic

humans is racist, while others have argued that the idea that humans didn’t

pick up Neanderthal genes is racist.

   Although  the  archaeological  evidence  suggests  that  moderns  and

Neanderthals  did  not  coexist  for  very  long  in  any  one  place  during  this

replacement, there is reason to believe there was some contact between the

two  different  populations.  In  several  places,  most  clearly  in  central  and

southwestern France and part of northern Spain, we find a tool tradition that

lasted  from  about  35,000  to  28,000  years  ago  (the  Châtelperronian)  that

appears  to  combine  some  of  the  techniques  of  the  Neanderthals  (the

Mousterian industry) with those of modern humans (the Aurignacian). The

name  Châtelperronian  comes  from  the  site  of  the  Grotte  des  Fées  (Fairy

Grotto)  near  the  French  town  of  Châtelperron.  Châtelperronian  deposits

contain flint cores characteristic of the Neanderthals’ Mousterian technology

mixed with more modern tools. One characteristic tool was a flint knife with

a single cutting edge, in contrast with the double-edged knives we see in the

Aurignacian  industry.  Most  important,  there  are  several  skeletons  clearly

associated with the Châtelperronian industry, and all are Neanderthal. This

strongly  suggests  that  there  were  interactions  between  the  populations,

enough that the Neanderthals learned some useful techniques from modern

humans. If this is the case, it tells us something about Neanderthal cognitive

capabilities—mainly that they can’t have been all that far behind modern

humans. At minimum, they were much better at learning new things than

chimpanzees.

 


  There  may  have  been  important  consequences  from  such  interactions;

familiarity may breed contempt, but lack of familiarity breeds nothing at all.

                               THE “BIG BANG”


 



“The Upper Paleolithic,” according to Stanford anthropologist Richard Klein,

“signals  the  most  fundamental  change  in  human  behavior  that  the

archaeological  record  may  ever  reveal,  barring  only  the  primeval
                                                                                3
development of those human traits that made archaeology possible.”

 


  He’s not kidding. The archaeological record of the Upper Paleolithic, or

last phase of the Old Stone Age—the product of the modern humans who

displaced  the  Neanderthals  in  Europe  30,000  to  40,000  years  ago—is

qualitatively different from anything that came before. With the advent of

modern humans in Europe, innovation was bustin’ out all over.

 


  Many  of  the  new  features  that  marked  this  “great  leap  forward”  were

impressive—cave paintings, sculpture, jewelry, dramatically improved tools

and  weapons.  Some  of  them  brought  significant  changes  in  the  practical

matters of daily life, but most important, from our point of view, is that they

show an extraordinary increase in the human capacity to create and invent.

 


  What’s  more,  the  innovations  show  that  profound  social  and  cultural

changes were taking place. We developed new social arrangements as well as

new tools: The spearpoints and scrapers of this period often used materials

from hundreds of miles away, which must have been acquired through some

form of trade or exchange. Before, tools were almost entirely made from

local materials. We also see the beginnings of cultural variation: Tools and

weapons started showing regional styles.

 


At this point, people—some of them anyhow—were acting wildly differentfrom their forebears of even 20,000 years earlier. The spark of innovation

was taking them in all kinds of new directions. We’re not saying that every

Tom, Dick, and Harry was an inventor, but at least some people were coming

up  with  new  ideas—and  doing  so  perhaps  100  times  more  often  than  in

earlier times. The natural question is, “Why?” It doesn’t really look as if

being  a  modern  human,  in  the  sense  of  having  ancestors  who  were

anatomically  modern  and  who  had  originated  in  Africa,  was  enough,  by

itself,  to  trigger  this  change.  We  don’t  see  this  storm  of  innovation  in

Australia. Obviously, something important, some genetic change, occurred in

Africa that allowed moderns to expand out of Africa and supplant archaic

sapiens.  Equally  obviously,  judging  from  the  patchy  transition  to  full

behavioral modernity, there was more to the story than that. So probably

being an “anatomically modern” human was a necessary but not sufficient

condition for full behavioral modernity.

 


  More generally, behavior has a physical substrate: Biology keeps culture

on a leash, which is why you can’t teach a dog to play poker, never mind all

those lying paintings. We have every reason to think that back in the Eemian

period (the interglacial period of about 125,000 years ago), the leash was too

short for agriculture. Humans did not develop agriculture anywhere on earth

during the Eemian, but they did so at least seven times independently in the

Holocene, the most recent interglacial period, which began 10,000 years ago.

Not  only  that,  in  the  Eemian  the  leash  was  too  short  to  allow  for  the

expansion of anatomically modern humans out of Africa into cooler climates.

In that period, biology somehow kept people from making atlatls or bows,

and from sewing clothes or painting, all of which are routinely performed and

highly valued by contemporary hunter-gatherers. People were different back

then—significantly different, biologically different.

 


  Genetic  changes  allowed  important  human  developments  in  40,000  BC

that hadn’t been possible in 100,000 BC. Moreover, other genetic changes

may have been necessary precursors to later cultural changes. Here we shall

argue  that  the  dramatic  cultural  changes  that  took  place  in  the  Upper

Paleolithic,  which  have  been  referred  to  as  the  “human  revolution,”  the

“cultural  explosion,”  or  (our  favorite),  the  “big  bang,”  occurred  largely

because of underlying biological change. 


We  are  not  the  first  to  suggest  this.  Richard  Klein  has  said  that  some

mutation must have been responsible for this dramatic increase in cultural
            4
complexity.  We  wholly  agree  with  the  spirit  of  his  suggestion,  but  we

believe that such dramatic change probably involved a number of genes, and

thus some mechanism that could cause unusually rapid genetic change. As it

turns out, we know of such a mechanism, and the necessary circumstances

for  that  mechanism  turn  out  to  have  arrived  just  in  time  for  the  human

revolution.

                           NEW AND IMPROVED


 



So  what  exactly  were  the  innovations  of  the  Upper  Paleolithic  that  have

drawn attention to this period as a time of revolutionary change? For one

thing, we see new tools, made from new materials—tools made using careful,

multistep  preparation.  Modern  humans  still  used  stone  (although  their

methods of preparation had grown more elaborate and efficient), but they

often used bone and ivory as well, in sharp contrast with Neanderthals. They

also  used  particular  types  of  high-quality  stone  from  distant  sources,

sometimes from as far as hundreds of miles away, a pattern that suggests

trade. New types of light, high-velocity weapons appeared, such as javelins,

atlatl darts, and eventually the bow and arrow. These weapons, which could

be used at a distance, must have made bringing down big game far safer than

it had been among hunters using thrusting spears. The skeletons of modern

humans in this period, unlike those of Neanderthals, are not thoroughly beat

up. The weapons were no doubt used for warfare and defense, but they were

primarily  for  hunting,  and  their  benefits  included  broadening  the  modern

humans’ diet.

 


  Moderns hunted small game and fish, in addition to the large game favored

by  their  predecessors.  This  more  varied  diet  (and  perhaps  safer  hunting

methods) led to higher population density—archaeological sites for modern

humans during this period become several times more common than they had

been among the Neanderthals. The moderns were able to catch fish using

newly devised tools such as fishhooks, nets, and multi-barbed harpoon points.

Those nets are a manifestation of another technological innovation, the use of

plant fibers to make baskets, textiles, and rope as well as nets and snares.

 


  Moderns developed new methods of preserving food, such as using dryingracks and pits dug in the permafrost, which acted as natural refrigerators.

They  employed  fire  more  efficiently  than  their  ancestors  had,  developed

hearths that had draft channels for better air flow, and began to use warming

stones  for  cooking.  Fire  was  used  in  other  specialized  ways  as  well—in

lamps, for example, and to make pottery figures.

 


  Burial—deliberate burial with clear-cut evidence of ritual—also becomes

much  more  common  in  the  Upper  Paleolithic.  The  remains  are  often

accompanied by grave goods such as tools, shells, personal items of jewelry,

and  red  ochre.  In  some  cases,  production  of  those  grave  goods  took

tremendous  effort.  In  Sungir,  near  Moscow,  individuals  were  buried  in

clothes decorated with thousands of ivory beads whose manufacture required

several  man-years  of  effort.  These  findings  suggests  a  hierarchically

differentiated society, with chiefs as well as Indians. These elaborate burials

are  in  sharp  contrast  to  Neanderthal  burials,  which  show  no  sign  of

ceremony. We don’t find weapons or decorative objects associated with those

graves.  It  may  be  that  for  the  Neanderthals,  burial  was  more  a  way  of

disposing  of  unpleasant  remains  than  a  ritual  occasion,  something  like

flushing a goldfish down the toilet.

 


  Modern  humans  began  to  build  much  more  substantial  protective

structures. At Dolni Vestonice, located in what is now the Czech Republic,

archaeologists have found the remains of five structures marked by mammoth

bones, blocks of limestone, and postholes, the largest covering more than

1,000  square  feet.  In  Russia  and  Ukraine,  where  natural  shelters  such  as

limestone  caves  were  scarce,  we  see  dwellings  that  use  many  mammoth

bones.  Building  them  must  have  involved  serious  effort:  One  such  house

contained some 23 tons of the bones of these large mammals.

 


The most striking change of the Upper Paleolithic, to modern eyes, is the

birth of art. The most spectacular examples are the cave paintings, found

primarily in France and Spain. Typical subjects are large animals such as

bison, deer, and aurochs, but sometimes predators such as lions, bears, and

hyenas  are  depicted.  Made  with  carbon  black  or  ochre,  these  paintings

usually depict animals naturalistically. Humans, which show up rarely, oftenlook quite strange.

 


The first real sculptures also appeared during this time. The most famous,

the Venus figurines, such as the famous Venus of Willendorf (see page 38),

may have been portable pornography. At Dolni Vestonice, researchers found

ceramic figures made about 29,000 years ago, long before the invention of

pottery in other parts of the world.

 


























Lascaux cave painting, ≈14,000 BC

 


The art of the Upper Paleolithic was qualitatively different from the first

symbolic objects seen in Africa before the expansion of modern humans:

Compare  the  incised  piece  of  ochre  from  Blombos  Cave  in  South  Africa
                          5
dated about 75,000 BC—representative of the most sophisticated symbolic

objects discovered in pre-expansion Africa—with the lion-headed sculpturecarved from mammoth ivory, found in Germany and dated about 30,000 BC

(see pages 38 and 39).

                                       FUSION


 



The tremendous changes in tools, in weaponry and hunting methods, and in

art, along with the social and cultural changes they imply, could not have

simply come out of the blue. The Upper Paleolithic advances point to some

underlying mechanism that generated rapid genetic changes that conferred

new capabilities. That mechanism, we believe, was introgression—that is, the

transfer of alleles from another species, in this case Neanderthals. There is no

faster way of acquiring new and useful genes.

 


Before we go further, we must acknowledge that this idea has not been

much considered by paleontologists and anthropologists, mainly because they

are not familiar with the arguments derived from population genetics that

show that such introgression is highly likely. In addition, members of the

general public who hear it for the first time may well be put off by the idea,

since Neanderthals are usually considered backward, even apelike.

 


  Many object to the notion of humans and Neanderthals mating and having

offspring. Their first impulse is to suggest that anatomically modern humans

and Neanderthals must have been too different, so that matings would not

have  produced  fertile  offspring.  They  say  that  humans  would  never  have

done such a disgusting thing. And they say that even if it happened, it was

almost  certainly  rare,  and  thus  biologically  insignificant.  None  of  these

claims are correct: We will address them all.

 


The issue of whether or not there was mating between modern humans and

Neanderthals is central to the debate that has raged for several decades about

multiregional evolution versus a single African origin of our species. Thestrong multiregional position held that Neanderthals were directly ancestral to
        6
humans,  while  the  strong  single-Africa-origin  model  held  that  modern
                                                7
humans simply replaced the Neanderthals. It quickly became apparent in the

face of genetic data that a dramatic out-of-Africa dispersal of modern humans

did  occur,  but  the  extent  of  genetic  exchange  between  the  old  and  new

humans was not resolved. Much debate occurred about whether there were

anatomical continuities between Neanderthals and contemporary Europeans,

the underlying assumption being that some sort of anatomical blending would

have  occurred.  Our  perspective  on  the  issue,  elaborated  below,  is  quite

different.

                                       Interfertility


 



The first point made by critics is that modern humans and Neanderthals could

not have been interfertile. However, we believe that they almost certainly

were,  since  the  two  species  had  separated  fairly  recently,  roughly  half  a

million years earlier. No primates are known to have established reproductive
                                  8
isolation  in  so  short  a  time.  Bonobos,  for  example,  branched  off  from

common chimpanzees some 800,000 years ago, but the two species can have
                  9
fertile  offspring.  Most  mammalian  sister  species  retain  the  ability  to
                                      10
interbreed for far longer periods. Sometimes zookeepers are surprised by
                                                                                          11
this, as when a dolphin and a false killer whale produce viable offspring. 

There  are  rumors  about  successful  matings  between  primate  lineages  that

separated as long as 5 million or 6 million years ago, but those are currently

unsubstantiated.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  during  the

Upper Paleolithic Neanderthals and anatomically modern humans could not

have mated and had children who lived to also reproduce.

                                       Bestiality?


 



As for the idea that people just wouldn’t have wanted to mate with creatures

that were so different, we can only say that humans are known to have had

sexual congress with vacuum cleaners, inflatable dolls, horses, and the Indus

river dolphin. Any port in a storm, as it were. Jared Diamond recounted how

a physician friend, treating a pneumonia patient with a limited command of

English, had the patient’s wife ask him if he’d had any sexual experiences

that could have caused the infection. After the man recovered consciousness

(his  wife  had  knocked  him  cold  as  he  began  to  answer),  he  admitted  to

repeated intercourse with sheep on the family farm.

 Venus of Dolni Vestonice, oldest known ceramic, ≈27,000 BC

 Venus of Willendorf, ≈23,000 BC

 Blombos ochre, one of the oldest known symbolic objects, ≈70,000 BC

 Lion Man of Hohlenstein, oldest known animal sculpture, ≈30,000 BC

 


The key point, which we will show in more detail later on, is that even rare

interbreeding  can  be  very  important.  If  someone  wanted  to  show  that

interbreeding  between  Neanderthals  and  modern  humans  was  biologically

insignificant, he would have to show that it never happened—and that is most

unlikely,  considering  the  human  track  record.  If  it  happened  at  all,  then

introgression could have had a huge impact on human development.

                                             2s


 



A number of researchers have suggested that matings between Neanderthals
                                                                                    12
and modern humans were rare and therefore biologically unimportant. But

this objection is definitely incorrect: It is based on a misunderstanding of the

genetics  of  natural  selection.  Some  anthropologists  who  study  anatomical

details  of  Neanderthals  and  modern  humans  see  evidence  of  Neanderthal
                                                                          13
features  in  some  of  the  earliest  modern  humans  in  Europe,  but  others

dispute the matter.

 


  Imagine that humans occasionally mated with Neanderthals, and that at

least some of their offspring were incorporated into human populations. That

process  would  have  introduced  new  gene  variants,  new  alleles,  into  the

human population. Many, probably most, of those alleles would have done

almost exactly the same thing as their equivalents in modern out-of-Africa

humans;  they  would  have  been  neither  better  nor  worse  than  those

equivalents—in other words, they would have been selectively neutral. Those

neutral  alleles  from  Neanderthals  would  have  been  rare,  and  they  would

probably have disappeared, the typical fate of rare neutral alleles.

 


The reason is simply chance. When the bearer of a rare neutral allele has a

child, that child has a 50 percent chance of carrying that allele. With two

children (the average number in a stable population), there’s a 25 percent

chance that neither child will have a copy, and in that case, the imported

allele disappears right then and there. More generally, the number of copies

of a neutral allele fluctuates randomly with time, and any time the number

hits zero, the story ends. If the original number of copies is low, this is fairly

likely. Even if, by sheer luck, one or two neutral Neanderthal alleles had

eventually become common in modern humans, there would have been no

real consequences, since neutral alleles are boring by definition. Neanderthalalleles with negative consequences (in humans) would have disappeared even

more rapidly. But some gene variants provide biological advantages and are

adaptive. For those advantageous alleles, the story is entirely different.

 


The key property of an advantageous allele is that its frequency tends to

increase with time, usually because it aids the bearer in some way. In a stable

population, this means that the number of copies in the next generation is (on

average)  larger  than  the  number  in  the  current  generation.  If  the  average

number of copies in the next generation were one and a quarter times larger

than in the first, we would say that the allele had a selective advantage of 25

percent.  As  favorable  alleles  go,  25  percent  is  a  very  large  advantage,

although not unprecedented.

 


A single copy of an advantageous allele can still disappear, and probably

will. With a 10 percent fitness advantage, a carrier in an otherwise stable

population would average 2.2 offspring instead of 2, and there would still be

a 23.75 percent chance of that allele disappearing in the first generation. But

there is a way in which copies of this allele can survive: If luck holds out

long enough, they will become more common—eventually, so common as to

be effectively immune to chance. From that point on they steadily increase in

numbers.

 


J.  B.  S.  Haldane,  the  great  British  geneticist  (1892-1964),  found  a

systematic way of adding up all these probabilities, and his method yields a

surprisingly simple answer. If the allele confers an advantage s, its chance of

going all the way is 2s. In a stable population, a single copy of an allele with

a  10  percent  fitness  advantage  has  a  20  percent  chance  of  eventually

becoming universal.

 


The fate of one copy of a favorable allele is very much like that of a

gambler who starts out with one chip and a roulette system—a way of beating

the odds—that really works. If he can pick the correct color (red or black) 55

percent of the time and bet one chip at a time, he’ll usually go broke—but

there’s an 18 percent chance that he’ll break the bank at Monte Carlo. Andthat’s  starting  with  one  chip.  With  twenty  chips,  our  friend  (and  who

wouldn’t want to have a friend like this?) would have a 98 percent shot at

victory.

 


  What this means is that one copy of an advantageous allele is much more

likely to reach high frequencies than a single copy of a neutral allele—so

much so that even a few dozen half-Neanderthal babies over thousands of

years  would  have  allowed  modern  humans  to  acquire  most  of  the

Neanderthals’ genetic strengths.

 


  Let’s  sketch  an  example.  A  neutral  allele’s  chance  of  drifting  to  100

percent (a state called “fixation”) is the inverse of the number of gene copies

in the population—one divided by twice the number of breeding individuals

in the population, since each individual carries two copies of that gene. In

other words, a neutral copy has exactly the same chance of reaching high

frequency as every other neutral copy of that gene. For a population of any

size, that chance is very small—for example, a chance of 1 in 20,000 for a

human population with an effective size of 10,000. Such drift is also a very

slow process, usually taking tens of thousands of generations.

 


Now  consider  an  advantageous  allele—a  single  copy  of  a  new  and

improved version of a gene involving the immune system, one that made the

bearer immune to some common and dangerous disease that normally killed

off 10 percent of the population in childhood. That new allele would have a

selective advantage of 10 percent. It might vanish; in fact it probably would,

if, for example, the bearer managed to be stepped on by a mammoth or if

none  of  his  or  her  kids  happened  to  carry  that  gene.  But  barring  such

accidents, the number of copies of that gene would tend to increase. Once the

number of copies reached 50 or 100, the gene would be very unlikely to

disappear  by  chance.  From  that  point  on  there  would  be  a  fairly  steady

increase. It turns out that a single copy of that gene would have a 20 percent

chance  of  making  it  big—going  from  one  individual  to,  eventually,  a

significant fraction of the human race over the course of a few thousand years

—assuming that the advantage persisted. That is, it would be 4,000 times

more likely than a single neutral allele to reach fixation, and the processwould be much faster.

 


If  this  advantageous  allele  was  introduced  by  hybridizing  with  another

species,  rather  than  as  a  new  mutation,  it  would  likely  be  introduced

repeatedly over a relatively short period of time, since there would probably

be a number of such matings. If ten copies were introduced, the odds would

be high that at least one of those copies would become a big success.

 


This reasoning goes against our intuition. Generally, we think that ancestry

is something like mixing colors of paint: If you pour in equal amounts of blue

and yellow, you’ll get green—and the paint will remain green. If a population

were 90 percent Norwegian and 10 percent Nigerian, intuition says that nine-

to-one mix will remain the case indefinitely. But intuition is wrong: If you

placed that mixed population in Africa, certain alleles that were common in

Nigerians—alleles that protected against malaria, or that made skin dark and

resistant to skin cancer—would become more and more common over many

generations. Eventually almost everyone in that population would carry the

Nigerian version of those genes.

 


In just this way, a tiny bit of Neanderthal ancestry thrown into the mix tens

of thousands of years ago could have resulted in many people today, possibly

even all modern humans, carrying the advantageous Neanderthal version of

some genes.

                           HOW DID IT HAPPEN?


 



If  there  really  was  interbreeding  between  Neanderthals  and  anatomically

modern humans, how and where might it have happened?

 


  There certainly might have been some gene flow among hominid species

in earlier times. After all, Homo heidelbergensis (the common ancestor of

Neanderthals and anatomically modern humans) somehow managed to settle

both Europe and Africa about half a million years ago, so communication

must have been possible, at least occasionally. It may have been impossible

most  of  the  time  because  of  the  Sahara  Desert,  which  is  a  potent  barrier

today, just as it was during the ice ages. The Sinai Peninsula, also often a

desert in its history, may also have been an important barrier, since it was the

only  land  connection  between  Africa  and  Eurasia.  More  than  that,

Neanderthal alleles that were advantageous outside of Africa may not have

been so in Africa and thus might not have spread to anatomically modern

humans there.

 


We have reason to think that the modern humans who expanded out of

Africa  some  50,000  years  ago  had  changed  in  important  ways—had,  for

example, probably acquired sophisticated language abilities. A Neanderthal

allele that had not been particularly useful in the genetic context of near-

modern  humans  100,000  years  ago  might  have  been  useful  to  the  more

advanced people who were expanding out of Africa.

 


  Logically, if  admixture occurred at all, it had to happen somewhere in

Neanderthal-occupied territory, which means Europe and western Asia. As

modern  humans  expanded  their  territory,  they  must  have  encounteredNeanderthal bands again and again. The two kinds of humans coexisted for a

few thousand years before the Neanderthals disappeared, at least in some

regions. This looks to be the case for the Châtelperronian culture of France

and northern Spain, and there are traces of a similar culture in Italy. If there

was trade, or if there was enough contact to transmit toolmaking techniques,

there was sexual contact as well—depend on it. If in the future we look at

very large genetic datasets from huge numbers of individuals, we might find
                                                14
a few traces of neutral Neanderthal genes. 

 


If we found a few individuals with Neanderthalish mitochondrial DNA

(mtDNA)  or  Y  chromosomes,  we  might  be  able  to  determine  whether

matings occurred mostly between Neanderthal males and modern females or

modern males and Neanderthal females. We do this type of analysis routinely

today  and  have  found,  for  example,  that  the  maternal  ancestry  for  most

Mexicans is Amerindian, whereas most of their paternal ancestry is Spanish

(which  simply  means  that  male  Spanish  explorers  sometimes  mated  with

Amerindian women). At this point, though we have found no Neanderthal Y

chromosomes or mtDNA in modern humans, we cannot rule out significant

introgression, because Neanderthal mtDNA and Y chromosomes may well

have been neutral or deleterious in modern humans. In either case they would

be unlikely to have persisted until today, particularly if the amount of gene

flow  was  small.  This  does  not  mean  we  did  not  inherit  beneficial  gene

sequences (see section on “Genetic Evidence” later in this chapter).

     BUT I DON’T WANT TO BE PART NEANDERTHAL!


 



There is often a visceral reaction to the idea that we carry some Neanderthal

genes. Probably this is due to the general impression that Neanderthals were

backward  and  apelike.  Neanderthals  weren’t  really  apelike,  although  they

were behind the times—but since it looks, in any case, as if we’ve absorbed

only their best (most useful) traits, we can be happy about our Neanderthal

ancestry, proud even. At any rate, it could be worse: We could have picked

up genes from a virus. In fact, it is worse: We have.

 


  Most viruses (which are basically just bags full of DNA or RNA) slip into

cells and then take over, making copies of themselves and usually killing the

host cells in the process. But some RNA viruses (retroviruses, like HIV) copy

their RNA into DNA and then, sometimes, integrate that DNA into the host

cell’s genome. If the retrovirus happens to occupy a reproductive cell, one

that makes sperm or eggs, the retroviral genes can actually become part of the

next generation’s genome. This has happened in the past: Humans have many

genetic  remnants  of  retroviruses  that  at  one  time  inserted  copies  of

themselves  into  the  human  genome.  Most  do  not  seem  to  have  any  real

function, but a few do. For example, both humans and apes have syncytin,

derived  from  a  retroviral  envelope  protein  that  our  ancestors  picked  up

roughly  30  million  years  ago.  It  plays  a  role  in  the  development  of  the

placenta—in particular, the process that leads to the development of a fused

cell layer. Anyone who’s overly worried about possible Neanderthal ancestry

should remember that we’re certainly descended from viruses. As usual, the

facts don’t care about our feelings.

 Stylized rendering of the AIDS retrovirus

                   EXAMPLES OF INTROGRESSION


 



Introgression as an important evolutionary force is more than just a theory:

Geneticists know of many cases in which it has definitely occurred. Most of

the  examples  that  are  well  understood  involve  domesticated  animals  and

plants, mainly because there are practical economic reasons for undertaking

close genetic studies of domesticated species.

 


  Introgression is hardly rare; in fact, it is ubiquitous among domesticated

plants. For example, the wheat that produces our daily bread is derived from

three  different  wild  grasses.  There’s  evidence  of  introgression  in  alfalfa,

barley, chili peppers, lettuce, maize (corn), potatoes, rice, rye, sorghum, and

soybeans—and  that’s  just  a  partial  list.  But  since  plants  are  better  than

animals at tolerating complex genetic events such as changes in chromosome

number, introgression in domesticated animals may be a better analogy.

 


  Cows  were  domesticated  at  least  twice:  in  the  Middle  East  (humpless

taurine cattle) and in India (humped, droopy-eared zebu cattle), and possibly

a third time in North Africa. The wild ancestors of taurine and zebu cattle

were  separated  for  several  hundred  thousand  years,  yet  those  breeds  are

interfertile. Zebu genes have been spreading among taurine cattle in Africa

and western Asia for the past 4,000 years. It appears that some zebu genes

increase tolerance of aridity and heat as well as resistance to rinderpest, a

virulent bovine disease. This is very similar to the pattern of introgression we

believe  must  have  occurred  among  moderns  and  archaics  such  as

Neanderthals.

 


  Evidence of adaptive introgression in wild populations was once rare, butit has become easier to discover and document it in recent years thanks to

improved DNA-sequencing techniques. We now have genetic evidence for

adaptive  introgression  in  wild  organisms  such  as  damselflies,  mosquitoes,

lake  trout,  and  European  hares.  One  of  the  most  interesting  cases  of  the

phenomenon in a (partly) wild population is the recent evolution of honey

bees, which is particularly interesting because of some close parallels with

human evolution.

 


























Zebu cow

 Texas longhorn

 


  Honey bees originated in eastern tropical Africa several million years ago

and later expanded into Eurasia in two different migrations. One of these led

to Western European honey bees and the other to Asian honey bees. Bees

living in temperate climates faced fundamentally new problems: more than

anything else, cold winters. To a large extent, their adaptation to those new

climates was mediated by changes in social behavior.

 


  They needed to choose nest sites that would protect them from the weather,

store much more honey, and form a winter cluster—that is, a tightly packed

clump of bees that conserves heat. In a 2008 study, Amos Zayed and Charles

Whitfield  concluded  that  approximately  10  percent  of  all  protein-coding
                                                                                          15
genes in bees underwent positive selection in that process of adaptation.

The history of honeybees parallels the history of humans in an interestingway—both  involved  expansion  into  a  new  environment  with  a  drastically

different climate followed by strong selection and adaptation.

 


The parallels don’t stop there. Soon after the initial colonization of the

Americas, Europeans introduced honey bees, where they did well, swarming

many times a year and outrunning colonists. However, they did not do as well

in the neotropics, the part of the New World most unlike Europe. Warwick

Kerr, a twentieth-century Brazilian geneticist and bee breeder, attempted to

develop a strain of bees that would be more productive in the tropics. Using

hybridization techniques, he bred Western European bees with African bees.

In 1956, twenty-six of his Tanzanian queens escaped and began colonies, and

their hybrid descendants have since spread over much of North and South

America. These Africanized bees produce more honey than European bees in

warm  climates,  but  they  are  very  aggressive  and  often  attack  people  and

animals that come too close to their hives. Once aroused, they may chase an

enemy a mile or more. This high level of aggression is adaptive in Africa,

where bees have not been domesticated. There, bee colonies are attacked by

honey badgers and other predators, and humans raid beehives rather than

keeping bees.

 


  Almost  all  Africanized  bee  colonies  have  African  mtDNA,  but  a

significant  fraction  of  their  nuclear  genome  is  European.  That  fraction  is

significantly higher in coding regions of the genome than in noncoding DNA,

which indicates that Africanized bees have succeeded in picking up adaptive

alleles  from  European  bees  while  retaining  those  African  alleles  that  are

adaptive  in  this  situation  (that  is,  most  of  them).  The  noncoding  regions,

presumably neutral or close to neutral, are incorporated at the rate 1/(2N),

while favorable coding genes are incorporated at the 2s rate, as discussed

above.  It  has  been  suggested  that  there  may  be  genetic  incompatibilities

between European mtDNA and the African nuclear genome, which would

explain why we find so very few Africanized bees with European mtDNA.

The Zayed-Whitfield study provided evidence that “invasive populations can

exploit hybridization in an adaptive fashion,” which is only reasonable. Just

as the Africanized bees have incorporated advantageous genes from the local

indigenous  bee  populations,  modern  humans,  we  believe,  incorporated

advantageous genes from their archaic human precursors, especially from theNeanderthals.

 


  Many instances of adaptive introgression—those, for example, that involve

biochemical  changes  that  do  not  affect  appearance—are  cryptic  and  were

effectively  undetectable  before  the  development  of  modern  molecular

research methods. This is worth remembering when we look at the fossil

record:  The  majority  of  adaptive  genetic  events  do  not  have  noticeable

skeletal signs. Some cases of adaptive introgression, though, have readily

visible effects, as when genes that increased drought tolerance spread from

Utah cliffrose to bitterbrush. The introgressed bitterbrush looks more like
                                                                                      16
cliffrose and can survive in places where ordinary bitterbrush cannot. In

this case, the population with introgressed genes reflects that introgression in

its external appearance, but more often the effects of introgression are not

readily apparent in the gross anatomy of an organism.

                         BREEDING EXPERIMENTS


 



Applied geneticists are always conducting breeding experiments—usually for

practical purposes in agriculture, often for research, sometimes for the sheer

fun of it. In those experiments, they usually select for some trait (or for the

absence  of  that  trait):  that  is,  they  breed  a  new  generation  from  those

individuals with especially high (or low) values of a trait. The average value

of that trait (or the absence of it) changes over generations and can eventually

reach levels that differ greatly from the original population. If you doubt this,

consider that the Chihuahua is the product of selection upon wolves. Change

gradually  slows  (at  least  in  small  populations)  and  the  trait  plateaus.

Sometimes this is because further change is physically impossible, but more

often  it  is  because  the  genetic  variety  of  the  population  has  become

exhausted. When several different populations (drawn from the same base

population)  have  undergone  such  selection  and  plateaued,  sometimes  the

breeder will take the two best lines and cross them. Some such efforts are

unproductive, but others succeed in producing a population with significantly

higher trait values.

 


Life is a breeding experiment, of course. And it looks as if the African-

Neanderthal cross has worked out pretty well—so far, anyway.

 


The key point here is that it would take only a very limited amount of

interbreeding  for  modern  humans  to  have  picked  up  almost  every

Neanderthal  allele  with  any  significant  advantage.  Limited  interbreeding

would mean that neutral genes in humans today would look almost entirely

African—which they do—while at the same time we might carry a number of

functional  alleles  that  originated  in  Neanderthals.  Those  alleles  would  be

ones that mattered, ones that made a difference. 


This raises the question of just what the Neanderthals might have had to

offer. The popular impression is that they were backward, almost bestial—

and it’s certainly true that moderns had capabilities that Neanderthals lacked.

But in archaeological artifacts from as recently as 100,000 years ago, it’s hard

to see any real differences in the material culture of Neanderthals and the

material culture of Africans—so the Neanderthals can’t have been all that far

behind.

 


The  alleles  most  obviously  worth  stealing  would  be  those  that

implemented adaptations to local conditions in Europe. That might mean, for

example, acquiring the ability to tolerate cold weather, resist local diseases,

or adjust to big swings in the length of the day over the course of a year (in

contrast to the tropics, where the length of the day does not vary much).

These kinds of adaptations, along with the more sophisticated, technological

solutions to cold characteristic of modern humans, such as building shelters

and so on, may have been important in human settlement of the far north, and

eventually of the Americas.

 


  These sorts of changes were important—adaptation to local climates and

pathogens  was  obviously  necessary  for  humans  to  succeed  in  northern

climates. But on the whole, they are not all that interesting. Obviously, even

penguins  are  better  adapted  to  cold  than  humans.  If  that  is  all  the

Neanderthals had to offer, the question of interbreeding with them would not

matter so much. The most interesting genetic changes are surely those that

change minds rather than bodies. And there are several lines of argument that

suggest that the Neanderthals may have had something to contribute along

those lines as well.

                                   Changing Minds


 



Neanderthals had developed larger brains during their time in Europe, just as

modern human ancestors had in Africa (and to some extent as the archaic

populations in Asia had as well). Those large brains paid off in increased

fitness in both populations, else they’d never have come into existence, but

there may have been functional differences.

 


  There  were  deep  differences  between Homo  sapiens  and Homo

neanderthalensis in way of life, with Neanderthals being high-risk, highly

cooperative hunters, rather like wolves, while anatomically modern humans

in  Africa  probably  had  a  mixed  diet  and  were  more  like  modern  hunter-

gatherers. Those differences could mean that big Neanderthal brains were

solving  different  sorts  of  problems  than  big  African  brains.  As  a  purely

hypothetical example, Neanderthals, facing high risks as ambush hunters of

big game, might have benefited from an ability to imagine and anticipate the

reactions of their prey—call it “theory of animal mind.” Neanderthals were

strong and heavily built, but their hunting success depended on brainpower to

a far higher degree than that of lions or wolves. Their intelligence made their

way of life possible via the use of tools and weapons, but there must have

been other ways in which their big brains aided survival. Improved accuracy

in guessing just how a wounded bison would react could well have kept a

Neanderthal from having his ribs kicked in, for example. There’s a precedent

for this notion of one species having a theory of mind in dealing with another

species: Wolves can’t take a hint, but dogs have an evolved ability to read
      17
people.

 


And yet, European Neanderthals probably faced many of the same life

problems that African humans did. To some degree, big brains may have

been solving the same problems in both populations. Even if that is the case,though, we can be certain that those problems were not solved in exactly the

same way. Examples demonstrating how natural selection works can shed

light on this concept. Let’s look again at human adaptation to malaria. We see

hemoglobin  variants  in  both  Africa  and  Southeast  Asia  (sickle  cell  and

Hemoglobin  E  [HbE]),  but  they’re  not  the same  variants.  Although  both

alleles protect against malaria, there’s no reason to assume that one works

exactly  like  the  other  (or  even  as  well  as  the  other).  HbE,  for  example,

definitely has fewer negative side effects than sickle cell.

 


We see a similar pattern in human adaptation to high altitude. On one

hand,  the  Amerindians  of  the  high  Andes  have  barrel  chests  and  blood

crammed with red cells; the Tibetans, on the other hand, have much lower

levels of hemoglobin but breathe faster to take in more oxygen. Both peoples

are  far  better  adapted  to  high  altitude  than  flatlanders,  but  the  Tibetan

adaptation is apparently more effective, since their babies are plumper and

healthier. Adaptation depends on the supply of favorable mutations, which

are generated randomly; thus, two populations facing the same problem may

well find different solutions, and those solutions need not be equally efficient.

Neanderthals and the anatomically modern humans of Africa faced some of

the same conditions and adapted to them, but they did not necessarily do so in

the same way or with the same degree of efficiency.

 


As  we  mention  elsewhere  in  this  work,  sometimes  variation  in  human

personality  is  best  explained  as  a  genetically  based  alternative  behavioral

strategy that works well when rare but whose advantage dissipates as bearers

of  that  strategy  become  more  common.  For  example,  many  suspect  that

human  sociopaths,  individuals  who  are  well-designed  “cheaters,”  like  con

artists, can prosper when they are rare but suffer fitness loss as they become
                                                                18
more common and others become more aware of them.

 


  There are many possible alternative strategies, and it is possible that the

Neanderthals had some that never came into existence among the modern

humans in Africa—and yet could succeed among them, particularly since

increased innovation had shaken up society. So, it could be the case that as

the modern humans moved north and came into contact with Neanderthals,they picked up alternative strategies for solving various problems—strategies

with  a  genetic  basis  that  came  to  them  not  by  observation  but  through

introgression and natural selection, and which depended upon new mental

functions and cognitive processes.

                           Paths on Fitness Landscapes


 



Another  point:  Ongoing  natural  selection  in  two  populations  can  allow

evolutionary events to occur that would be impossible in a single well-mixed

population, since it allows for simultaneous exploration of divergent paths.

Natural selection is short-sighted: Alleles increase in frequency because of

their current advantage, not because they might someday be useful. Think of

various  possible  solutions  of  some  problem  as  hills,  with  higher  hills

corresponding to better solutions. Natural selection climbs up the first hill it

chances upon; it can’t see that another solution has greater possibilities in the

long run. Not only that: Since the environmental conditions of Europe and

Africa were significantly different, evolution could try solutions in Europe

that couldn’t be explored in Africa, because the initial step along that path

had negative payoffs in Africa. In Europe, for example, you had to worry

about staying warm enough, whereas Africans faced heat stress: These issues

were important considerations in the evolution of larger brains. It may be that

the  relative  unimportance  of  heat  stress  in  Europe  opened  up  some

evolutionary pathways that had greater long-term possibilities than the ones

that developed in Africa.

 


  Consider an analogy from the history of technology. Somewhere back in

late classical times, the use of the camel was perfected—a better saddle was

developed,  for  example,  one  that  allowed  camels  to  carry  heavy  loads

efficiently. Throughout most of the Middle East and North Africa, camels

were  (after  those  developments)  a  superior  means  of  land  transportation:

They were cheaper than ox-drawn wagons and not dependent upon roads.

Over a few centuries, people in areas where camels were available abandoned
                                                  19
wheeled vehicles and roads almost entirely. You can still see the effects in

the oldest sections of some cities in the Arab world, where the alleys are far

too  narrow  to  have  ever  passed  a  cart  or  wagon.  Europeans,  not  having

camels,  had  to  stick  with  wheeled  vehicles,  which  were  clearly  moreexpensive,  given  the  infrastructure  they  required.  But  as  it  turned  out,

wheeled vehicles—in fact, the whole road/wheeled vehicle system—could be

improved. Back then, when camels seemed so much better, who knew that

someday there would be horse collars and nailed horseshoes, then improved

bridge  construction,  suspensions  that  reduced  road  shock,  macadamized

roads, steam power, internal combustion engines, and ultimately the nuclear

Delorean. The motto here is that sometimes the apparently inferior choice has

a better upgrade path: Evolution can’t know this, and we aren’t particularly

good at recognizing it ourselves. On the genetic level, it translates as follows:

Natural  selection  may  solve  the  same  problems  differently  in  different

populations, and what appears to be the most elegant solution at the time may

not  in  fact  turn  out  to  be  the  one  that  works  best  in  the  long  run.  The

seemingly inferior choice may come out on top down the road. It is easy to

think of plausible cases: Imagine, for example, that excess heat production

limited  the  trend  toward  larger  brains  in  Africa,  while  in  the  climate  of

Europe heat was not much of a problem. Later, as evolution fine-tuned the

physiology of large brains, much of the heat problem was solved—and so the

new brain could then spread in Africa as well.

                     Spare Genetic Diversity for the Future


 



Lastly,  we  should  consider  that  even  a  slight  degree  of  Neanderthal

admixture  would  have  increased  the  amount  of  genetic  variation  among

modern humans, and those imported alleles could have been useful in solving

future  adaptive  problems  even  if  they  were  not  particularly  advantageous

back in the Upper Paleolithic. We now know that the transition to agriculture

posed many challenges that led to strong selective pressures on farmers. Most

of  the  adaptive  responses  to  agriculture  were  probably  the  result  of  new

mutations, but some must have made use of preexisting genetic variation,

which would have included any alleles that we picked up from Neanderthals

or  other  archaic  humans.  Think  of  it  this  way:  Modern  humans  and

Neanderthals were both unsuited to agriculture and civilization, so Africans

were not much more likely to carry alleles preadapted to agriculture than

Neanderthals were. The solutions to agricultural challenges could have come

from either camp.

 


We’re not saying that Neanderthals were competitively superior: After all,

we’re here, and they’re not. But it is highly likely that, out of some 20,000

genes, at least a few of theirs were worth having.

 


  Not only was interbreeding between Neanderthals and moderns likely and

potentially important, there is evidence indicating that it actually occurred.

That evidence is of two kinds, skeletal and genetic.

                             SKELETAL EVIDENCE


 



Neanderthal anatomy differed in a number of ways from that of anatomically

modern humans, as we have noted before. There are particular details that are

relevant to interbreeding. One is the occipital bun, a bulge at the back of the

skull, which was very common among Neanderthals but is rare among people

today. Another is the retromolar space, a gap between the last molar and the

back  of  the  mouth.  These  and  other  skeletal  details  characteristic  of

Neanderthals were unusually common among the modern humans who were
                                                                                    20
their immediate successors but have declined in frequency over time. The

skeletons we’ve found of modern humans during the Upper Paleolithic don’t

have the pulled-forward face that is so distinctive of Neanderthals—which is

consistent  with  the  idea  that  there  wasn’t  a lot  of  gene  flow.  Complex

craniofacial features probably depend on many genes working together, so

such features are unlikely to show up if Neanderthal genes are uncommon in

modern humans of the period. There have been claims that certain early but

clearly modern human skeletons have several distinctive Neanderthal skeletal
                                                                    21
features, however, which could indicate recent admixture.

 


We  think  that  the  skeletal  evidence  suggests  that  there  was  significant

Neanderthal admixture, but we also recognize that this evidence is not by

itself  definitive.  Considering  the  possibility  of  convergent  evolution,  the

situation  is  complex.  One  problem  is  that  skeletal  features,  like  almost

everything else, evolved for a reason: They somehow increased fitness for the

Neanderthals in their environment. It is therefore possible that some features

similar to those of the Neanderthals evolved independently in Cro-Magnons

(that is, in anatomically modern humans of the Upper Paleolithic) because

they fulfilled the same functions. Moreover, only Neanderthal traits that were

adaptive are likely to have introgressed and reached significant frequency

today.  Fortunately  we’re  not  limited  to  skeletal  evidence—we  are  rapidlyacquiring genetic evidence that bears on this question.

                             GENETIC EVIDENCE


 



The first investigations of modern humans attempting to detect remnants of

ancient lineages looked at mitochondrial DNA and Y chromosomes. Both are

of interest because they are inherited from just one parent (the Y chromosome

from  the  father,  the  mtDNA  from  the  mother)  and  because  they  do  not

recombine. Extensive sampling has shown no evidence of variants that might
                                                                              22
have existed in archaic human populations such as Neanderthals.  The data,

in other words, are consistent with low (or zero) gene flow from archaic to

modern  populations.  This  pattern  might  also  have  arisen  if  Neanderthal

mtDNA and Y chromosomes didn’t mesh well with the genetic background

of anatomically modern humans and reduced fitness in some way. In that

case, they would have dwindled with time and could be rare or nonexistent

today even if they had once been moderately common in modern humans.

 


A  number  of  recent  reports,  however,  provide  evidence  that  people  do
                                                              23
retain some autosomal alleles from archaic humans. Some of these reports

have detected odd patterns in our genome as a whole, whereas others have

looked closely at particular unusual genes.

 


V. Plagnol and J. D. Wall found that the pattern of linkage disequilibrium

—that  is,  of  the  history  of  chromosomes  having  broken  and  reformed—

among SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms, or single base differences

between  chromosomes)  in  the  human  genome  was  inconsistent  with  an

unstructured ancient population, estimating that 5 percent of genetic variation

among  both  Europeans  and  sub-Saharan  Africans  originated  in  archaic
                                        24
humans such as the Neanderthals. This is interesting, in that evidence for

introgression is nearly as strong among Africans as it is among Europeans.

This is what one would expect to happen if many of the alleles picked upfrom Neanderthals or eastern archaic humans were generally advantageous

and  spread  very  widely.  There  may  also  have  been  significant  archaic

populations somewhere in Africa: There are some apparently archaic variants

found  only  in  Pygmies,  which  suggests  an  African  origin.  Conditions  for

fossilization  are  poor  in  much  of  Africa  west  of  the  Rift  (for  example,

chimpanzees have almost no fossil record)—and there may well have been

hominid populations other than anatomically modern humans in the blank

spots  in  those  Afric  maps.  Since  some  of  these  alleles  are  found  at  high

frequencies in people today, and since the overall level of admixture was

probably low, they probably gave a fitness advantage—in other words, were

adaptive.

 


P. D. Evans and his colleagues at the University of Chicago looked at
                                                                                          25
microcephalin  (MCPH1),  a  very  unusual  gene  that  regulates  brain  size.

They found that most people today carry a version that is quite uniform,

suggesting that it originated recently. At the same time, it is very different

from other, more varied versions found at the same locus in humans today, all

of which have many single-nucleotide differences among them. More than

that, when there are several different versions of a gene at some locus, we

normally find some intermediate versions created by recombination, that is,

by chromosomes occasionally breaking and recombining. In the case of the

unusual  gene  (called D  for  “derived”)  at  the  microcephalin  locus,  such

recombinants are very rare: It is as if the common, highly uniform version of

microcephalin simply hasn’t been in the human race all that long in spite of

the  high  frequency  of  the  new  version  in  many  human  populations.  The

researchers estimated that it appeared about 37,000 years ago (plus or minus

a few tens of thousands of years). And if it did show up then, Neanderthals

are a reasonable, indeed likely, source.

 


  Another interesting possibility involves FOXP2, a gene that plays a role in
                                                                                26
speech that was replaced by a new variant some 42,000 years ago. This is

very recent in evolutionary terms, and there is evidence that the same version
                                          27
of that gene existed in Neanderthals . If the new FOXP2 allele is really that

recent in modern humans, it is likely that the migrating humans picked it up

from Neanderthals, since that’s about the time they encountered them in theirexpansion out of Africa. The idea that we might have acquired some of our

speech  capabilities  from  Neanderthals  may  be  surprising,  but  it  is  not

impossible.  The  timing  of  the  acquisition  is  certainly  consistent  with  the

creative  explosion.  If  it  is  true  that  we  gained  the  gene  by  means  of

introgression, then the version of FOXP2 in the Neanderthals is likely to be

older  and  have  more  variation  than  it  does  in  modern  humans.  Further

sequencing efforts on the skeletal remains of Neanderthals should eventually

confirm or refute this possibility.

 


If FOXP2 is indeed a “language gene” and responsible, perhaps, for some

of the creative explosion of modern humans in Europe and northern Asia, it

would explain a major puzzle about modern human origins. There were at

least two streams out of Africa 50,000 years ago, one northward into Europe

and central Asia, and another eastward around the Indian Ocean to Australia,

New  Guinea,  and  parts  of  Oceania.  There  is  no  trace  of  any  creative

explosion in populations derived from the southern Indian Ocean movement,
                                                                                28
who brought and retained Neanderthal-grade technology and culture.

                                   CONCLUSION


 



A  burst  of  innovation  followed  the  expansion  of  modern  humans  out  of

Africa. Signs of that change existed in Africa before the expansion, but the

pattern  became  much  stronger  in  Europe  some  20,000  years  later,  after

anatomically  modern  humans  had  encountered  and  displaced  the

Neanderthals. That transition to full behavioral modernity—as seen in the

archaeological record—occurred patchily and finished later in other parts of

Eurasia.  We  argue  that  even  limited  gene  flow  from  Neanderthals  (and

perhaps  other  archaic  humans)  would  have  allowed  anatomically  modern

humans to acquire most of their favorable alleles. We believe that this sudden

influx of adaptive alleles contributed to the growth of the capabilities that

made up the “human revolution,” and we believe that this introgression from

archaic human populations will prove central to the story of modern human

origins.

 


So  by  40,000  years  ago,  humans  had  become  both  anatomically  and

behaviorally  modern  (which  is  not  to  say  they  were  exactly  like  people

today). They had vastly greater powers of innovation than their ancestors,

likely  owing  in  part  to  genes  stolen  from  their  Neanderthal  cousins.  The

speed of cultural change increased by tens of times, and when the glaciers

retreated and new opportunities arose, it accelerated further.

                                             3

 



                  AGRICULTURE: THE BIG CHANGE

 



Favorable mutations are rare, and many of those that do occur are lost by

chance. In the small human populations of the Old Stone Age, establishing

such mutations typically took hundreds of thousands of years. It’s not that it

took that long for favorable mutations to spread—the problem was generating

them in the first place.

 


But as human population sizes increased, particularly with the advent of

agriculture,  favorable  mutations  occurred  more  and  more  often.  Sixty

thousand years ago, before the expansion out of Africa, there were something

like a quarter of a million modern humans. By the Bronze Age, 3,000 years

ago,  that  number  was  roughly  60  million.  Favorable  mutations  that  had

previously occurred every 100,000 years or so were now showing up every

400 years.

 


One might think that it would take much longer for a favorable mutation to

spread  through  such  a  large  population  than  it  would  for  one  to  spread

through a population as small as the one that existed in the Old Stone Age.

But since the frequency of an advantageous allele increases exponentially

with time in a well-mixed population, rather like the flu, it takes only twice as

long  to  spread  through  a  population  of  100  million  as  it  does  to  spread

through a population of 10,000.

 


  Agriculture  imposed  a  new  way  of  life  (new  diets,  new  diseases,  new

societies, new benefits to long-term planning) to which humans, with their

long history as foragers, were poorly adapted. At the same time it led to a

vast population expansion that greatly increased the production of adaptive          1
mutations. So agriculture created many new problems, but it created even

more  new  solutions.  Earlier  innovations  had  also  helped  to  increase

population size and thus had speeded up human evolution, but agriculture had

a far greater effect and is in a class of its own.

 


  Naturally, increased population size had a similar impact on the generation

of new ideas. All else equal, a large population will produce many more new

ideas than a small population, and new ideas can spread rapidly even in large

populations. In Guns, Germs, and Steel, Jared Diamond observed: “A larger

area or population means more potential inventors, more competing societies,

more innovations available to adopt—and more pressure to adopt and retain

innovations,  because  societies  failing  to  do  well  will  be  eliminated  by
                        2
competing societies.” We take this observation a step further: There are also

more genetic innovations in that larger population.

 


This is a new picture of recent human evolution. It implies that humans

have changed not just culturally, but genetically, over the course of recorded

history, and that we must allow for such changes when we try to understand

historical events. The implications of this contention are vast: If correct, it

means that peoples in different parts of the world have changed in varying

ways, since they adopted different forms of agriculture at different times—or

in some cases not at all.

 


  Since genetic change wasn’t uniform, discrete populations came to differ

genetically  from  one  another,  and  sometimes  those  genetic  differences

conferred competitive advantages. We believe that such genetic advantages

have played a role in migrations and population expansions—and thus are

important in explaining the current distribution of languages and peoples. In

fact,  history  looks  more  and  more  like  a  science  fiction  novel  in  which

mutants repeatedly arise and displace normal humans—sometimes quietly,

simply by surviving, sometimes as a conquering horde.

 


It’s probable that the evolutionary response to farming also affected the

distribution of cognitive and personality traits, and that these changes playeda crucial role in the development of civilization and the birth of the scientific

and industrial revolutions.

                             SETTING THE STAGE


 



When the Ice Age ended around 10,000 BC, the world became warmer and

wetter, and the climate became more stable. Carbon dioxide levels increased,

which increased plant productivity. The stage for agriculture was now set—

and this time the actors were ready as well.

 


  Although  there  had  been  other  interglacial  periods  in  the  past,  early

humans had never developed agriculture then. We suspect that increases in

intelligence made agriculture possible, but the route may have been indirect.

For  example,  the  invention  of  better  weapons  and  hunting  techniques,

combined with other technologies that let humans make better use of plant

foods, could have led to lower numbers, or even extinction, of key game

animals—which would have eliminated an attractive alternative to farming.

 


  Farming appeared first in the Fertile Crescent of Southwest Asia. By 9500

BC, we see the first signs of domesticated plants: first wheat and barley, then
                                      3
legumes such as peas and lentils. From there farming spread in all directions,

showing up in Egypt and western India by 7000 BC and gradually moving

into  Europe  and  India.  Around  7000  BC,  rice  and  foxtail  millet  were

domesticated  in  China.  Animals  were  domesticated  on  a  similar  timeline,

with the Middle East in the lead. Goats were tamed around 10,000 BC in

Iran,  sheep  about  1,000  years  later  in  Iraq.  Both  the  taurine  cattle  we’re

familiar with in the Middle East and the humped zebu cattle in India were

domesticated around 6000 BC.

 


  Agriculture came later to the rest of the world. In some cases it spread by a

geographic expansion of farmers, in others through hunter-gatherers adoptingalready-existing methods of agriculture, and in yet others by hunter-gatherers

independently  inventing  their  own  forms  of  agriculture.  In  Europe,

agriculture  was  spread  by  Middle  Eastern  immigrants  and  by  native

Europeans learning to grow Middle Eastern crops such as wheat and barley.

In sub-Saharan Africa, geographic barriers and climatic differences blocked

adoption  of  most  Middle  Eastern  crops  and  domesticated  animals.  There,

agriculture appeared around 2000 BC and was based on locally domesticated

crops such as sorghum and yams. The story is similar in the Americas, where

the Amerindians were almost entirely cut off from the rest of the world and

had  to  domesticate  their  own  crops.  (Some  of  those,  such  as  maize  and

potatoes, are among the most important crops in the world today.)

 


  Agriculture  comprised  what  was  surely  the  most  important  set  of

innovations since the expansion of modern humans out of Africa, resulting in

changes  in  human  diet,  disease  exposure,  and  social  structure.  Another

consequence (one of great evolutionary significance) was a huge population

boom. Human numbers had already been on the increase since the advent of

behavioral modernity, partly as the result of migration into the far northern

regions of Asia, over the sea into Australia, and across a land bridge into the

Americas—all places that archaic humans had been unable to settle—and

partly because of improvements in food production technology (such as nets

and bows). An educated guess puts the total population of the world 100,000

years ago at half a million, counting both anatomically modern humans in

Africa and archaic humans (Neanderthals and evolved erectus) in Eurasia. By

the end of the Ice Age some 12,000 years ago, there may have been as many

as  6  million  modern  humans—still  hunter-gatherers,  but  far  more

sophisticated and effective hunter-gatherers than ever before.

 


  Farming,  which  produces  10  to  100  times  more  calories  per  acre  than

foraging, carried this trend further. Over the period from 10,000 BC to AD 1,

the world population increased approximately a hundredfold (estimates range

from 40 to 170 times). That growth in itself transformed society—sometimes,

quantity has a quality all its own. And as we have pointed out, this larger

population was itself an important factor in evolution.

 The  advent  of  agriculture  changed  life  in  many  ways,  not  all  of  them

obvious. It vastly increased food production, but the nutritional quality of the

food was worse than it had been among hunter-gatherers. It did not materially

increase  the  average  standard  of  living  for  long,  since  population  growth

easily caught up with improvements in food production. Moreover, higher

population  density,  permanent  settlements,  and  close  association  with

domesticated animals greatly increased the prevalence of infectious disease.

 


The sedentary lifestyle of farming allowed a vast elaboration of material

culture. Food, shelter, and artifacts no longer had to be portable. Births could

be  spaced  closer  together,  since  mothers  didn’t  have  to  continually  carry

small  children.  Food  was  now  storable,  unlike  the  typical  products  of

foraging, and storable food could be stolen. For the first time, humans could

begin to accumulate wealth. This allowed for nonproductive elites, which had

been impossible among hunter-gatherers. We emphasize that these elites were

not formed in response to some societal need: They took over because they

could.

 


  Combined with sedentism, these developments eventually led to the birth

of governments, which limited local violence. Presumably, governments did

this because it let them extract more resources from their subjects, the same

reason that farmers castrate bulls. Since societies were generally Malthusian,

with  population  growth  limited  by  decreasing  agriculture  production  per

person at higher human density, limits on interpersonal violence ultimately

led  to  a  situation  in  which  a  higher  fraction  of  the  population  died  of

infectious disease or starvation.

 


All these changes generated new selective pressures, which is another way

of saying that humans didn’t fit the new environment they had created for

themselves,  so  the  species  was  under  pressure  to  adapt.  Because  of  the

newness of the environment, genetic improvements were relatively easy to

find—definitely  easier  at  this  point  than  finding  ways  to  become  better

hunter-gatherers.  Modern  humans  had  been  adapting  to  their  hunting-

gathering lifestyle for a very long time and had already exhausted most such

possibilities.  Adaptation  to  the  farming  life  was  doable,  but  as  always,  itwould require concrete genetic changes.

                             GENETIC RESPONSE


 



When agriculture was new, natural selection must have operated with the

genetic variation that already existed, just as it does in small-scale artificial-

selection experiments. Such experiments cause changes in the frequency of

existing alleles.

 


  Most  preexisting  genetic  variation  must  have  taken  the  form  of  a  few

neutral  variants  of  each  gene—variants  that  are  not  significantly  different

from each other. They may well do something, but the neutral alleles all do

the same thing. We doubt if many of those neutral genes turned out to be the

solution for the problems faced by the future farmers of Eurasia. More likely,

preexisting functional variation mattered more. For example, there is a gene

whose ancestral form helps people to conserve salt. Since humans spent most

of their history in hot climates, this variant was generally useful. A high

frequency of this ancestral allele among African Americans probably plays a

role in their increased risk of high blood pressure today. In tropical Africa, in

fact, almost everyone has the ancestral version of the gene. In Eurasia, a null

variant (one that does nothing at all) becomes more and more common as one
              4
moves  north.  Perhaps  the  gene’s  action  of  promoting  salt  conservation

becomes harmful—by causing higher blood pressure—in cooler areas, where

people sweat less and lose less salt.

 


  Significantly, the null allele is the same in both Europe and eastern Asia—

which suggests that it originated in Africa and is ancient. If it had separate

European and Asian origins, then we would expect to see different versions

in the two regions, just as different broken pigment genes lead to light skin in

the two regions.

 The most reasonable explanation for this dud salt-conservation gene is that

parts of Africa (before the expansion out of Africa) were cool enough that

salt retention was not a major concern, so that in these regions an inactive

form of the gene was in fact advantageous. This might have happened in

Ethiopia during glacial periods, considering that the climate on the Ethiopian

plateau  is  moderate  even  today.  If  so,  the  null  allele  would  represent

preexisting  adaptive  variation  caused  by  environmental  variations  inside

Africa rather than neutral variation. Such internal variation inside Africa must

have helped prepare humans for environments outside Africa.

 


  Another  kind  of  preexisting  genetic  variation  would  have  consisted  of

balanced  polymorphisms.  Balanced  polymorphisms  occur  within  a

population when the population maintains two different alleles of a gene, and

the reason the polymorphism can be stable is that heterozygous individuals

will  have  greater  fitness  than  homozygous  individuals.  A heterozygote

advantage  exists,  for  example,  in  sickle  cell  and  other  malaria  defenses.

There  are  also  alleles  that  have  positive  effects  when  rare,  but  whose

advantages decrease as they become common, eventually becoming negative

(this is called frequency-dependent selection). Some of the most interesting

examples involve behavior and lend themselves to a game-theory analysis.

 


The best-known model is the hawk-dove game, where some individuals are

genetically aggressive while others are genetically peaceful. When hawks are

rare, they easily defeat doves and have higher fitness. As they become more

common, however, they run into other hawks more often and have costly

fights that decrease their fitness. At some frequency, the fitness of hawks and
                                                                5
doves is the same, leading to a balanced polymorphism.

 


  Balanced  behavioral  polymorphisms  could  respond  quickly  to  new

selective pressures. If the original mix was 50 percent doves and 50 percent

hawks, an environmental change that raised the costs of aggressive behavior

would lead to a shift in frequency—say to 70 percent doves and 30 percent

hawks.  This  kind  of  evolutionary  change  is  very  rapid,  especially  when

compared to new sweeping genes, which are rare in the beginning and take

thousands of years to reach frequencies of 20 percent or more. If the dovesacquired a selective advantage of 5 percent, that change (from 50 percent to

70 percent) could occur in less than ten generations.

 


  Human genetic variation was limited in the days before agriculture, in part

because populations were small, and it was often not useful, since many of

the changes that were favored among agriculturalists would actually have

been deleterious among their hunter-gatherer ancestors. This means that some

of the alleles with the right effects in farmers would have been extremely rare

or nonexistent in their hunter-gatherer ancestors. For example, variants of

G6PD  (for  glucose-6-phosphate  dehydrogenase)  with  reduced  function

protect against falciparum malaria but also have negative effects, especially

in men. Today, those G6PD variants have a net positive effect in malarious

regions and have become common in many populations. Before the spread of

falciparum  malaria,  those  variants  likely  had  a  net  negative  effect  in  all

populations, and so were extremely rare.

 


  Therefore,  new  mutations  must  have  played  a  major  role  in  the

evolutionary response to agriculture—and as luck would have it, there was a

vast increase in the supply of those mutations just around this time because of

the population increase associated with agriculture. We’re not saying that the

advent of agriculture somehow called forth mutations from the vasty deep

that fitted people to the new order of things. Mutations are random, and as

always, the overwhelming majority of them had neutral or negative effects.

But more mutations occurred in large populations, some of them beneficial.

Increased population size increased the supply of beneficial mutations just as

buying many lottery tickets increases your chance of winning the prize.

 


By the beginnings of recorded history some 5,000 years ago, new adaptive

mutations  were  coming  into  existence  at  a  tremendous  rate,  roughly  100

times more rapidly than in the Pleistocene. This means that recent human

evolution  differs  qualitatively  from  typical  artificial  selection  acting  on

domesticated animals. It is simply a matter of scale. In the artificial-selection

experiments,  which  typically  involve  no  more  than  tens  or  hundreds  of

animals,  very  few  new  favorable  mutations  occur,  and  selection  must  act

primarily on preexisting genetic variation. In recent human evolution, we’retalking anywhere from millions to hundreds of millions of individuals, all of

them potential mutants, so most of the advantageous variants would have

been new.

 


You might think that alleles that were already common would be more

likely than new variants to grow to high frequency under agriculture. It stands

to reason that the new mutations, which would start out with a single copy,

would face disadvantages. But that reasoning underestimates the effect of the

advantage that the mutation conferred on the individual who carried it and his

or her descendants. Even a single copy of an advantageous gene has a fair

chance of succeeding (10 percent for a gene with a 5 percent advantage), and

exponential growth allows it to spread rapidly. Many new mutations must

have occurred in those large farming populations, and the great majority of

the sweeping genes must have been new.

 


  Not only did post-agricultural evolution involve much higher numbers than

would be possible in any artificial-selection experiment, it also involved a

much longer time frame. Post-agricultural evolution occurred over some 400

generations,  which  would  be  impractical  for  selection  experiments  using

mammals. That long time scale also makes for a qualitative difference, since

it is long enough to allow new mutations to rise to high frequency and make

up a major part of adaptive variation.

 


  Recent studies have found hundreds of ongoing sweeps—sweeps begun

thousands of years ago that are still in progress today. Some alleles have gone

to fixation, more have intermediate frequencies, and most are regional. Many

are very recent: The rate of origination peaks at about 5,000 years ago in the

European and Chinese samples, and at about 8,500 years ago in the African

sample. There are so many sweeps under way, in fact, that we can do some

useful statistical analysis. Often we have some idea of a gene’s function—for

example, by seeing what tissues it is highly expressed in, or by knowing what

goes wrong when it’s inactivated. Using that information, we can look at the

hundreds of genes undergoing sweeps and see what kinds of jobs they do.

And when we do that kind of analysis, we see that most of the sweeping

alleles  fall  into  a  few  functional  categories:  Many  involve  changes  inmetabolism  and  digestion,  in  defenses  against  infectious  disease,  in

reproduction, in DNA repair, or in the central nervous system.

                       YOU ARE WHAT YOU EAT


 



Early farmers ate foods that hunter-gatherers did not eat, or at least they ate

them in much greater quantities, and at first they were not well adjusted to the

new diet. In Europe and western Asia, cereals became the dietary mainstay,

usually wheat or barley, while millet and rice became the primary foods in

eastern Asia. Those early farmers raised other crops, such as peas and beans,

and they ate some meat, mostly from domesticated animals, but it looks as if

the carbohydrate fraction of their diet almost tripled, while the amount of
                6
protein tanked. Protein quality decreased as well, since plant foods contained

an undesirable mix of amino acids, the chemical building blocks of which

proteins are made. Almost any kind of meat has the right mix, but plants

often do not—and trying to build muscle with the wrong mix is a lot like

playing Scrabble with more Q’s than U’s.

 


  Shortages of vitamins are also likely to have been a problem among those

early farmers, since the new diet included little fresh meat and was primarily

based  on  a  very  limited  set  of  crops.  Hunter-gatherers  would  rarely  have

suffered vitamin-deficiency diseases such as beri-beri, pellagra, rickets, or

scurvy, but farmers sometimes did. There is every reason to think that early

farmers developed serious health problems from this low-protein, vitamin-

short, high-carbohydrate diet. Infant mortality increased, and the poor diet

was likely one of the causes. You can see the mismatch between the genes

and  the  environment  in  the  skeletal  evidence.  Humans  who  adopted
                                                                            7
agriculture shrank: Average height dropped by almost five inches.

 


  There  are  numerous  signs  of  pathology  in  the  bones  of  early

agriculturalists. In the Americas, the introduction of maize led to widespread

tooth  decay  and  anemia  due  to  iron  deficiency,  since  maize  is  low  inbioavailable iron. This story is not new: Many researchers have written about
                                                                          8
the health problems stemming from the advent of agriculture. Our point is

that, over millennia, populations responded to these new pressures. People

who had genetic variants that helped them deal with the new diet had more

surviving children, and those variants spread: Farmers began to adapt to an

agricultural diet. Humanity changed.

 


We are beginning to understand some of the genetic details of these dietary

adaptations, which took several forms. Some of the selected alleles appear to

have increased efficiency—that is to say, their bearers were able to extract

more nutrients from an agricultural diet. The most dramatic examples are

mutations that allow adults to digest lactose, the main sugar in milk. Hunter-

gatherers, and mammals in general, stop making lactase (the enzyme that

digests  lactose)  in  childhood.  Since  mother’s  milk  was  the  only  lactose-

containing “food” available to humans in days of yore, there wasn’t much

point  in  older  children  or  adults  making  lactase—and  shutting  down

production may have decreased destructive forms of sibling rivalry. But after

the domestication of cattle, milk was available and potentially valuable to

people  of  all  ages,  if  only  they  could  digest  it.  A  mutation  that  caused

continued  production  of  lactase  originated  some  8,000  years  ago  and  has

spread widely among Europeans, reaching frequencies of over 95 percent in

Denmark and Sweden. Other mutations with a similar effect have become

common (despite starting several thousand years later) in some of the cattle-

raising  tribes  in  East  Africa,  so  that  90  percent  of  the  Tutsi  are  lactose

tolerant today. These mutations spread quite rapidly and must have been very

advantageous.

 


  When you think about it, the whole process is rather strange: Northern

Europeans  and  some  sub-Saharan  Africans  have  become  “mampires,”

mutants that live off the milk of another species. We think lactose-tolerance

mutations played an important role in history, a subject we will treat at some

length in Chapter 6.

 


  Some genetic changes may have helped to compensate for shortages in the

new  diet.  For  example,  we  see  changes  in  genes  affecting  transport  of                    9
vitamins into cells. Similarly, vitamin D shortages in the new diet may have

driven the evolution of light skin in Europe and northern Asia. Vitamin D is

produced by ultraviolet radiation from the sun acting on our skin—an odd,

plantlike way of going about things. Less is therefore produced in areas far

from the equator, where UV flux is low. Since there is plenty of vitamin D in

fresh meat, hunter-gatherers in Europe may not have suffered from vitamin D

shortages and thus may have been able to get by with fairly dark skin. In fact,

this must have been the case, since several of the major mutations causing

light  skin  color  appear  to  have  originated  after  the  birth  of  agriculture.

Vitamin D was not abundant in the new cereal-based diet, and any resulting

shortages  would  have  been  serious,  since  they  could  lead  to  bone

malformations (rickets), decreased resistance to infectious diseases, and even

cancer. This may be why natural selection favored mutations causing light

skin, which allowed for adequate vitamin D synthesis in regions with little

ultraviolet radiation.

 


  There were other changes that ameliorated nasty side effects of the new

unbalanced diets. The big increase in carbohydrates, especially carbohydrates

that are rapidly broken down in digestion, interfered with the control of blood

sugar and appears to have caused metabolic problems such as diabetes. A

high-carbohydrate diet also apparently causes acne and tooth decay, both of

which are rare among hunter-gatherers. More exactly, both are caused by

infectious organisms, but those organisms only cause trouble in the presence

of a high-carbohydrate diet.

 


  Some of the protective changes took the form of new versions of genes

involved in insulin regulation. Researchers in Iceland have found that new
                                                                                10
variants of a gene regulating blood sugar protect against diabetes. Those

variants  have  different  ages  in  the  three  populations  studied  (Europeans,

Asians,  and  sub-Saharan  Africans),  and  in  each  population  the  protective

variant is roughly as old as agriculture. Alcoholic drinks, also part of the new

diet,  had  plenty  of  bad  side  effects,  and  in  East  Asia  there  are  strongly

selected alleles that are known to materially reduce the risk of alcoholism.

 


  Clearly, the evolutionary responses to an agricultural diet must differ, sincedifferent peoples adopted different kinds of agriculture at different times and

in different environments. This variation has caused biological differences in

the metabolic responses to an agricultural diet that persist today, but it has

also generated differences in every other kind of adaptive response to the new

society. Agriculture began in the Middle East 10,000 years ago and took

almost 5,000 years to spread throughout Europe. Amerindians in the Illinois

and Ohio river valleys adopted maize agriculture only 1,000 years ago, but

the Australian Aborigines never domesticated plants at all. Peoples who have

farmed since shortly after the end of the Ice Age (such as the inhabitants of

the Middle East) must have adapted most thoroughly to agriculture. In areas

where agriculture is younger, such as Europe or China, we’d expect to see

fewer adaptive changes—except to the extent that the inhabitants were able to

pick up genes from older farming peoples. And we’d expect to see fewer

adaptive  changes  still  among  the  Amerindians  and  sub-Saharan  Africans,

who had farmed for even shorter times and were genetically isolated from

older  civilizations  by  geographical  barriers.  In  groups  that  had  remained

foragers,  there  would  presumably  be  no  such  adaptive  changes—most

certainly not in isolated forager populations.

 


  Populations that have never farmed or that haven’t farmed for long, such as

the Australian Aborigines and many Amerindians, have characteristic health

problems  today  when  exposed  to  Western  diets.  The  most  severe  such

problem  currently  is  a  high  incidence  of  type  2  diabetes.  Low  physical

activity certainly contributes to that problem today, but genetic vulnerability

is a big part of the story: Navajo couch potatoes are far more likely to get

adult-onset diabetes than German or Chinese couch potatoes. The prevalence

of diabetes among the Navajo is about two and a half times higher than it is

in their European-descended neighbors, and about four times more common

among Australian Aborigines than in other Australians. We think this is a

consequence  of  a  lesser  degree  of  adaptation  to  high-carbohydrate  diets.

Interestingly, Polynesians are also prone to diabetes (with roughly three times

European rates), even though they practiced agriculture, raising crops such as

yams, taro, bananas, breadfruit, and sweet potato. We believe that their case

still fits our general picture of incomplete adaptation, however. Among the

Polynesians,  adaptation  would  have  been  limited  by  the  relatively  small

population  size  and  the  low  rate  of  protective  mutations  it  would  havegenerated. In addition, settlement bottlenecks and limited contacts between

the  populations  of  the  far-flung  Polynesian  islands  would  have  interfered

with the spread of any favorable mutations that did occur.

 


Our explanation of this susceptibility pattern differs from the well-known

“thrifty  genotype”  hypothesis  originally  promulgated  by  James  Neel.  He

suggested that pre-agricultural peoples were especially prone to famine and

that the metabolic differences that led to diabetes in modern environments
                                                                11
had helped people survive food shortages in the past. This seems unlikely.

The lower rungs of agricultural societies in Europe and East Asia usually

suffered food shortages severe enough to cause below-replacement fertility,

and weather-related crop failure often struck whole nations or even larger

regions. Sometimes this led to famines severe enough to lead to widespread

cannibalism, as seems to have occurred in the great famine that struck most

of northern Europe from 1315 to 1317.

 


  Hunter-gatherers should have been, if anything, less vulnerable to famine

than farmers, since they did not depend on a small set of domesticated plant

species (which might suffer from insect pests or fungal blights even in a year

with good weather), and because local violence usually kept their populations
                                                  12
well  below  the  local  carrying  capacity.  State  societies  limited  local

violence,  but  in  a  Malthusian  world, something  always  limits  population

growth. In this case, fewer deaths by violence meant more deaths due to

starvation and infectious disease. Moreover, hunter-gatherer societies do not

appear to have been divided into well-fed elites and hungry lower classes, a

situation that virtually guarantees malnourishment and/or famine among a

significant fraction of the population, whereas agricultural societies did have

divisions  of  this  sort.  We  believe  that  our  explanation,  based  on  the

evolutionary  response  to  a  well-established  increase  in  carbohydrate

consumption among farmers, is more likely to be correct than an explanation

based on the idea that hunter-gatherers were particularly prone to famine, a

notion that has no factual support.

 


  Most populations that are highly vulnerable to type 2 diabetes also have

increased risks of alcoholism. This is no coincidence. It’s not that the samebiochemistry underlies both conditions, but that both stem from the same

ultimate  cause:  limited  previous  exposure  to  agricultural  diets,  and  thus

limited adaptation to such diets.

 


  Booze  inevitably  accompanies  farming.  People  have  been  brewing

alcoholic beverages since the earliest days of agriculture: Beer may date back

more  than  8,000  years.  There’s  even  a  hypothesis  that  barley  was  first

domesticated  for  use  in  brewing  beer  rather  than  bread.  Essentially  all

agricultural  peoples  developed  and  routinely  consumed  some  kind  of

alcoholic beverage. In those populations with long exposure, natural selection

must have gradually increased the frequency of alleles that decreased the risk

of  alcoholism,  due  to  its  medical  and  social  disadvantages.  This  process

would have gone furthest in old agricultural societies and presumably would

not have occurred at all among pure hunter-gatherers.

 


We must wonder why farming peoples didn’t just evolve an aversion to

alcohol. It seems as if that would have been a bad strategy, since moderate

consumption of traditional, low-proof alcoholic drinks was almost certainly

healthful.  People  who  drank  wine  or  beer  avoided  waterborne  pathogens,

which were a lethal threat in high-density populations. Alleles that reduced

the risk of alcoholism therefore prevailed.

 


  There  is  also  some  reason  to  believe  that  populations  that  have  been

drinking  alcohol  for  hundreds  of  generations  may  have  also  evolved

metabolic changes that reduced some of alcohol’s other risks. In particular,

we know that alcohol consumption by pregnant women can have devastating

effects on their offspring. Those effects, called fetal alcohol syndrome, or

FAS,  include  growth  deficiency,  facial  abnormalities,  and  damage  to  the

central  nervous  system.  FAS  is,  however,  far  more  common  in  some

populations than in others: Its prevalence is almost thirty times higher in

African American or Amerindian populations in the United States than it is

among Europeans—even though the French, for example, have been known

to take a drink or two. Some populations, such as those of sub-Saharan Africa

and their diaspora, may run higher risks of suffering from FAS than others

consuming similar amounts of alcohol. If so, study of the alleles protectingagainst FAS in resistant populations might lead to greater understanding of

the biochemical mechanisms underlying the syndrome. With luck, we might

be able to use that information to decrease the incidence of FAS in vulnerable

populations.

 


This  picture  of  adaptation  to  agricultural  diets  has  two  important

implications: Populations today must vary in their degree of adaptation to

such diets, depending on their historical experience, and populations must

have changed over time.

 


For  example,  there  must  have  been  a  time  when  no  one  was  lactose

tolerant, a later time in which the frequency was intermediate, and finally a

time when it reached modern levels. In this instance, we have hard evidence

of such change. In a 2007 study, researchers studied DNA from the skeletons

of people who died between 7,000 and 8,000 years ago. These skeletons were

from central and northern Europe, where today the frequency of the lactase-

persistence  variant  is  around  80  percent.  None  of  those  ancient  northern
                            13
Europeans had that allele. In another study, a different group of researchers

looked at central European skeletons from the late Bronze Age, some 3,000

years ago. Back then, the gene frequency (judging from their sample) was
                                    14
apparently around 25 percent.  This  shows  that  the  frequency  of  lactose

tolerance really has changed over time in the way indicated by the HapMap

genetic data. The theory made sense, but experimental confirmation is always

welcome.  We  expect  that  there  will  be  many  similar  results  (showing

ongoing change in sweeping genes) in studies of ancient DNA over the next

few years.

 


Over time, if our argument is correct, farming peoples should have become

better adapted to their agricultural diets in many ways, and we might expect

that some of the skeletal signs of physiological stress would have gradually

decreased.  Although  such  genetic  adaptation  clearly  occurred,  cultural

changes that improved health must have occurred as well. For example, the

adoption of new crops and new methods of food preparation would have

improved  the  nutritional  quality  of  the  average  peasant’s  diet.  Of  course,

some of those new methods (polishing rice) and new crops (sugarcane)—actually made things worse. Adaptive change is slow and blind, but it is also

sure and steady. Cultural change is less reliable.

 


But cultural change is important. Although many traditional archaeologists

and  anthropologists  will  probably  see  us  as  biological  imperialists  out  to

explain  everything  that  ever  happened  with  our  pet  genetic  theories,  we

firmly believe that cultural change—new ideas, new techniques, new forms

of social organization—were powerful influences on the historical process.

We’re  simply  saying  that  the  complete  historical  analyst  must  consider

genetic change as well as social, cultural, and political change. Once a list of

battles and kings seemed plenty good enough, but life keeps getting more

complicated.

                                             4

 



                CONSEQUENCES OF AGRICULTURE

 



Agriculture  reshaped  human  society,  resulting  in  selective  pressures  that

changed us in many ways. Some of those changes involved fairly obvious

accommodations to new problems in nutrition and infectious disease. Others

consisted  of  subtle  psychological  and  cognitive  changes,  some  of  which

eventually  led  to  revolutionary  social  innovations—possibly  including  the

birth  of  science.  In  this  chapter,  we  discuss  many  of  those  evolutionary

responses.

                             INFECTIOUS DISEASE


 



Of course, diet is not the only thing that changed under agriculture. Farming

revolutionized human infectious disease—but not in a good way.

 


The  population  expansion  associated  with  farming  increased  crowding,

while farming itself made people sedentary. Mountains of garbage and water

supplies  contaminated  with  human  waste  favored  the  spread  of  infectious

disease. As farmers, humans acquired new commensals, animals that lived

among  them.  We  already  had  ride-along  commensals  such  as  lice  and

intestinal  worms—now  we  had  rats  and  mice  as  well,  which  spread

devastating diseases such as typhus and bubonic plague.

 


  Quantitative changes in population density and disease vectors resulted in

qualitative  changes  in  disease  prevalence—not  only  did  old  infectious

diseases become a more serious threat, entirely new ones appeared.

 


  Most infectious diseases have a critical community size, a number and

concentration of people below which they cannot persist. The classic example

is measles, which typically infects children and remains infectious for about

ten days, after which the patient has lifelong immunity. In order for measles

to survive, the virus that causes it, the paramyxovirus, must continually find

unexposed victims—more children. Measles can only persist in a large, dense

population: Populations that are too small or too spread out (under half a

million in close proximity) fail to produce unexposed children fast enough, so

the virus dies out. This means that measles, at least in the form we know it

today, could not have existed in the days before agriculture—there was no

concentrated population that large anywhere on earth. (The virus that causeschicken pox is different: It lingers in the nervous system and often reemerges

late in life in the form of shingles, which can be incredibly painful. Children

can  catch  chicken  pox  from  their  grandparents—cycle  of  life!  Since  the

critical  community  size  of  chicken  pox  is  less  than  100  people,

epidemiologists judge that it has probably been around for a long time.)

 


In any case, the new conditions that accompanied agriculture brought more

than measles. Many other diseases that just didn’t exist in hunter-gathering

days could now thrive as well. Some originated as mutated versions of milder

infectious  diseases  that  already  existed  in  humans;  we  picked  up  others

(probably most) from animals, especially domesticated herd animals. Later,

as trade and travel increased, civilizations exchanged some of their regional

diseases, with disastrous results.

 


  Infectious disease was thus a far bigger threat to farmers than it had been

to hunter-gatherers—which meant that farmers experienced strong selective

pressures on that account. They eventually developed much more effective

genetic  defenses  against  infectious  disease  than  those  sported  by  their

Neolithic  ancestors,  and  these  defenses  were  also  far  more  effective  than

those possessed by people who remained hunter-gatherers.

 


The best-understood genetic defenses are those that protect people against

falciparum malaria. There are several kinds of malaria, but falciparum is the

most serious and accounts for the most deaths. Increased population density

and the use of slash-and-burn agricultural techniques (cutting and burning

forests to create fields) may have favored the spread of this virulent form of

malaria. The trend was particularly unpleasant in Africa, where mosquitoes

that preferred humans to animals evolved, facilitating transmission of this

deadly disease.

 


  Wherever falciparum malaria has existed for a long time, mainly in the

tropical  areas  of  the  Old  World,  people  have  developed  genetic  defenses

against it, and the side effects of those defenses account for most cases of

genetic disease in populations originating in those regions. We know a lotabout malaria defenses because they cause illness, and more time and effort

has been spent on medical research than on understanding the evolutionary

underpinnings of the disease. This is not surprising, since these illnesses have

been so troubling in tropical areas. But understanding the root causes of the

medical conditions may be worthwhile: A little more evolutionary thought in

medicine might actually have practical payoffs.

 


The most important mutations that protect against malaria are those that

change some feature in the red blood cells that are the primary target of the

malaria parasite—usually, the hemoglobin molecule (for example, sickle cell

hemoglobin [HbS], hemoglobin C [HbC], hemoglobin E [HbE], alpha- and

beta-thalassemia,  Melanesian  ovalocytosis,  and  glucose-6-phosphate

dehydrogenase [G6PD] deficiency). We also know of a number of alleles
                                                          1
(such as the glycophorin C variant in New Guinea) that are almost certainly

malaria defenses but do not cause noticeable disease as side effects. In fact, it

looks as if the well-known defenses, such as sickle cell, that cause obvious

disease are only the tip of the iceberg.

 


The expensive malaria defenses (defenses with serious side effects) are far

more common than any single genetic disease caused by random mutations.

Some 400 million people, 7 percent of the world’s population, have G6PD

deficiency,  which  can  be  serious.  About  250,000  children  are  born  with

sickle-cell anemia each year (which is very serious), while about 20,000 boys

are born with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, one of the most common of all
                                      2
mutation-driven genetic diseases.

 


  These malaria defenses became common because they gave an advantage

to carriers (people with one copy of the gene variant); however, they cause

problems (from mild to lethal) in people with two copies. This is unusual: We

seldom see such crude adaptations in other functions. For example, humans

don’t have an allele that makes carriers run faster while crippling those with

two copies. Normally, genes work together in an efficient and coordinated

way. We think that this evolutionary sloppiness exists because falciparum

malaria, as we know it today, has not been around very long—perhaps as

little as 4,000 years. The same appears to be true of the antimalaria geneticdefenses.  For  example,  the  main  African  variety  of  G6PD  deficiency  is
                                                                                3
roughly 2,500 years old, HbE in Thailand is roughly 2,000 years old.

 


  These adaptations to falciparum malaria were both recent and local. They

occurred in the tropical and subtropical areas of the Old World: Peoples who

lived in the cooler parts of Eurasia, in Australia, and in the Americas either

remained  unexposed  or  were  only  exposed  even  more  recently.  Malaria

reshaped the human genome, but only in some peoples. It has been one of the

forces differentiating human populations over the past few thousand years.

 


  Malaria defenses are only one example of a more widespread phenomenon.

Recent  whole-genome  selection  scans  suggest  that  there  have  been  many

other genetic changes related to defense against disease. Again, the extent of

these adaptations has varied regionally.

 


We see evidence of a number of cases in which new alleles related to

pathogen  defense  and  the  immune  system  have  rapidly  reached  high

frequency:  These  alleles  involve  the  production  of  antibodies,  control  of

white cells that attack intruder organisms and infected cells, genes affecting

viral infection, and cellular interaction with pathogens such as Helicobacter

pylori, the bacterium that causes most stomach ulcers and stomach cancer.

Again, most such changes are regional. But even before we began to discover

these new defenses, it was obvious that something of the sort must exist,

since some populations were much more vulnerable than others to diseases

such as smallpox and influenza.

 


It’s  time  to  address  the  old  chestnut  that  biological  differences  among

human  populations  are  “superficial,”  only  skin-deep.  It’s  not  true:  We’re

seeing genetically caused differences in all kinds of functions, and every such

difference was important enough to cause a significant increase in fitness

(number of offspring)—otherwise it wouldn’t have reached high frequency in

just a few millennia. These were not just superficial changes affecting things

like hair color, skin color, and the shape of the nose, although even those

apparently  superficial  differences  sometimes  had  important  consequences.Some of these differences were far from being superficial or insignificant and

profoundly affected the populations in which they appeared, sometimes in

unexpected ways. They had a major influence on history; some continue to

shape the course of events today.

 


  Populations  that  experienced  different  ecological  histories  had  different

evolutionary responses. In the case of infectious disease, it was in the main

population centers of the Old World that human populations developed the

strongest defenses. Populations isolated from the Old World diseases did not

have an opportunity to develop such protections.

 


  Amerindians, for example, experienced very little infectious disease. The

story  is  similar  in  other  isolated  populations,  such  as  the  Australian

Aborigines, Polynesians, and the inhabitants of the Andaman Islands: They

didn’t  experience  millennia  of  infectious  disease,  didn’t  evolve  improved

defenses as most Old Worlders did, and were decimated upon contact with

the wider world.

                                     SKIN-DEEP


 



We now understand quite a bit about the genetic changes that led to light skin

in northern Eurasians. At least we know what happened in Europe and Asia

(China and Japan), the non-African populations studied in the HapMap.

 


In each of these populations, a number of genes have been replaced by—or

are in the process of being replaced by—new variants that produce lighter

skin color than the dark skin seen in sub-Saharan Africans, who mostly have

the ancestral human alleles. Interestingly, the sets of changes driving light

skin color in China are almost entirely different from those performing a

similar function in Europe. In most cases the mutations involve changes in

different  genes,  and  even  when  the  same  gene  is  involved,  usually  the

common mutations at the opposite ends of Eurasia are not the same. So in

this example, as in lactase persistence and a number of other cases, it turns

out that similar traits in different populations are the product of convergent

evolution and are quite different at the level of biochemistry and genetics.

Sometimes racial similarities are only skin-deep.

 


  Many of these changes seem to be quite recent. The mutation that appears

to have the greatest effect on skin color among Europeans and neighboring

peoples, a variant of SLC24A5, has spread with astonishing speed. Linkage

disequilibrium—that  is,  the  degree  to  which  the  genome  is  surprisingly

uniform around this gene—suggests that it came into existence about 5,800

years ago, but it has a frequency of about 99 percent throughout Europe and

is found at significant levels in North Africa, East Africa, and as far east as

India and Ceylon. If it is indeed that recent, it must have had a huge selective

advantage, perhaps as high as 20 percent. It would have spread so rapidly

that,  over  a  long  lifetime,  a  farmer  could  have  noticed  the  change  inappearance in his village. Again, if it is that recent, it must have had a more

limited distribution in early historical times, particularly in peripheral areas:

In fact, this may explain the Roman impression that the Picts of Scotland

were dark-skinned.

 


As noted in Chapter 3, the recent sweeps of genes causing light skin might

have been driven by an increased need for vitamin D among farmers living in

high-latitude regions with low levels of ultraviolet radiation. But there are

other  possibilities.  In  the  Old  World  tropics,  such  as  sub-Saharan  Africa,

Melanesia,  and  New  Guinea,  the  ancestral  condition—dark  skin—was

favored by selection. Palefaces didn’t prosper. But in higher-latitude regions,

such as Europe and northern Asia, skin could be lighter. Many genes have

more than one function: It may be that genes that produce dark skin pigments

were now free to change in ways that enhanced some of their other functions,

giving some kind of benefit other than increased vitamin D production.

 


We  know  of  an  example  in  fish  that  illustrates  the  same  principle.  In

humans, OCA2 (for oculocutaneous albinism II) is a gene involved in the

melanin pathway—if you have two broken copies, you’re an albino. It also

affects eye color: A particular variant that has increased rapidly in Europe is

the main cause of blue eyes. Species of fish trapped in caves—this all relates,

trust us—lose their eyesight and become albinos over many generations. But

researchers have found that OCA2 is mutated in a number of different species

of  blind  cave  fish  in  Mexico,  all  descended  from  tetras.  The  mutations

causing albinism in these fish are different from each other and originated

independently. Since we see changes in OCA2 in each case, however, there

must  have  been  some  advantage  in  knocking  out  OCA2,  at  least  in  that

underground  environment.  The  advantage  cannot  lie  in  increased  UV
                                                            4
absorption, since there’s no sunlight in those caves.

 


  There are hints that knocking out OCA2, or at least reducing its activity,

may be advantageous (probably in some way unconnected with vitamin D) in

humans who can get away with it. We see a pattern that suggests that having

one inactive copy of OCA2 is somehow favored even in some quite sunny

regions.  In  southern  Africa,  a  knocked-out  version  of  OCA2  is  fairly                                                        5
common: The gene frequency is over 1 percent. Individuals with two copies

are albinos and have problems such as skin cancer and blindness as well as

social rejection and persecution. Yet it’s the most common genetic disease in

southern  Africa,  with  the  great  majority  of  cases  caused  by  the  same

mutation.  There’s  a  similar  story  among  Amerindians  in  the  American

Southwest: A form of OCA2 albinism is common among the Navajo and
                                                                                    6
other neighboring tribes, with gene frequencies as high as 4.5 percent. The

same  pattern  appears  in  southern  Mexico,  eastern  Panama,  and  southern

Brazil. All of which suggests that heterozygotes—that is, those carrying one

copy of the broken version of OCA2—may have some advantage.

 


  Something  else  that  makes  us  wonder  whether  vitamin  D  was  the  key

factor behind recent changes in skin color is the fact, mentioned before, that

the genetic changes underlying light skin in Europe and East Asia are almost

entirely different. If a reduced-function version of a gene involved in melanin

synthesis was strongly favored in Europe, why wouldn’t a similar reduced-

function version of that same gene arise and spread in China? Mutations that

reduce function are quite common. In addition, selection on genes affecting

skin  color,  eye  color,  and  hair  color  somehow  created  lots  of  variety  in

Europeans: red-heads and blondes, blue eyes and green eyes. Nowhere else in

the world is that sort of variety common. In most parts of the world, even in

temperate regions, everyone has dark eyes and dark hair. To us these facts

suggest  that  there  was  something  fundamentally  different  in  the  selective

forces affecting skin color in Europe and East Asia. If those forces were

different, at least one of them was probably selecting for something other

than vitamin D.

                                   DEM BONES


 



The  skeletal  record  clearly  supports  the  idea  that  there  has  been  rapid

evolutionary  change  in  humans  over  the  past  10,000  years.  The  human

skeleton has become more gracile—more lightly built—though more so in

some populations than others. Our jaws have shrunk, our long bones have

become lighter, and brow ridges have disappeared in most populations (with

the notable exception of Australian aborigines, who have also changed, but

not as much; they still have brow ridges, and their skulls are about twice as
                                    7
thick as those of other peoples.) Skull volume has decreased, apparently in

all populations: In Europeans, volume is down about 10 percent from the

high point about 20,000 years ago. These changes were spread out over time,

of course. For example, if you look at Bronze Age skeletons from Europe

(around 3,000 years ago), you find that some people still had brow ridges like

those  of  Australian  Aborigines.  Hardly  any  Europeans  have  brow  ridges

today.

 


  Genome-selection surveys may have found some of the alleles affecting

these processes. One group of researchers discussed two genes involved in

bone growth that showed signs of selection in Europeans, another in the same

gene  family  that  showed  selection  among  East  Asians,  and  a  fourth  that
                                                      8
showed signs of selection in both populations. Even though we see similar

skeletal  changes  in  many  populations,  the  genetic  underpinnings  are

generally different, much like the pattern underlying skin color.

 


  Some  changes  can  be  seen  even  over  the  past  1,000  years.  English

researchers  recently  compared  skulls  from  people  who  died  in  the  Black

Death (≈650 years ago), from the crew of the Mary Rose, a ship that sank in

Tudor times (≈450 years ago), and from our contemporaries. The shape of theskull  changed  noticeably  over  that  brief  period—which  is  particularly

interesting  because  we  know  there  has  been  no  massive  population

replacement in England over the past 700 years. The height of the cranial

vault  of  our  contemporaries  was  about  15  percent  larger  than  that  of  the

earlier populations, and the part of the skull containing the frontal lobes was
            9
thus larger.

                             CHEATERS PROSPER


 



Usually a new version of a gene increases in frequency because it aids the

bearer in some way—although it may not aid the species as a whole. Some

alleles take this a step farther and succeed by helping themselves, not the

bearer. They’re called “driving genes.”

 


  Everyone  has  two  copies  of  all  chromosomes  other  than  the  sex

chromosomes,  and  so  everyone  has  two  copies  of  each  gene  on  those

autosomal chromosomes. In the process of meiosis (the process that forms

germ cells), a diploid germ cell replicates its DNA and then divides twice,

forming  four  haploid  cells  each  having  a  complete  set  of  autosomal

chromosomes and a single sex chromosome. In sperm production, all four

haploid cells become gametes, while in females only one of the haploid cells

becomes an egg.

 


  Generally, each of the two copies of each gene has an equal chance of

showing up in a gamete. The system is designed (in an evolutionary sense) to

give alleles a fair shake. But sometimes, mutation creates a new allele that

has a better chance of getting into a gamete—greater than 50 percent. Think

of  it  as  a  line-cutter.  Along  the  same  line,  a  mutation  might  increase  a

gamete’s chance of success—say, by making sperm swim faster—and this

might  be  the  case  for  SPAG6  (for  sperm  associated  antigen  6),  a  gene

involved  in  sperm  motility  that  has  apparently  undergone  a  sweep  in
                                                    10
Europeans over the past few thousand years.

 


  Driving versions of genes must have come into existence more often as

human  population  increased,  just  as  lightning  strikes  more  Texans  thanKansans. In a small population, a driving allele would occasionally come into

existence and rapidly go to fixation, but the population might spend most of

the time in between such sweeps. The much larger populations associated

with  behavioral  modernity,  in  particular  with  agriculture,  should  have

generated driving alleles at a rate perhaps two orders of magnitude higher

than the populations of the Old Stone Age. Those new driving alleles would

not  have  taken  all  that  long  to  spread,  since  they  would  have  grown

exponentially in a well-mixed population. Therefore, modern humans should

have an unusually large number of driving genes, either recently fixed or on

their way to fixation. By the same argument, any species whose numbers

have  recently  soared—for  example,  after  domestication—is  likely  to  also

have an unusually large number of driving alleles.

 

                                                                                11
  Recent work may have identified such driving alleles. One study found

evidence  of  selective  sweeps  in  a  number  of  centromeric  regions—the

centromere being a central region that holds together the two halves of the

chromosome and that plays a key role in meiosis and in ordinary cell division

(mitosis).  Since  these  regions  have  relatively  few  active  genes,  the

centromeres themselves may be the target of selection. There is reason to

believe that centromere mutations can affect the way in which alleles end up

in the egg or in polar bodies, which are dead-end by-products of the egg’s

division. Any allele with an increased chance of ending up in the egg, instead

of  a  polar  body,  would  have  an  advantage,  possibly  a  large  one.  The

researchers found evidence of sweeps in eight out of seventeen chromosomes

for which data were available. Those sweeps were regional, mainly in the

European  and  Asian  samples,  which  suggests  that  they  came  after  the

expansion out of Africa.

 


In the long run, a large population would develop more defenses against

driving genes as well as more driving genes. But in the short run, just after a

dramatic  population  expansion,  driving  genes  might  be  both  unusually

numerous  and  unusually  troublesome,  since  selective  pressures  favoring

defenses  and  modifiers  only  come  into  existence after  the  driving  alleles

become  common.  This  isn’t  just  a  theoretical  concern—it  might  have

something to do with the mysteriously high miscarriage rate in humans. The

fraction  of  conceptions  that  lead  to  a  healthy  baby  may  be  as  low  as  25percent, far lower than in most other mammals, and it seems that most of the

miscarriages  are  caused  by  chromosomal  anomalies.  An  unusually  large

number of driving genes may play some causal role in this. Too many alleles

trying  to  shoulder  their  way  into  the  egg  at  the  same  time  could  lead  to

trouble, just like Stooges all trying to get through the door at the same time.

                               CHANGING MINDS


 



The most interesting kind of genetic changes are those that affect human

personality and cognition, and the evidence is good that such changes have

indeed occurred.

 


A  number  of  the  new,  rapidly  spreading  alleles  found  in  the  recent

selection surveys have to do with the central nervous system. There are new

versions  of  neurotransmitter  receptors  and  transporters—neurotransmitters

being molecules that relay and influence signals between nerve cells. Several

of the new alleles have effects on serotonin, a neurotransmitter involved in

the regulation of mood and emotion. Many recreational and therapeutic drugs

(particularly antidepressants) modulate serotonin metabolism. And there are

new versions of genes that play a role in brain development: genes that affect

axon  growth,  synapse  formation,  formation  of  the  layers  of  the  cerebral

cortex,  and  overall  brain  growth.  Again,  most  of  these  new  variants  are

regional: Human evolution is madly galloping off in all directions.

 


We see new versions of several genes in factors having to do with muscle

fibers and brain function. Dystrophin is a protein (coded by the longest of all

known human genes) that has an important structural role in muscle fibers

and the brain; the dystrophin complex is a set of proteins that are physically

associated with dystrophin. Major defects in the dystrophin gene itself cause

Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which has very severe effects, while lesser

defects  cause  Becker’s  muscular  dystrophy,  which  is  milder.  These  are

among the most common genetic diseases, apparently because the extremely

large and structurally complex dystrophin gene has so many ways of going

wrong. Dystrophin’s dual role has medical consequences, in that boys with

Duchenne  muscular  dystrophy  suffer  reduced  IQ  as  well  as  muscularweakness.

 


The  dystrophin-associated  sweeping  alleles  that  we  see  in  the  selection

surveys (which do not cause disease) raise the interesting possibility of direct

trade-offs between muscle and brain function in the recent past. We have

reason to think that humans circa 100,000 BC  had stronger muscles than

today—and  so  changes  in  the  dystrophin  complex  may  have  sacrificed

muscle strength for higher intelligence.

 


  Another very intriguing pattern involves new versions of genes that affect
              12
the inner ear. We wonder if this is a consequence of recent increases in

language complexity sufficiently recent that our ears (and presumably our

brains, throats, and tongues) are still adapting to those changes. Or, since

some of the sweeping genes involving the inner ear are regional and recent,

could some populations be adapting to characteristics of particular languages

or language families? It seems that all humans can learn any human language,

but we don’t know whether everyone is inherently just as good as everyone

else  at  learning  every  language,  communicating  in  every  language,  or

eavesdropping in every language.

 


  More generally, these sweeping neurological genes could be responses to

the  new  challenges  posed  by  agriculture  itself  and  the  dense  hierarchical

societies  it  made  possible.  In  the  following  sections,  we  discuss  those

challenges and likely adaptive responses to them.

                         THE MALTHUSIAN TRAP


 



In An  Essay  on  the  Principle  of  Population,  Thomas  Malthus  in  1798

observed  that  population  tends  to  outrun  food  supply,  since  population

increases geometrically while food supply increases arithmetically. He wrote:


    The power of population is so superior to the power of the earth to

    produce subsistence for man, that premature death must in some shape

    or other visit the human race. The vices of mankind are active and able

    ministers of depopulation. They are the precursors in the great army of

    destruction, and often finish the dreadful work themselves. But should

    they fail in this war of extermination, sickly seasons, epidemics,

      pestilence, and plague advance in terrific array, and sweep off their

    thousands and tens of thousands. Should success be still incomplete,

    gigantic inevitable famine stalks in the rear, and with one mighty blow

    levels the population with the food of the world.

 

 

 


  Imagine that a population of farmers is doing well: They have plenty to

eat. It’s easy for them to raise more than two children per family—they do so,

and the population increases. It continues to increase as long as conditions

remain  the  same.  More  people  need  more  food,  but  then  there  are  more

workers producing food. As long as per capita production stays the same, the

standard of living does not change, even as population increases. However,

eventually this expanding population runs out of land, and farmers in the next

generation have to farm smaller plots. They may be able to keep per capita

production  the  same  by  working  harder,  but  in  the  next  generation  plots

become even smaller. If the methods of food production remain the same,

eventually per capita production must decrease as population increases andper capita resources decrease. That decrease will continue until the average

farmer  produces  just  enough  food  to  raise  two  children,  at  which  point

population growth stops.

 


  Suppose that farming methods improve, so that productivity per acre goes

up by a factor of ten. The population begins to grow—let’s say fairly slowly,

with each family managing to raise 2.5 children (on average) to adulthood.

The population is growing 25 percent per generation. In ten generations—

about 250 years—the population has caught up with those improved methods.

Living standards are low again, and population growth stops. But 2.5 children

per family is by no means an especially high rate of population growth: In

colonial  America,  the  average  family  raised  more  than  7  children  to

adulthood.  At  that  rate,  population  growth  could  catch  up  with  a  tenfold

increase in productivity in just two generations.

 


The point is that even moderate rates of population growth can rapidly

catch  up  with  all  plausible  improvements  in  food  production.  Thus,

populations should spend most of the time near a Malthusian limit, and there

should be no lasting improvement in the standard of living. Malthus himself

pointed out that factors other than food shortages can also limit population.

Any negative factor that intensifies as population density increases can be the

limiting factor—starvation and malnutrition are not the only possibilities. The

key is which negative factor shows up at the lowest population density. We

believe that the nature of the key limiting factor—which is not necessarily the

same  in  all  human  populations—can  have  important  effects  on  human

evolution, including the recent changes we have been discussing.

 


One might imagine that some form of birth control could also effectively

limit population, but of course that only works if everyone adopts it. Even

smallish groups that do not limit their fertility will rapidly displace (in a few

centuries at most) those that do, which brings us back to where we started—a

trap  where  population  growth  and  limitations  on  population  growth  keep

pace,  causing  us  to  remain  near  the  Malthusian  limit  without  achieving

lasting improvements in standard of living. In the future, under a disciplined

world state, the imposition of birth control could conceivably invalidate theprinciple, as it could lower the rate of population growth and enable a higher

standard of living to take root, but birth control has certainly never worked

that way in the past.

 


War (defined broadly to include all kinds of interpersonal violence) might

limit population before starvation occurred if it increased strongly as human

density increased. If humans had been unable to form large, well-organized

societies, war might have saved us from penury: In fact, war probably has

been an important limiting factor in many species other than our own and was

probably important for early humans. But humans can cooperate, particularly

if there is something worth stealing. In a population with a storable surplus,

state  formation  eventually  limited  local  violence—and  peace  led  to  the

poorhouse.

 


  Infectious  disease  is  the  most  serious  rival  to  famine  as  a  population

limiter.  Certainly  the  two  can  work  together  and  often  have,  since

malnutrition can lead to reduced disease resistance, while infectious agents

can  reduce  work  output—and  thus  food  production.  Furthermore,  an

infectious disease made worse by population density, or one that killed even

well-fed people, could, in principle, be the key population-limiting factor in a

society. In such a situation, humans would generally have plenty of food, but

other  trade-offs  would  be  present.  There  would,  for  example,  be  weaker

selection for metabolic efficiency than in a classic famine-driven Malthusian

trap. Depending on how most of the people made a living, women might

become  self-supporting  and  have  a  reduced  need  for  paternal  investment.

There would be strong selection for resistance to the organism or organisms

responsible for that strong disease pressure.

 


Each  of  those  three  horsemen—war,  pestilence,  and  famine—has

dominated in different populations and time periods.

 


  Primitive  warfare  was  apparently  the  dominant  mechanism  limiting

population among most foragers before the development of agriculture in the

Neolithic period. Infectious disease must have mattered in hunting-gatheringsocieties, but its impact was mitigated by foragers’ low population density.

Strong climatic swings, such as major droughts or cold waves, must have

sometimes rapidly reduced the land’s carrying capacity and caused famine—

particularly  during  the  climatically  unstable  glacial  periods.  But,  judging

from  the  abundant  evidence  of  homicide  and  cannibalism  in  the

archaeological record, our guess is that local violence had a stronger effect. In

this sort of system, people were egalitarian, and it shows in the genes: The

fraction of men fathering the next generation seems to have been markedly

higher  than  in  agricultural  societies.  Infectious  disease,  in  particular

falciparum  malaria,  may  have  been  the  limiting  factor  in  tropical  Africa.

From what we know, it seems that until very recently population densities

stayed lower in Africa than in Europe, the Middle East, or East Asia. The

female-dominated farming system seen in much of Bantu Africa, in which

women  were  largely  self-supporting,  indicates  that  producing  food  was

fundamentally easier there than in most of Eurasia. In much of Eurasia, hard

work from two parents barely allowed break-even reproduction. Disease may

have limited the complexity of African state systems—but of course there

were many other factors, ranging from Africa’s relative isolation from rest of
                                                                    13
the Old World to elephants attacking the fields of pioneers.

 


In many parts of the Old World, particularly among farmers living under

strong  states,  famine  and  malnutrition  were  the  main  factors  limiting

population.  With  internal  peace,  population  rapidly  bumped  up  against

carrying capacity. In those societies, people living on the bottom rungs of

society were regularly short on food, so much so that they often couldn’t

raise  enough  children  to  take  their  place.  However,  elites  must  have  had

above-replacement fertility, and their less successful offspring would have

replaced the missing farmers. Gregory Clark, in A Farewell to Alms, shows

that in medieval England the richest members of society had approximately
                                                                      14
twice the number of surviving offspring as the poorest.  The bottom of

society did not reproduce itself, with the result that, after a millennium or so,

nearly everyone was descended from the wealthy classes. There is reason to

think that this happened in many places (eastern Asia and much of western

Europe,  for  example),  but  wealth  was  not  acquired  in  the  same  way

everywhere, so selection favored different traits in different societies.

                               UNDER THE YOKE


 


                                                                                      15
As Rousseau wrote, “Man was born free, and he is everywhere in chains.”

 


In the days before agriculture, governments didn’t really exist. Most of the

hunter-gatherers  were  egalitarian  anarchists:  They  didn’t  have  chiefs  or

bosses,  and  they  didn’t  have  much  use  for  anyone  who  tried  to  be  boss.

Bushmen today still laugh at wannabe “big men.” Perhaps we could learn

from them.

 


But farmers do have chiefs: It goes with the territory. Grain farmers store

food, and so they have something valuable to steal, which wasn’t the case

among hunter-gatherers. Elites, defined as those who live off the productive

work of others, came into existence in farming societies because they could.

Interestingly, some peoples seem to have curbed the growth of elites just by

growing root crops such as yams that rot quickly unless left in the ground,
                              16
and thus are hard to steal. Another point is that the strongest early states

often had natural barriers that made it difficult for “citizens” to escape the tax

collectors. Egypt, with a strip of very fertile land embedded in uninhabitable
                              17
desert, is a prime example.

 


Of course, once your neighbors form states, there’s pressure on your group

to do the same, both for self-defense and for the benefit of those locals who

will form the new elite. Today, practically everyone lives under some kind of

government.

 


  Once elites became possible, elite reproductive advantage kicked in. Thisis the most basic kind of class struggle—the struggle for existence—but it has

seldom been noticed by historians, or for that matter by the participants. It

could take various forms. In some cases, tremendous advantage accrued to a

single  male  lineage—it’s  good  to  be  the  king!  Researchers  have  found  a

surprisingly common form of Y chromosome in 8 percent of Ireland’s male

population. That Y chromosome is also fairly common in parts of Scotland

that  are  known  to  have  had  close  ties  with  Ireland,  and  among  the  Irish

diaspora. Worldwide, 2 million to 3 million men carry this chromosome, and

it appears to be the marker of direct male descent from Niall of the Nine

Hostages, a high king of Ireland around AD 400. For some 1,200 years (until
                                                                18
1609), his descendants held power in northern Ireland.

 


The most spectacular example is Genghis Khan, otherwise known as the

Scourge of God, the Master of Thrones and Crowns, the Perfect Warrior, and

Lord  of  All  Men.  About  800  years  ago,  Genghis  and  his  descendants

conquered everything from Peking to Damascus. Genghis knew how to have

a good time. Here’s his definition of supreme joy: “to cut my enemies to

pieces, drive them before me, seize their possessions, witness the tears of
                                                                        19
those dear to them, and embrace their wives and daughters!” It appears that

the last part of that list especially appealed to him. He and his sons and his

son’s  sons—the  Golden  Family—ruled  over  much  of  Asia  for  several

hundred years, tending to the harem throughout. In so doing, they made the

greatest of all genetic impacts. Today some 16 million men in central Asia

are his direct male descendants, as shown by their possession of a distinctive

Y chromosome. It just shows that one man can make a difference.

 


The  elite’s  reproductive  advantage  was  usually  less  concentrated.  For

example, we often see cases in which a relatively small band of conquerors

takes over a society and becomes the new elite. If that ruling elite has a strong

reproductive  advantage  and  doesn’t  intermarry  much  with  the  original

population, the average inhabitant may eventually be largely descended from

that elite, even without any obvious or deliberate genocide. This may have

happened when the Anglo-Saxons conquered England; although they were

greatly outnumbered by the existing Celtic speakers, they account for a large

fraction of the modern English gene pool. There is evidence of an apartheid-like social structure in early Anglo-Saxon England that would have furthered
          20
this trend.

 


If it was possible for individuals to move into and out of the elite, which

was  often  the  case,  traits  that  increased  the  probability  of  entry  and

continuing membership would have been favored by natural selection. This

could happen in any class that had above-replacement fertility, not just in a

ruling class. As long as there was significant gene flow, traits favored in that

class would tend to increase in the population as a whole, not just in the high-

fertility groups.

 


But if a high-fertility subpopulation was reproductively isolated (or nearly

so) for long enough, selective pressures specific to that social niche might

cause  them  to  evolve  in  an  unusual  direction  and  become  significantly

different from the surrounding population. We think this happened among the

Ashkenazi Jews, as we discuss at length in Chapter 7. Suffice it to say, for

now, that the kind of natural selection that occurred among the Ashkenazim

was possible because of the persistence over centuries of strong prohibitions

against intermarriage and an odd social niche in which certain traits conferred

high fertility. It’s a very unusual case, since few populations appear to have

experienced  the  long-lasting  reproductive  isolation  and  unusual  job  mix

required to get those results. There are all sorts of ways in which that process

could have been interrupted; it’s being interrupted now, for example, through

high rates of intermarriage between Jews and non-Jews and by changes in

fertility patterns.

 


  We’ve  said  that  the  top  dogs  usually  had  higher-than-average  fertility,

which  is  true,  but  there  have  been  important  exceptions.  Remember  that

rulers, then as now, made mistakes, had bad luck, and in fact often had no

idea  what  they  were  doing.  Sometimes  ruling  elites  lost  wars  and  were

replaced by outsiders, as in the Norman Conquest. Sometimes they got a little

too enthusiastic about slaughtering each other, as in the Wars of the Roses.

And often ruling elites just made bad choices—bad in terms of reproductive

fitness, that is. The most common mistake must have been living in cities,

which  have  almost  always  been  population  sinks,  mostly  because  ofinfectious disease. By “population sink,” we mean that city dwellers couldn’t

manage to raise enough children to break even: Cities in the past, before

modern medicine and civil engineering, could only maintain their population

with a continuing flow of immigrants from the surrounding countryside.

 


  Wealth could make up for the risks that cities presented, if the disease risk

wasn’t too bad—immunity to famine is an automatic perk of the ruling class,

and it’s worth quite a lot. But if disease risks were severe, even complete

immunity  from  famine  might  not  be  enough,  and  the  ruling  elite  would

gradually  disappear—it  may  not  have  been  obvious,  but  it  sometimes

happened.

 


The  disease  risks  of  cities  must  have  gotten  worse  with  time  as  new

pathogens adapted to humans and as civilizations separated by geographic

barriers made contact and exchanged pathogens (as happened to the Hittites).

We know, for example, that falciparum malaria did not always exist in Italy,
                                                                                          21
but arrived and spread gradually up the peninsula during classical times.

Smallpox was also a latecomer to Italy, and it’s possible that the addition of

those  two  mighty  diseases  turned  Rome  into  a  population  sink  for  the

empire’s elites.

 


  Sometimes  evolutionarily  bad  choices  on  the  part  of  a  ruling  class  are

obvious. In classical times, there was a plant called silphium that grew in a

narrow coastal strip of Cyrenaica, modern-day Libya. Its resin was used as a

contraceptive  and  abortifacient.  The  resin  appears  to  have  been  very

effective,  preventing  pregnancy  with  a  once-a-month  pea-sized  dose.

Silphium  eventually  became  too  popular  for  its  own  good.  Never

domesticated, it was overharvested as demand grew. As it became scarcer,

the price rose until it was worth its weight in silver, which drove further

overharvesting  and  eventually  led  to  one  of  the  first  human-caused

extinctions in recorded history. However, during the centuries in which it was

routinely used by the Greco-Roman upper classes, it must have noticeably

depressed fertility, unless they were throwing money out the window.

   Eventually,  in  some  populations,  elites  turned  into  governments  with  a

local monopoly of force. You would think that the resulting law and order

would have been good for the peasants. They were safer, since they were no

longer allowed to raid and be raided by their neighbors. This was a major

change, since pre-state warfare often killed a larger fraction of the population

than major modern wars do. Peasants still experienced war with external foes,

but the percentage killed by violence seems to have decreased. However,

since births and deaths still balanced, every decrease in death by violence was

counterbalanced by an increase in deaths caused by infectious disease (which

hit everybody, including elites) and starvation (peasants only). Government,

especially good government, eventually led to decreased standards of living,

at least in terms of calories.

 Man with the Hoe

       WE FOUGHT THE LAW (AND THE LAW WON)


 



If your ancestors were farmers for a long time, you’re descended from people

who decided it was better to live on their knees than to die on their feet.

 


  Farming led to elites, and there was no avoiding their power. Foragers

could walk away from trouble, but farms were too valuable (too important to

the farmers’ fitness) to abandon. So farmers had to submit to authority: The

old-style,  independent-minded  personalities  that  had  worked  well  among
                                                                                          22
egalitarian hunter-gatherers (“A Man’s a Man for a’ That”) were obsolete.

Even when some group had a chance to refound society on a more egalitarian

basis,  as  in  the  case  of  the  medieval  Iceland  republic,  elites  tended  to
        23
reappear.

 


  Aggressive, combative people may also have experienced lowered fitness

once ruling elites began to appear. With strong states, the personal payoff for

aggression  may  have  become  smaller,  while  law  and  order  made

combativeness  for  self-defense  less  necessary.  Sheer  crowding  must  also

have  disfavored  some  personality  traits  that  had  worked  in  the  past.

Intuitively, it seems that a high level of aggressiveness would be less favored

when encounters with strangers were frequent. Fight too often and you’re

sure to lose. Moreover, although the winner of a deadly struggle between two

peasants might conceivably gain something, his owners, the elites who taxed

both of those peasants, would not, any more than a farmer benefits when one

bull kills another.

 


  Farmers  don’t  benefit  from  competition  between  their  domesticated

animals or plants. In fact, reduced competition between individual membersof domesticated species is the secret of some big gains in farm productivity,

such  as  the  dwarf  strains  of  wheat  and  rice  that  made  up  the  “Green

Revolution.” Since the elites were in a very real sense raising peasants, just as

peasants  raised  cows,  there  must  have  been  a  tendency  for  them  to  cull

individuals who were more aggressive than average, which over time would

have  changed  the  frequencies  of  those  alleles  that  induced  such

aggressiveness. This would have been particularly likely in strong, long-lived

states, because situations in which rebels often won might well have favored

aggressive personalities. This meant some people were taming others, but

with  reasonable  amounts  of  gene  flow  between  classes,  populations  as  a

whole should have become tamer.

 


We know of a gene that may play a part in this story: the 7R (for 7-repeat)

allele  of  the  DRD4  (dopamine  receptor  D4)  gene.  It  is  associated  with

Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity  Disorder  (ADHD),  a  behavioral  syndrome

best characterized by actions that annoy elementary school teachers: restless-

impulsive behavior, inattention, distractibility, and the like.

 


The polymorphism is found at varying but significant levels in many parts

of the world, but is almost totally absent from East Asia. Interestingly, alleles

derived from the 7R allele are fairly common in China, even though the 7R

alleles  themselves  are  extremely  rare  there.  It  is  possible  that  individuals

bearing  these  alleles  were  selected  against  because  of  cultural  patterns  in

China. The Japanese say that the nail that sticks out is hammered down, but

in China it may have been pulled out and thrown away.

 


  Selection  for  submission  to  authority  sounds  unnervingly  like

domestication.  In  fact,  there  are  parallels  between  the  process  of

domestication  in  animals  and  the  changes  that  have  occurred  in  humans

during the Holocene period. In both humans and domesticated animals, we

see a reduction in brain size, broader skulls, changes in hair color or coat

color, and smaller teeth. As Dmitri Belyaev’s experiment with foxes shows,

some of the changes that are characteristic of domesticated animals may be

side effects of selection for tameness. As for humans, we know of a number

of recent changes in genes involving serotonin metabolism in Europeans thatmay well influence personality, but we don’t know what effect those changes

have  had—since  we  don’t  yet  know  whether  they  increase  or  decrease

serotonin levels. Floppy ears are not seen in any human population (as far as

we  know),  but  then,  changes  in  the  external  ear  might  interfere  with

recognition of speech sounds. Since speech is of great importance to fitness

in humans, it may be that the negative effects of floppy ears have kept them

from arising.

 


  Some of these favored changes could be viewed as examples of neoteny—

retention  of  childlike  characteristics.  Children  routinely  submit  to  their

parents—at least in comparison to teenagers—and it’s possible that natural

selection modified mechanisms active in children in ways that resulted in

tamer human adults, just as the behaviors of adult dogs often seem relatively

juvenile in comparison with adult wolf behavior.

 


If the strong governments made possible by agriculture essentially “tamed”

people, one might expect members of groups with shallow or nonexistent

agricultural experience to be less submissive, on average, than members of

longtime agricultural cultures. One possible indicator of tameness is the ease

with which people can be enslaved, and our reading of history suggests that

some peoples with little or no evolutionary exposure to agriculture “would

not endure the yoke,” as was said of Indians captured by the Puritans in the

Pequot War of 1636. In the same vein, the typical Bushman, a classic hunter-

gatherer, has been described as “the anarchist of South Africa.”

                             BOURGEOIS VIRTUES


 



Agriculture itself, and the particular form it took in state societies, must have

selected for personalities that can only be called bourgeois, characterized by

the traits that make a man successful rather than interesting. One such trait

was the ability to defer gratification for long periods of time. This was a

practical requirement for farmers, since they had to save a portion of their

crop for seed and some of their domesticated animals for breeding stock.

 


This wasn’t easy. Food was often shortest just before sowing, and those

early farmers had to abstain from eating the seed grain when they and their

families were hungriest. This is something that classic hunter-gatherers just

didn’t do: There was no way for them to store food effectively, so they either

consumed it on the spot or shared it with others. Foragers had no tradition of

self-denial and no inclination to deny themselves. They weren’t very good at

self-denial back in the early Neolithic period, and they aren’t very good at it

even today: Efforts to teach Bushmen to become herders frequently fail when

they  eat  all  their  goats.  People  can  learn  new  traditions,  but  genetic

differences must make this kind of self-denial easier for some people than it

is  for  others.  It  takes  a  certain  type  of  personality—with  traits  including

patience, self-control, and the ability to look to long-term benefits instead of

short-term satisfaction—and natural selection must have gradually made such

personalities more common among peoples that farmed for a long time.

 


  Agriculture also led to the birth of property. Among hunter-gatherers, there

hadn’t really been any. Although tribes sometimes claimed hunting grounds,

there  was  no  individual  ownership  of  land.  The  mobile  way  of  life  that

hunter-gatherers pursued kept them from accumulating much property other

than  some  personal  tools  and  weapons.  Farmers,  being  sedentary,  couldaccumulate domesticated animals, land, and other forms of property. This

became more practical and more important as states appeared and limited

local violence. Law and order allowed for population gains that increased the

scarcity and value of land. In some cases, governments made property safer

and more secure.

 


  Farmers could thus accumulate resources that increased their fitness and

that of their descendants—if they decided to do so, and if the state didn’t take

too much. But those choices didn’t come easily. Hunter-gatherers routinely

shared resources, partly in order to cement relations with other members of

the tribe, partly because there often wasn’t anything else to do with those

resources. Try eating a whole giraffe before the meat goes bad. Even with the

wife and kids helping, it can’t be done. The effective cost of sharing that meat

is zero. Foragers aren’t selfish.

 


  Farmers, in contrast, have to be selfish. At minimum, they can’t afford to

give away seed grain or breeding stock—not if they want to stay farmers.

More than that, farmers could gain increased fitness by being miserly, at least

in comparison to foragers.

 


And once there was property, laziness must have decreased. There were

many ways in which hard work could produce enduring assets that could

increase an individual’s fitness or that of his children and relatives. Farmers

could  save  to  buy  more  land  or  livestock.  They  could  build  long-lasting

improvements like buildings or irrigation works. This was not really possible

for hunter-gatherers—there was no way for them to accumulate wealth. If

they  had  full  stomachs  and  their  tools  and  weapons  were  in  good  shape,

hunter-gatherers  didn’t  work.  They  hung  out:  They  talked,  gossiped,  and

sang. They were lazy, and they should have been: Being lazy made biological

sense. They could usually obtain enough food fairly easily, since constant

local violence kept human numbers below the land’s carrying capacity. When

law and order let human density increase, farmers eventually had to work

harder and harder just to survive. Here again, selection must have favored

those odd people who like to work, even when there was enough to eat.

   Ultimately, this meant that both sexes had to work hard. In fact, for most

people, that became the only way to produce enough to feed and raise a

family.  That  pattern  is  not  universal.  In  situations  where  resources  are

abundant, men sometimes do little work. Men working hard to feed their

families—“high  paternal  investment,”  we  call  it—is  common  among

contemporary hunter-gatherers and may well have been a standard feature of

the ancestors of all modern humans. Women bring in most of the calories in

such societies (from plant foods), at least in warm climates, but the meat

contributed by male hunters is a vital source of protein and other essential

nutrients.

 


  However, the grueling labor required of peasants in well-governed states—

inevitable when local violence no longer keeps the population well below

carrying capacity—takes this to another level entirely. Since a hardworking

husband was essential, in some cultures the practice of dowry arose, so that a

farmer with assets could buy his daughter a productive husband—making

dowries yet another way of using property to increase fitness.

 


  Given  a  stable  government  and  reasonably  low  taxes,  self-denying

individuals  could  make  wealth  generate  more  wealth.  In  many  early

civilizations, the real interest rate was around 10 percent per year, a rate high

enough that anyone who managed to put some money aside as savings would,

after a few decades, be able to kick back and relax a bit. At that point men

were  too  old  to  truly  enjoy  that  income,  but  it  could  still  increase  their

children’s fitness, and so selection may have favored that kind of behavior.

As  “time  preference”  declined  (that  is,  as  propensity  toward  delay  of

gratification increased), interest rates eventually fell as more and more people

saved rather than spending any spare money.

 


  Agriculture in Malthusian conditions must have also favored individuals

who were metabolically efficient and could produce the maximum work for a

given amount of food. Among hunter-gatherers the selective pressures were

different—in  their  way  of  life,  bursts  of  strength  in  war  or  hunting  were

relatively  more  important.  We  see  differences  in  the  gene  alpha-actinin-3

(ACTN3) that may reflect this. The gene has two forms—one that produces aprotein that is active in fast-twitch muscles, and one that produces no protein

at all. The intact version of the gene increases muscle power and is noticeably

more common among world-class sprinters than in the rest of the population;

the  other  version  of  the  gene  increases  aerobic  efficiency  and  endurance.

Gene-engineered  mice  with  the  endurance  version  of  ACTN3  can  run  33
                                                                          24
percent farther than standard lab mice before exhaustion sets in. Both forms

of ACTN3 are found in all populations, but the endurance form appears to

have become more common since the advent of agriculture in Europe. We

suspect that it made peasant farmers more productive.

 


At  first,  all  these  pro-agricultural  behaviors  must  have  run  against  the

grain: It’s unlikely that humans were comfortable doing things that had never

made sense in the past. But over time, alleles that induced this kind of ant-

like  behavior  must  have  increased  in  frequency,  until  eventually,  after

millennia, selfish, hardworking, self-denying people were far more common

than  they  had  been  among  hunter-gatherers.  Acting  like  ants  rather  than

grasshoppers  didn’t  improve  the  average  standard  of  living  over  the  long

haul, since the world was Malthusian, but farmers who worked harder than

average and saved more than their neighbors would have had higher-than-

average  fitness.  Eventually  there  must  have  been  many  people  with

personality types that hadn’t existed at all among our forager ancestors.

                           MONEY AND MARKETS


 



In Narrow  Roads  of  Gene  Land,  theoretical  biologist  William  Hamilton

wrote, “It seems to me that there are some aspects of innate intelligence that

civilization  steadily  promotes.  Mercantile  operations,  for  example,  are  an

inseparable part of Old World civilizations and need complex models in the

minds of their operators, just as military ventures do. The main difference is

more emphasis on prudence and less on daring. It is probable that civilization

has given steady selection for the intelligence needed for this mercantile kind
                              25
of preparatory modeling.”

 


  Agriculture would have selected for traits that enable people to engage

successfully in trade: A farmer able to sell his wheat at a higher price than the

other wheat farmers or to make more advantageous trades would have been

more successful and better able to support a large family. And so salesmen,

businessmen, and financiers were born.

 


If this theory is correct, we would not expect populations that have never

experienced such pressures, or that have only experienced them for limited

periods and to a limited degree, to be very successful in such activities today.

Groups that became agriculturalists relatively recently, or not at all, are slow

to master important new social and technical developments. This is the case

for the Amerindians, and it underlies a current wave of discontent with liberal

economic policies in South America.

 


  Along  the  same  line,  the  well-known  middleman  minorities,  such  as

Armenians, Jews, Lebanese, Parsees, Indians in East Africa, and Chinese in

Southeast  Asia,  are  all  descended  from  long-established  agriculturalpopulations. Evidently, a long history of getting and spending does not lay

waste your power.

                                 MODERN TIMES


 



The  kind  of  gradual,  directional  biological  change  we’ve  outlined  should

have generated historical trends. These trends wouldn’t necessarily have been

monotonic, but over time, to the extent that the underlying biological changes

favored certain kinds of societies and organizations, those kinds of societies

and  organizations  would  have  become  more  common.  Ultimately,  some

populations  may  have  changed  enough  to  allow  some  social  patterns  to

prevail that couldn’t have worked at all in long-ago societies. More exactly,

those patterns could only exist in populations that had been reshaped over

millennia by the selective pressures associated with hierarchical agricultural

societies.

 


The  fact  that  there  is  undoubtedly  a  lot  of  overlap  between  the

psychologies  of  different  populations  does  not  mean  that  the  same  social

patterns  and  the  same  kinds  of  organizations  are  always  possible.  The

distribution of personality traits also matters.

 


For example, a high-trust society can largely avoid some costs—in modern

terms, they could leave their doors unlocked and wouldn’t worry much about

corruption. All else equal, they’d be more effective in war than societies with

less trust among their own members, since they wouldn’t suspect betrayal at

every setback. A different society, one in which 20 percent of the population

practiced  cheater  strategies,  would  have  to  spend  a  lot  of  resources  on

punishment and prevention. Certain activities that required a high degree of

mutual trust might be effectively impossible.

 


So a population in which no personality was truly alien (one in whicheveryone  resembled  some  character  in  Shakespeare,  for  example)  might

generate a qualitatively different civilization because the mix of personality

types differed from ours. A society that had many more Hamlets than ours

might never accomplish anything at all.

 


We have two ways of looking for social patterns favored by recent natural

selection. The most obvious is to look for patterns whose frequency changed

over time. In the strongest examples, such patterns would be rare or unknown

until some point in history, possibly quite recently. This can be difficult to

do, though, because in many cases we simply do not have much information

about ancient civilizations. For example, we doubt that the Indus civilization

had  a  bicameral  legislature,  an  independent  judiciary,  and  a  written

constitution—but since we can’t read their script, how can anyone know?

The other way is to exchange time for space: to look at contemporary peoples

that have never lived as peasants, or have done so for a considerably shorter

period  of  time  than  Europeans,  East  Asians,  and  Middle  Easterners,  then

check to see what social patterns and institutions (if any) do not flourish in

those  populations.  Although  this  method  can  be  more  controversial  than

looking at the earliest civilizations, it does have one advantage in that recent

history is at least well documented.

 


The relative ease with which old agricultural civilizations (many of them,

anyhow) have managed to adopt complex new technologies and forms of

social organization, compared to populations that have had less experience

with  agriculture  and  dense  hierarchical  societies,  suggests  that  gradual

biological changes in cognition and personality played a key role in the birth

of the industrial and scientific revolutions.

 


  Jared Diamond observed in Guns, Germs, and Steel that “the nations rising

to new power are still ones that were incorporated thousands of years ago into

the old centers of dominance based on food production, or that have been

repopulated by people from those centers. . . . Prospects for world dominance

of  sub-Saharan  Africans,  Aboriginal  Australians,  and  Native  Americans
                                                                                          26
remain dim. The hand of history’s course at 8000 BC lies heavily on us.”

But what kind of experience are we talking about? Diamond asserts that suchdifferences were entirely cultural, that is to say, learned—but if this were so,

populations that missed out on these experiences could in principle catch up

rapidly. After all, culture is learned anew every generation, so presumably

new  technologies  and  new  forms  of  social  organization  that  had  proved

successful in other countries could be adopted over two or three generations,

just as most farmers in many countries have become city dwellers over a few

generations.  Yet  economists  have  shown  that  the  age  of  the  transition  to

agriculture  appears  to  have  a  strong  influence  on  a  country’s  economic

development  in  recent  decades,  even  after  controlling  for  many  other
      27
factors. It’s hard to see how this could be due to cultural effects. Even if a

nation could learn from experiences their ancestors had back in the Bronze

Age and benefit from them (which sounds unlikely), why can’t everyone else

learn those same lessons? Why would those experiences confer a relative

advantage? On the other hand, genetic changes that accommodated people to

a  dense  hierarchical  society  could  easily  have  developed  over  those

millennia, and genetic information can’t easily be transferred—yet.

 


If  the  root  causes  of  these  differences  are  biological  changes  affecting

cognitive  and  personality  traits,  changes  that  are  the  product  of  natural

selection acting over millennia, conventional solutions to the problem of slow

modernization among peoples with shallow experience of farming are highly

problematic.  And  yet,  methods  based  on  an  understanding  of  underlying

biological  causes  might  be  very  effective.  It’s  entirely  possible  that  such

methods  would  turn  those  prospects  of  world  dominance  around,  which

would certainly liven things up.

 


The new social patterns we find most intriguing are those that have led to

greatly increased rates of innovation in the past few centuries—usually called

the  scientific  and  industrial  revolution.  Some  argue  that  gradual  genetic

changes could not be responsible for such rapid social changes. We don’t call

them revolutions without reason. We believe, however, that these arguments

are mistaken. Consider an example in which an allele affecting behavior had

a frequency of 20 percent and a 6 percent selective advantage in a European

population in 1500—we know that there are many sweeping alleles with a

selective advantage in that range. Over the next 300 years, the frequency of

that allele would have doubled, and going from 20 percent to 40 percentcould be a significant change, enough to give European society in 1800 some

new capability or tendency.

 


  Such a favored allele takes about a millennium to increase by a factor of

ten. When its frequency is 1 in 100,000, 1 in 10,000, or even 1 in 1,000, that

allele has no social impact: But when the frequency changes from 1 percent

to 10 percent, the allele starts to make itself felt. When it increases from 10

percent to 50 percent in less than a millennium, its impact could be dramatic.

 


  Modest biological changes might also trigger dramatic social changes by

crossing some threshold, just as a tiny increase in temperature can turn ice

into  water.  Such  changes  (ice  into  water,  water  into  steam,  graphite  into

diamond)  are  called phase  transitions  .  There  may  be  analogous  social

transitions. Picture an army in the middle of a battle, one that’s not going

very well. Soldiers are beginning to run away—first a few, then more. Those

who are still fighting suspect that their chance of victory is rapidly decreasing

as more and more of their comrades leave, and as the odds grow worse, more

and  more  soldiers  flee.  This  accelerates  until  the  army  completely

disintegrates, with every soldier trying to save himself. A small change in the

battle situation has transformed a highly organized, functional army into a

mob.  Depending  on  the  mix  of  personality  types  in  that  army,  such

disintegration  could  range  from  unlikely  to  virtually  inevitable,  and  the

difference between those mixes might not be all that large. Cultural factors

could influence the probability of that kind of social transition, but so could

biological influences on personality.

 


It is also likely that some significant activities had effective thresholds,

such that only individuals with atypical traits could perform them. It’s easy to

imagine a boulder so heavy that only a few of the strongest men could lift it,

but then it’s also easy to imagine a puzzle so difficult that only a few people

could solve it, or a song with notes so high that only a few people could sing

it. In such situations, outliers are important.

 


  Many  traits  are  distributed  approximately  in  a  bell  curve,  or  “normaldistribution.” This is the shape that describes most of us being middling, a

few of us being a bit different from average, and a tiny number of us being

quite a lot different from average. The average height among men in the

United  States,  for  example,  is  about  5  feet  9  inches,  while  the  standard

deviation (the typical difference between two U.S. men chosen at random) is

about 3 inches. This means that about two-thirds of men are between 5 feet 6

inches and 6 feet tall, with about a sixth over 6 feet. As we go further from

the norm, we find fewer and fewer individuals: About 1 in 50 are over 6 feet

3 inches, while one in 770 are over 6 feet 6 inches. The fraction above a

threshold falls off more and more rapidly as we increase the threshold. Now

consider another, shorter population—let’s say that the average height of men

in this population is 5 feet 6 inches, one standard deviation below the average

height  of  American  men.  There  is  substantial  overlap  between  the  two

populations, but the difference in the frequency of Eastwoods becomes very

large: Men taller than 6 feet 6 inches will be more than forty times rarer in the

shorter group than in the U.S. sample.

 


The point here is that a modest difference in the mean of some trait can

have a tremendous effect on the frequency with which members of a group

exceed  a  high  threshold.  If  some  important  cultural  task  can  only  be

accomplished by individuals who are unusually good at solving certain kinds

of puzzles, then the course of cultural evolution may change radically with

modest  changes  in  the  group’s  average  puzzle-solving  ability.  There  are

many other factors that might influence such events, but a difference in mean

ability due to genetic differences is one of them. And both of these factors—

social phase transitions and increases in the frequency of people with specific

talents—may have played a part in the birth of modern science.

 


  Science  as  we  know  it  got  its  official  start  in  Europe  in  the  sixteenth

century with the publication of Copernicus’s work De revolutionibus in 1543.

The closest thing to modern science seen before that would have been the

protoscience  practiced  by  the  Greek  and,  later,  Arab  civilizations—but

they’re not that close. The productivity and intensity of modern science far

outshines  earlier  efforts.  Some  of  the  most  important  European  scientists,

such  as  Isaac  Newton,  James  Clerk  Maxwell,  and  Charles  Darwin,  made

larger intellectual contributions as individuals than other entire civilizationsdid over a period of centuries.

 


We believe that science requires communication and cooperation between

people who are unusually good at (and interested in) puzzle-solving. Science

is  a  social  enterprise,  and  scientists  never  truly  work  alone:  They  always

build on the work of others. It was Newton who said, “If I have seen further it

is by standing on the shoulders of Giants,” and he ought to have known. So

the number of such people, and their social connections, is crucial to the

progress of science. We also know that modest differences in mean ability

can have a big effect on how common such people are.

 


You see, there can also be phase transitions in connectivity. Imagine that

the average budding scientist in Europe in 1450 knew a few other people like

himself. Those acquaintances knew others, but since such people were rare,

the potential scientists of Europe fell into small, isolated groups rather than a

single connected community. There was no efficient way for new ideas and

discoveries to spread. We are positing that as the frequency of such people

increased, there was a sharp transition at a certain critical value. Suddenly all

groups  connected,  and  there  was  a  path  between  any  two  members.

Something similar happens in epidemiology: If the number and density of

vulnerable individuals exceeds a certain threshold, the infectious disease is

certain to spread to the entire community. Below that threshold, the disease is

confined to a small cluster of people and dies out.

 


  Thus,  the  scientific  “revolution”  may  well  have  resulted  from  modest

changes in gene frequencies affecting key psychological traits. What traits

would have favored the birth of science? Increases in abstract reasoning or

numerical abilities might have helped, and it’s possible that those traits were

favored by selection in complex, hierarchical societies. Generally, though, we

think there was no direct selection favoring creativity itself, and that creative

individuals are accidental by-products of selection for other traits, traits that

really did pay off in everyday life, such as low time preference and the ability

to make complex mental models.

 Our view is in sharp contrast to those who have argued that creativity

conferred fitness benefits. It has been shown that poets are unusually likely to
                        28
be  manic-depressive.  Building  on  this,  others  have  argued  that  alleles

underlying manic-depression should have increased in frequency because of
                                                                            29
the social rewards received by poets and other creative artists. Of course,

few people carrying those alleles had a chance to be poets: Most (in recent

millennia) must have been hardscrabble farmers, and it’s hard to see how

manic-depression could have been an advantage in that situation.

 


In fact, poets have seldom received large rewards, and their fitness has

often been low—particularly among those with manic-depression, as a result

of  its  high  suicide  risk.  More  generally,  creativity  seldom  confers  large

fitness advantages, because good new ideas can be rapidly copied by others.

The copiers receive the fitness benefits without paying the associated costs.

In fact, it’s been obvious for a long time that innovators seldom harvest much

of  the  benefit  generated  by  their  innovations.  Public  policy  has  aimed  at

increasing those rewards—for example, through patent systems and public

support  of  scientific  research.  Such  support  is  limited  and  fairly  recent,

however,  and  over  the  long  run  of  human  history  and  prehistory,  direct

selection for creativity seems unlikely.

 


  Technical and social factors must have been important in increasing social

connectivity:  Better  transportation,  regular  mail  services,  and  the  printing

press, for example, played essential roles. Although inventions such as the

printing press were undoubtedly important, they seem to have been necessary

rather than sufficient, since science either does not exist or is appallingly

feeble in the majority of the world’s populations, even among those that have

access  to  those  favorable  technological  factors.  If  a  region  or  population

produces  major  advances  in  knowledge,  science  there  is  real  and  alive,

otherwise not. By that standard, science does not exist in sub-Saharan Africa

or in the Islamic world today. As Pervez Hoodbhoy (head of the physics

department in Islamabad) has written, “No major invention or discovery has
                                                                                30
emerged from the Muslim world for well over seven centuries now.”

 


  Although we do not as yet fully understand the true causes of the scientificand  industrial  revolution,  we  must  now  consider  the  possibility  that

continuing  human  evolution  contributed  to  that  process.  It  could  explain

some of the odd historical patterns that we see. For example, if people hadn’t

yet changed enough, the failure of Hellenistic science to take off may have

been  inevitable.  In  addition,  such  ideas  may  help  explain  why  some

populations with an early start on agriculture and state formation have found

it easy to participate in these revolutions, while those with late starts have

not. In particular, we think that the story of the Ashkenazi Jews, many of

whom  have  played  important  parts  in  the  later  phases  of  those  two

revolutions, was shaped by this kind of evolution—evolution over historical

time.

                                             5

 



                                  GENE FLOW

                               GENETIC HISTORY


 



Geneticists have traditionally traced the flow of genes in order to study the

movements and origins of peoples. They’ve studied particular variants of the

Y chromosome in an attempt to determine which ethnic group in Asia is most
                                        1
closely related to the Amerindians. They’ve tried to determine the extent to

which  modern  Europeans  are  descended  from  ancient  Europeans  of  the

Upper Paleolithic period who adopted farming, or from Neolithic immigrants
                        2
from the Middle East. Researchers have used mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)

and Y-chromosome data to determine which groups contributed maternal and

paternal ancestry to a mixed population—they have determined, for example,

that  most  Mexican  Y  chromosomes  are  of  Spanish  origin,  whereas  most
                                      3
Mexican mtDNA is Amerindian. They have tried to analyze other ancient

population movements in this way as well, most notably the original human

expansion out of Africa.

 


  There are two ways of looking at these types of informative gene variants.

In  the  kind  of  analysis  conducted  to  determine  paternal  and  maternal

ancestral lines, on the one hand, researchers are only interested in these gene

variants as markers of past population movement and admixture rather than

in the functions of the variants themselves. The assumption is that one Y

chromosome functions just like any other and that all mtDNA variants have

the same properties: That is to say, they’re neutral. But if their properties

varied—if the bearers of some Y-chromosome variants had noticeably higher

fitness than those bearing other variants—this whole brand of analysis would

be  thrown  into  question,  particularly  when  used  to  look  far  back  into

prehistory.

 


  We, on the other hand, are interested in alleles because of their effects,precisely because they do make a difference. Generally, we’re interested in

how  population  movements  and  admixture  have  helped  to  spread  new

adaptive variants rather than in how using the variants can help us to track the

movements.

 


  Every new mutation, including any rare but important beneficial mutation,

starts out as a single copy in one individual. It’s local. If it’s going to be

important, if it’s ever going to influence a significant fraction of the human

species, it must first spread. Looking at the bigger picture, we can see that the

flood of favorable mutations involved in the recent acceleration of human

evolution will have major impacts only if they spread widely. Presumably, if

our theories are correct, many of them are still in the midst of sweeping

through large segments of our world population. This means that the average

person today bears many of these new favorable mutations. You are, most

likely,  significantly  different  genetically  from  your  ancestors  of  a  few

thousand years ago. And although natural selection hardly operates in a way

guaranteed  to  maximize  our  convenience,  it  is  still  the  case  that  many

adaptive changes have welcome results. It’s hard to argue against something

that keeps you alive.

                         BREEDING LIKE RABBITS


 



The settler Thomas Austin released 24 wild rabbits on his Australian farm,

called  Barwon  Park,  in  1859,  and  some  other  Australian  farmers  later

followed his example. Rabbits are sexually mature at about six months, and

they have a 31-day gestation period. Given a favorable environment, rabbits

can easily increase their population fourfold in a year. Try to imagine the

growth of the rabbit population in Australia: first 24 rabbits, then 100 rabbits

after  a  year,  20,000  in  five  years,  and  25  million  after  ten  years.  That’s

roughly  what  happened:  At  the  end  of  ten  years,  shooting  or  trapping  2

million a year had no noticeable effect on their population.

 


At first growth was slow—an increase of 75 in a year doesn’t sound that

impressive, not in a country the size of the lower 48. But growth speeded up

as  the  rabbit  population  increased.  Another  way  of  putting  it  is  that  the

percentage of growth per year stayed the same, but that the percentage was

multiplied by a larger and larger population as time passed. A process that at

first  seemed  unimpressive  left  a  whole  continent  literally  swarming  with

rabbits in a single decade. It took only two or three times longer to fill a

continent with rabbits than it had to fill a single farm.

 


A favorable allele, such as the one that confers lactose tolerance, spreads in

much the same way, although the process takes thousands of years, largely

because human generations are much longer than rabbit generations. But for

a sweep to happen rapidly, the population must be “well mixed.” This is not

always  the  case,  because  mixing  genes  over  long  distances—over  rivers,

mountains,  deserts,  and  oceans,  or  through  hostile  tribes—is  far  from

automatic. Sometimes it happened, sometimes it didn’t. These sweeps were

strongly influenced by history—and they influenced history right back.                           HOW A SWEEP BEGINS


 



Every selective sweep starts out as a change in the DNA of a sperm or egg.

Such changes can be caused by chemicals, radiation, or just random jostling

of  molecules—but  what  matters  to  us  is  that  such  changes  do  occur.

Mutations favorable enough to initiate a sweep are extremely rare. One set of

human DNA has about 3 billion nucleotides, and an average person has about

100 new mutations. Most of those changes are in DNA that apparently does

nothing at all—only 2 percent of our DNA does anything (as far as we know)

—but on average, two or three of those mutations affect functional DNA.

Still, they do not usually make a significant difference, either in a positive or

a negative way.

 


  When a mutation does make a significant difference, the effect is almost

always  negative:  Random  changes  in  an  incredibly  complex  piece  of

machinery are likely to screw things up. Sometimes a change in a single

nucleotide can kill or cause serious disability. For example, achondroplasia,

the  most  common  kind  of  dwarfism,  is  caused  by  a  change  in  a  single

nucleotide on chromosome 6—almost always the same exact change. Such

negative alleles never become common: Their bearers have fewer children

than  average,  so  there  will  be  fewer  copies  in  the  next  generation.  Very

rarely,  a  mutation  happens  that  has  a  positive  effect—a  good  difference.

These rare but supremely important events are the raw material of evolution.

                             LIMONE SUL GARDA


 



In 1980, Italian researchers found that a man from Limone sul Garda (a small

lakeside  village  in  northern  Italy)  had  very  low  levels  of  HDL  (“good”

cholesterol)  and  high  levels  of  triglycerides,  yet  showed  no  sign  of  heart

disease.  Both  of  his  parents  had  lived  to  advanced  ages.  Their  curiosity

whetted, the researchers performed blood tests on all 1,000 inhabitants of

Limone and found a total of 43 people with this same unusual blood-lipid

profile.  The  local  church  had  birth  records  going  back  centuries,  and  the

researchers were able to determine that all those individuals could trace their

ancestry back to the same couple (Giovanni Pomaroli and Rosa Giovaneli),
                              4
who had married in 1780. This genealogical pattern suggested that these

villagers shared a mutation, which turned out to be a change in the protein

called  ApoA-I  (Apolipoprotein  A-I),  a  major  component  of  high-density

lipoprotein (HDL). ApoA-I helps to clear cholesterol from arteries, but this

variant, ApoA-I (M for Milano), apparently does a considerably better job
                M

of it. A change in a single nucleotide modified an amino acid in the protein,

completely changing its chemical action.

 Limone sul Garda

 


  ApoA-I is much more effective at scouring out arteries than the standard
          M

version  of  the  protein  is,  and  carriers  have  substantial  protection  against

atherosclerosis. They have a much-reduced risk of heart attacks and strokes,
                                                5
and they often reached an advanced age. Not only that, these effects of the

ApoA-I mutation have been duplicated in mice, and it protects them against
        M
                        6
artery plaque as well. Preliminary tests show that intravenously administered

synthetic  ApoA-I  actually  shrinks  preexisting  artery  plaque  in  humans:
                    M

Nothing else we know of does that.

 


  Judging from the records we have, this mutation seems to have increased

in  number,  from  1  copy  to  43  in  ten  generations.  Chance  and  general

population growth must have played a role, but let’s suppose that freedom

from  heart  attacks  and  strokes  is  driving  a  gradual  increase.  What  would

happen if it were given several thousand years to expand? 


  Let’s say that its true advantage—the long-term average—is 7 percent, so

that carriers raise 7 percent more children than average. In that case, you’d

expect most Europeans to have a copy in 6,000 years or so. This assumes, of

course,  that  Europe  will  still  exist  thousands  of  years  from  now,  that  we

won’t have developed a universal cure for atherosclerosis in the meantime,

and  that  the  robots  won’t  have  taken  over  first.  We  know  the  future  is

uncertain—bear with us.

 


  Success in 6,000 years is nothing to hold your breath about, but the point is

that mutations with a similar advantage that started in a single village at the

dawn of recorded history have had time to become common in just this way.

That estimate assumes that genes (and people) are well mixed, but that’s

clearly not the case in Limone sul Garda. The village is quite isolated: The

mountains and the lake hem it in, and there wasn’t even a road until the

1930s. Such isolation doesn’t make the occurrence of a favorable mutation

more or less likely, but the concentration of carriers in one village may have

made them easier to notice. However, it certainly interferes with the spread of

the gene.

 


So how did a favorable mutation spread thousands of years ago?

                           THE GIRL NEXT DOOR


 



Few villages today are as geographically isolated as Limone: Most have other

villages  fairly  close  to  them,  and  generally  there’s  traffic  between  them.

People make frequent visits to these places close to home. The simplest and

oldest mechanism of gene flow—marrying someone from the next village

over—therefore still prevails. More often than not, this has meant women

leaving their homes to join their husbands’ communities, an ancient pattern

that we still see in chimpanzees. This village-to-village contact has been a

factor in gene flow ever since people settled in villages, and it has been one

of the most important ways in which favorable alleles have spread. Given

time,  neighborhood  marriages  can  carry  an  allele  thousands  of  miles.  A

beneficial  allele  originating  in  one  band  or  village  could,  through  such

intermarriage,  gradually  spread  to  neighboring  populations,  and  then  to

neighbors’ neighbors, and so on. Alleles with a big advantage would spread

more rapidly than alleles with a small advantage.

 


In any case, with some simplifying assumptions, it’s possible to model the

spread of an adaptive allele with a mathematical formula. In that model, the

frequency of the favored allele spreads in the form of a wave with a constant

speed.  The  speed  depends  on  the  selective  advantage  and  the  root-mean-

square distance separating the parents’ and the child’s birthplaces. If we call

that marital distance σ and the selective advantage of the allele s, the speed of

advance is approximately σ ×(2s)½ miles per generation.

 


  Hunter-gatherers can be amazingly mobile, and since most recent hunter-

gatherers were spread very thinly, there often were no girls next door. So

hunter-gatherers, especially in sparsely settled areas, had to find mates at a

considerable  distance.  A  generation  ago,  when  many  Bushmen  were  stillwandering freely, their average marital distance was over 40 miles. This may

not  have  been  typical  in  prehistory.  In  the  days  before  agriculture,  when

everybody  and  his  brother  was  a  hunter-gatherer,  most  lived  in  choice

territories, not in the marginal habitats like the Kalahari Desert where that

way of life has persisted. Population density would have been higher in those

conditions  than  among  Bushmen  today,  and  people  may  not  have  had  to

search so far for a mate. However, it is clear that agriculture eventually led to

crowding.  Peasant  farmers  usually  marry  people  living  nearby,  not  least

because  there are  plenty  of  people  living  nearby  to  choose  from.  In  an

example  discussed  by  Alan  Fix,  based  on  census  records  from  a  densely

settled part of rural England about 150 years ago, the average marital distance
                        7
was only 6 or 7 miles.

 


  Consider a new allele that has an advantage of 5 percent. In a well-mixed

population  it  would  rise  to  high  frequency  in  about  8,000  years.  Among

hunter-gatherers like the Bushmen, it might spread 9 miles per generation, on

average, and among farmers, about 1 or 2 miles per generation. Since the

preponderance of recent evolution seems to have been driven by the changes

associated  with  agriculture,  the  1.5  miles  per  generation  you’d  expect  in

farmers would be a good estimate. So in the 400 generations since the birth of

agriculture  (at  twenty-five  years  per  generation),  a  gene  with  a  5  percent

advantage would have moved out about 600 miles.

 


  Although this way of spreading genes is simple, universal, and easy to

understand, it’s not the only way, and it’s slow. When you run the numbers,

it’s hard to see how it can carry alleles as far as they have actually traveled in

the time available. There is a similar problem in understanding the spread of

oak trees in England. Some 15,000 years ago, back in the Ice Age, oak trees

were extinct there, or nearly so—oak trees just don’t grow very well under

thousands of feet of ice. Possibly a few hung on in protected southern river

valleys. Yet today they’re all over the island—a fine thing, no doubt, but how

did they manage it? Oaks shouldn’t spread very fast for the simple reason that

the acorn doesn’t fall far from the tree.

 


The answer is that unusual events took place often enough for oak trees tospread faster than would have been possible if all the acorns stayed near their

trees. Occasionally a bird carried an acorn far ahead of the main wave of

advance and started a new oak forest. An acorn might have floated a long

way  down  a  river  and  sprouted.  Maybe  some  of  the  first  humans  who

resettled Britain after the ice melted took some acorns with them on a long

hunting trip north and dropped a few. The speed of advance is determined

more by these rare, long-distance events than by gravity and squirrels.

 


So although local marriage is a big part of the story, rarer, weirder, more

complicated  events  most  likely  determined  the  speed  of  advance  of  new

favorable alleles in humans.

                         BARRIERS TO GENE FLOW


 



Of course, there were a few major factors that blocked or slowed gene flow

over the past few millennia.

 


The Atlantic and Pacific oceans were important barriers. There was very

little  contact  between  the  peoples  of  the  Old  and  New  Worlds  before

Columbus.  Australia  was  much  easier  to  reach  from  Indonesia  or  New

Guinea than the Americas were. There were definitely visiting sailors from

Indonesia  fishing  for  sea  cucumbers  along  the  north  coast  of  Australia

beginning around 1720. There must have been other early contacts, but the

amount  of  gene  flow  was  not  large,  judging  from  what  we  know  of  Y-
                                                                      8
chromosome and mtDNA variants in Australian Aborigines. The north coast

did not attract settlers from Indonesia or Southeast Asia, probably because

that coast was unsuited to their forms of agriculture. Moreover, new alleles

that  were  adaptive  in  the  context  of  agriculture  may  not  have  had  an

advantage in Australia: Even if some were introduced, they may not have

spread widely.

 


  Deserts mattered. There was plenty of gene flow between North Africa and

the  other  lands  surrounding  the  Mediterranean,  particularly  after  the

development  of  sailing  ships,  but  the  Sahara  certainly  interfered  with

movement to and from sub-Saharan Africa. The block wasn’t absolute. The

Sahara was a much friendlier environment in the early Neolithic than it is

today.  Later,  the  domestication  of  the  camel  favored  trans-Saharan  trade,

while the European and Arab slave trade eventually brought African alleles to

other parts of the world.

   Still, we know that the amount of gene flow into sub-Saharan Africa was

limited in the past, since several local mutations that cause lactose tolerance

became common among the cattle-raising peoples in the Sudan and Ethiopia,

even though the European version is considerably older. If there had been

much gene flow into sub-Saharan Africa back then, the European mutation

would most likely have dominated. In fact, if even one person carrying that

European allele had successfully settled in the Sudan back in the Bronze Age,

he would have had a fair chance of introducing it, as a kind of genetic Johnny

Appleseed. The Sahara Desert made such contacts rare, but it may also be

that tropical diseases such as malaria and yellow fever interfered, just as they

later interfered with European colonization attempts. The local sub-Saharan

Africans  had  enough  resistance  to  those  diseases  to  get  by,  but  outsiders

generally did not.

 


  Most mountain ranges affect gene flow but aren’t impassable enough to

substantially block it. The Himalayas, however, are an exception. Judging

from the limited information we have today, it seems that India shares a fair

number of favored new alleles with Europe and the Middle East, but has

mixed far less with China. Since the Himalayas are the tallest mountains on

earth, backed by the Tibetan Plateau, it’s possible to believe that they greatly

reduced gene flow between India and China, and ultimately between east and

west Eurasia.

 


  Other people getting in the way must have been one of the most powerful

forces  slowing  gene  flow.  Many  alleles  that  helped  people  adjust  to

agriculture probably came into existence in the Middle East, since agriculture

began there. When we consider the ways in which those alleles could have

reached  western  Europe,  where  agriculture  developed  later,  it’s  worth

remembering that it only takes a few months to walk that entire distance. If

that happened often, you’d expect genes to have spread far more rapidly than

they  actually  did.  The  problem  is  that  would-be  long-distance  travelers

quickly encountered other groups that spoke a different language and had

uncongenial  customs.  Some  were  enemies,  and  all  were  suspicious  of

strangers. Passing through other groups was very difficult, so long-distance

land travel was almost impossible.

 In The  Third  Chimpanzee,  Jared  Diamond  describes  this  pattern  in

highland New Guinea, one of the last places in the world to make contact

with outsiders. He wrote, “When I was living among Elopi tribespeople in

west New Guinea and wanted to cross the territory of the neighboring Fayu

tribe in order to reach a nearby mountain, the Elopis explained to me matter-

of-factly  that  the  Fayus  would  kill  me  if  I  tried.  From  a  New  Guinea

perspective, it seemed so perfectly natural and self-explanatory. Of course the

Fayus will kill any trespasser: you surely don’t think they’re so stupid that

they’d admit strangers to their territory? Strangers would just hunt their game

animals, molest their women, introduce diseases, and reconnoiter the terrain
                                        9
in  order  to  stage  a  raid  later.”  Before  outside  contact,  New  Guinea

highlanders spent their entire lives within a few miles of their villages, and as

far as we know, none had ever seen the sea, which was just 100 miles away.

It seems likely the whole world was like this in prehistory.

             HISTORICAL PATTERNS OF GENE FLOW


 



Trade gave people reasons to surmount or bypass those barriers to travel, and

it has played an important role in facilitating human gene flow. Although its

impact on gene flow was probably not as dramatic as that resulting from

conquest  and  colonization,  it  was  important,  particularly  after  the

development of sailing ships. Sailors and barmaids, like traveling salesmen

and farmers’ daughters, have played a crucial role in recent human evolution.

 


  Trade—more  exactly,  traders—spread  new  alleles  along  every  line  of

communication: along sea routes, up navigable rivers, between villages and

market  towns.  In  early  times  it  often  took  the  form  of  semi-military

campaigns,  as  when  Egypt  sent  trade  expeditions  to  Punt  in  northern

Ethiopia/ Eritrea in order to obtain gold, slaves, ebony, and ivory, or when

Mesopotamian kings like Sargon of Akkad sought cedarwood in Lebanon.

 


  Trade connected widely separated civilizations—some of them, some of

the time—nearly as far back as we have records. There is evidence of trade

between the Indus civilization and Mesopotamia during the Akkadian Empire

more than 4,000 years ago—Mesopotamian cereals and wool in exchange for

wood and ivory from “Meluhha,” thought to be the Indus civilization. We

have  found  Indus  cylinder  seals  in  Ur  and  Babylon,  and  references  to  a

village made up of traders from Meluhha, who eventually became one more

component of the local ethnic mix. This is exactly the sort of contact that

could have played a significant role in the transmission of new beneficial

alleles: The peoples of the Indus civilization probably faced similar selective

pressures to those seen in Mesopotamia, and they were far enough away that

gene flow through local marriage would have taken a long time to occur.

However,  the  contact  happened  early  in  history,  so  that  any  good  allelesintroduced to the Middle East in this way have had 160 generations in which

to spread.

                                 COLONIZATION


 



One major pattern of migration that affected gene flow was the seeding of

colonies along the coasts of the Mediterranean and Black seas by peoples

from  the  eastern  end  of  the  Mediterranean.  Even  as  far  back  as  the  late

Bronze Age, it was easier and cheaper to travel long distances by sea, not

least because you could avoid having to fight your way through already-

established  peoples.  Long-distance  trade  helped  pave  the  way  for  these

colonies. Sometimes they began as trading posts, and trade must have been

the basis for the seafaring techniques and geographical knowledge that made

the founding expeditions possible.

 


The  colonizers—Etruscans,  Greeks,  and  Phoenicians—came  from  the

Middle East or areas heavily settled by early Middle Eastern farmers. They

must have carried many of the new alleles that were adaptive in the context of

agriculture, and their voyages probably spread many copies of those alleles to

the western Mediterranean.

 


The Phoenicians, a people living in cities along the coast of what is now

Lebanon, traded over much of the Mediterranean. Their colonies started out

as anchorages and trading posts along their trade routes, but eventually some

of them grew into substantial towns. The largest and most important of these

colonies was Carthage (Kart-Hadasht) in Tunisia, which eventually became

Rome’s  great  rival.  Many  of  those  towns  still  exist  today:  Palermo  and

Marsala in Sicily, Cagliari in Sardinia, Tangier in Morocco, and Cadiz and

Cartagena in Spain. Phoenician colonies appear to have spread one of the

more  common  versions  of  beta-thalassemia  (a  genetic  defense  against

malaria) around the western Mediterranean. Most likely this allele originated
                  10
in North Africa. 


The Greeks colonized on a larger scale: A single city, Miletus, founded

ninety colonies. Some were founded for commercial advantage, some as a

refuge  for  a  losing  side,  and  others  as  a  means  of  getting  rid  of  surplus

population. The Greeks founded many colonies in Sicily and southern Italy,

which became known as “Magna Graecia.” They include such modern cities

as Syracuse and Naples. There were also many Greek colonies around the

Black Sea, some (like Marseille) in southern France and others as far away as

Spain and Libya. It looks as if the Greeks spread at least two characteristic

malaria defenses of their own, a different version of beta-thalassemia and a

form  of  G6PD  deficiency.  (Malaria  defenses  are  probably  not  the  only

adaptive  alleles  that  Phoenicians  or  Greeks  transmitted—they  are  just  the

ones  that  have  been  well  studied  so  far.)  Since  the  recent  whole-genome

surveys show that many genes have been under recent selection and risen to

high frequencies, apparently mostly in response to the new conditions that

accompanied  agriculture,  we  expect  that  these  colonizations  transmitted  a

number of adaptive alleles.

 


  Recent genetic studies have confirmed a third major colonization in which

an eastern group, this time from Turkey, colonized northwestern Italy: the

Etruscans. They were a somewhat mysterious people who spoke a non-Indo-

European  language  that  we  have  not  yet  deciphered.  The  Etruscans  had

tremendous influence on Roman art, architecture, and religion. The question

of Etruscan origins had long been controversial, with most archaeologists

arguing that the culture developed in Italy, although some ancient sources,

such as Herodotus, said that it originated in Lydia, a region on the western

coast of Turkey. Recent work has shown that some populations in Tuscany
                              11
have Near-Eastern mtDNA and that some distinctive local cattle also have
                                                          12
mtDNA characteristic of Middle Eastern breeds, confirming an Anatolian

origin.

 


The Etruscans added a healthy dose of Middle Eastern, agriculture-adapted

alleles into the Roman mix. We have reason  to suspect that those alleles

shaped attitudes as well as affecting metabolism and disease resistance. Did

they influence Rome’s rise to power? It’s possible.     YOU HAVE BEEN IN AFGHANISTAN, I PERCEIVE


 



Military movements also let favorable alleles vault over long distances and

geographical  barriers.  Alexander  the  Great  furnished  one  of  the  more

dramatic examples. In the course of a remarkable career of conquest (dying

undefeated), he marched as far east as Pakistan.

 


In addition to settling Greeks over much of the Middle East, his legacy

included Greek kingdoms that survived for several centuries in Afghanistan

and Pakistan. Those kingdoms didn’t just influence the artistic development

of Buddhism; they also transmitted alleles. Today we see a few Greek Y

chromosomes among the Pathans, the dominant ethnic group in Afghanistan.
13
 Of course, we also see some Y chromosomes that are directly descended
                                                                                          14
from Genghis Khan himself in the Pathans’ despised neighbors, the Hazara.

Local  marriage  could  never  have  spread  genes  as  rapidly  as  that—but

Genghis and Alexander could.

 


If  regional  Y-chromosome  variants  (which  as  far  as  we  know  have  no

special inherent fitness advantage) could spread that far, you can be sure that

any  advantageous  mutation  that  had  become  common  in  Greece  in

Alexander’s time did as well. Every such allele has had a good chance of

becoming common in Afghanistan by the present day. This isn’t quite as true

for those Mongol alleles, since they’ve only had a third as long to spread as

those of Alexander and his merry men. In these long-distance transfers, the

earlier  the  connection,  the  more  important.  And  in  the  same  way,  large

population transfers have a greater effect than small ones.

                               THE LOST TRIBES


 



Imperial  politics  sometimes  played  an  important  role  in  dispersing  genes,

often in highly unpleasant ways. Forced relocation of peoples has been a

standard  tactic  during  times  of  conflict—whether  in  ex-Yugoslavia  or

Chechnya in our day or in Assyria during ancient times. Tiglath Pileser III

moved some 30,000 people from what is now northern Syria to the Zagros

Mountains in western Iran in 742 BC, Sargon II displaced about 100,000

Babylonians in 707 BC, and Sennacherib deported another 208,000 in 703

BC. One of the most notorious forced relocations was in 722 BC, when the

Assyrians conquered the Northern Kingdom of Israel, destroying its capital

and sending its population into exile.

 


  These population transfers were intended not only to punish, but also to

break up local elites and traditions, open up strategic areas for occupation,

and provide the Assyrian state with labor and soldiers. The number of people

forcibly removed from home over three centuries of these policies has been

estimated  at  more  than  4  million.  Considering  the  enmity  these  actions

provoked, they may have hastened the fall of Assyria—but they surely spread

alleles over most of the Fertile Crescent.

 


  There are other famous examples of forced relocations. The Babylonian

Empire  defeated  Judah,  the  Southern  Kingdom  of  Israel,  in  586  BC  and

relocated some of the population to Mesopotamia. After the Persian Empire

succeeded  the  Babylonians  in  539  BC,  Cyrus  the  Great  allowed  them  to

return.

                       AN ARTHURIAN ROMANCE


 



The Sarmatians were steppe nomads from the southern Ukraine who spoke an

Iranian language. The classical historian Cassius Dio said, “The Sarmatians

were  a  savage  uncivilized  nation,  .  .  .  naturally  warlike,  and  famous  for

painting their bodies to appear more terrible in the field of battle. They were

known for their lewdness. . . . They generally lived on the mountains without

any habitation except their chariots. . . . They lived upon plunder, and fed
                                                  15
upon milk mixed with the blood of horses.”

 


  They  were  famous  for  their  heavy  cavalry,  who  fought  with  lances,

longswords, and bows. The Romans had fought them in AD 92 and knew

their  quality.  In  AD  175,  Marcus  Aurelius  hired  8,000  Sarmatians  into

Roman service and sent 5,500 of them to northern Britain. At first they were

attached to one of the Roman legions there, Legio VI Victrix, but when their

twenty years of service were up, they were settled in a permanent military

colony in Lancashire. Apparently they never went home: The colony is still

mentioned almost 250 years later.

 


  Imagine that one of those selected alleles we see in the HapMap scans

originated far to the east of Britain—perhaps as far east as Kazakhstan—

some  thousands  of  years  ago,  possibly  in  the  Andronovo  culture.  Then,

suppose  the  allele  had  a  large  selective  advantage,  and  by  the  time  the

Sarmatians were fighting for the Romans, it had become common among the

Iranian-speaking steppe peoples, among whom it had diffused easily because

of their characteristic horse-nomad mobility—but had not yet spread as far as

western Europe. If limited to girl-next-door diffusion, it would have required

several millennia to reach Britain.

 That Sarmatian military colony, however, could have introduced several

thousand copies of that hypothetical allele into Lancashire. The Sarmatian

cavalrymen were paid well and surely could have managed to raise at least as

many children as the average Briton. Starting with an original gene frequency

of 0.1 percent in England in the year 175, that hypothetical allele could have

a high frequency in the English population by the present time. Trade and

war would ensure that the new allele spread effectively over Great Britain,

and there was undoubtedly plenty of both, especially war.

 


  Those Sarmatians may have spread ideas as well. They had some very

interesting religious beliefs and legends, some of which are preserved among

the Ossetians, their descendants in the Caucasus. A number of those legends

sound  awfully  familiar—in  particular,  the  story  of  a  dying  warrior  who

demands that his best friend destroy his sword by tossing it into a lake rather

than allowing it to be captured by enemies. The friend can’t see throwing

away such a beautiful weapon, and twice pretends to have done so—but the

sword-bearer, hearing his account, somehow knows that he has not. On the

third try, the sword is thrown into a lake and is caught by a woman’s hand

coming out of the water.

 


So it may be that the Sarmatians introduced key elements of the Arthur

mythos, the Matter of Britain, the subject of books and poems and movies for

hundreds of years. A good story can go a long way, as can a good allele.

There is a real similarity. A slight contact can transmit an idea, if it falls on

fertile ground—if people like the idea and repeat it. In the same way, a long-

forgotten Roman transfer of troops may have played a key role in the genetic

history  of  Britain.  A  few  copies  of  a  favorable  allele  can  increase

tremendously,  given  time:  The  average  Englishman  has  only  a  dab  of

Sarmatian ancestry, but might be mostly Sarmatian in a key gene or two.

                                     BLUE EYES


 



A strong state fosters gene flow within itself through trade, free movement,

and sometimes forced movement. At the same time, it tends to limit gene

flow  from  outside,  particularly  when  it  upholds  its  borders  with  military

force. When such a state disintegrates, there can be a massive movement of

peoples—in part because the borders are no longer defended, but even more

in those cases in which the inhabitants have lost their military habits over the

course of a long imperial peace. In classical times, one obvious sign of that

kind of relative domestic tranquility was unwalled cities.

 


The fall of the Roman Empire followed this pattern. As the state weakened,

many ethnic groups entered. In the early days they were often mercenary

soldiers, but eventually some came as plundering bands. Those invaders also

carried new alleles. We will discuss the Vandals, one of the most spectacular

of  these  groups.  We  think  they  may  have  played  a  part  in  spreading  a

particular far-flung new allele, the one responsible for blue and green eyes.

 


  Blue eyes are common in Europeans and their descendants and are found

to some extent in adjacent populations, but they are essentially nonexistent in

most of the world. Some 10,000 years ago there seems to have been no such

thing.  There  are  other  shades  of  eye  color,  and  other  genes  have  some

influence, but most of the story boils down to a single new allele of the gene

named OCA2 (for oculocutaneous albinism II, also discussed in Chapter 4).

To  be  exact,  blue  eyes  are  caused  by  a  change  in  a  DNA  sequence  that

regulates the expression of OCA2, a sequence that is embedded in HERC2,
                          16
the gene next to OCA2. That allele accounts for 75 percent of the variation

in eye color in Europe. It’s the third longest haplotype in Europeans and

therefore can’t be very old: Analysis of the unshuffled region associated withOCA2 suggests that it originated about 6,000 to 10,000 years ago. Blue eyes

are  most  common  in  northern  Europe,  centered  around  the  Baltic.  The

simplest assumption is that the allele originated in the center of the region,

where  its  frequency  is  very  high  today,  so  our  best  guess  is  that  it  first

occurred in a Lithuanian village about 6,000 years ago.

 




























A member of the Tuaregs, nomadic Berbers of the Sahara

 


  Clearly the spread of this allele involved more than just men marrying the

girl next door. You can see light eyes in Berbers from the Atlas Mountains of

Morocco, and even in Tuaregs living in the Sahara. Light eyes are fairly

common in Kurds living in the Zagros Mountains along the border between

Iraq  and  Iran,  and  we  can  find  people  with  light  eyes  as  far  away  as

Afghanistan,  over  3,000  miles  from  Vilnius.  In  order  to  explain  thesepatterns,  we’re  going  to  have  to  make  a  little  excursion  through  history.

Again, a gene is the center of attention rather than battles and kings.

 




























Light-eyed Afghan girl

 


  Start with the Berbers. Clearly the OCA2 allele didn’t get there solely by

peasants marrying their neighbors, since the Mediterranean Sea blocks that

kind of connection. It could be that blue eyes in Morocco are caused by some

local mutation, not the same one that has spread over Europe. But if it is the

same  mutation,  as  seems  likely,  since  we  have  found  the  same  OCA2

haplotype around the Mediterranean, the prime candidates for bringing that

gene to North Africa are barbarians and pirates.

 


  Barbarians came first. During the twilight of the Roman Empire, wholetribes, mostly some flavor of German, began wandering across the borders.

The Vandals were among the most troublesome. They are thought to have

originated  in  southern  Sweden  and  had  moved  to  Silesia  (now  eastern

Poland) by 120 BC. By the third century, they had moved on to western

Romania  and  Hungary,  then  into  Roman  territory.  Around  AD  400  they

began moving westward (along with their allies, the Alans and Suebians),

crossing the frozen Rhine on the last day of 406. They went on to devastate

France, plundering their way through Aquitaine and crossing the Pyrenees in

late AD 409. The Alans (an Iranian-speaking people off the steppe) set up a

kingdom in Portugal, while the Suebians settled down in Galicia.

 


Facing pressure from the Visigoths (yet another medieval gang, which had

already crushed the Alan kingdom), the Vandals and the surviving Alans,

some 80,000 souls altogether, crossed from Spain into Africa in 429. This

Vandal kingdom dominated the western Mediterranean with its stolen fleet,

extorting tribute from seaports and sending out raiding parties every year.

The Vandals sacked Rome in 435, ensuring that their name would live in

infamy. Finally, in 533, Justinian, the emperor of the remaining eastern half

of the Roman Empire, sent a force to attack the Vandals. Led by Belisarius,

the best general of the age and one of the best of all time, the Imperials

landed in Carthage and made short work of the Vandals—some of whom,

when finally defeated, may have blended into the countryside. As Edward

Gibbon  wrote,  “When  every  resource,  either  of  force  or  perfidy,  was

exhausted,  Stoza,  with  some  desperate  Vandals,  retired  to  the  wilds  of

Mauritania,  obtained  the  daughter  of  a  Barbarian  prince,  and  eluded  the
                                                          17
pursuit of his enemies, by the report of his death.”

 


  Seems like a lot of trouble just to inject a few thousand copies of the new

OCA2 allele into the Rif.

 


  Later  came  pirates.  From  1500  to  1800,  Muslim  corsairs  captured  and

enslaved many Europeans: by one estimate, more than a million. Mainly they

took  captives  from  the  Mediterranean  coasts  of  Italy  and  Spain,  but

occasionally they ranged farther afield, raiding Cornwall, Ireland, and even

Iceland. Most male slaves were worked to death and made little contributionto the gene pool, but women could and often did end up in harems. You see a

similar  pattern  with  the  slaves  the  Arabs  took  from  sub-Saharan  Africa:

About 5 percent of the maternal ancestry of Arabs in the Middle East is

African, judging from mtDNA, but you see very few African Y chromosomes

there.

 


We’re  not  suggesting  that  Berbers  have  a  lot  of  European  ancestry:

Judging from Y-chromosome and mtDNA data, that does not appear to be the

case. The point is that even a moderate degree of admixture can introduce

many  copies  of  a  beneficial  allele,  and  over  time  that  allele  can  become

common. The earlier the introduction, and the more copies introduced, the

more effective this process is. If we had to guess, we’d say that the blue-eyed

variant of OCA2 found in Berbers was probably introduced by the Vandals,

but it may have happened earlier and involved population movements that we

are not aware of.

                                             6

 



                                  EXPANSIONS

 



History is full of examples of human groups expanding at the expense of their

neighbors.  Anatomically  modern  humans  expanded  and  replaced  archaic

humans,  the  Bantu  expanded  at  the  expense  of  the  Bushmen  and  other

peoples, and Turks and Mongols pushed aside the Iranian-speaking peoples

who had previously occupied the steppes of central Asia. In many of those

cases, there was some degree of admixture, but replacement dominated. We

could cite dozens of other examples. Surely the most obvious question is why

those groups expanded.

 


In some cases, sheer chance may have played an important role—perhaps

some  key  battle  was  lost  for  want  of  a  horseshoe  nail.  More  often,  the

successful  group  had  some  kind  of  advantage  that  drove  their  expansion.

Anatomically modern humans probably had new and improved technologies

like projectile weapons as well as more sophisticated language. The Bantu

had  iron  tools  and  a  set  of  domesticated  plants  adapted  to  Africa,  which

together gave them a pretty powerful advantage over the hunter-gatherers

they encountered. The Turco-Mongol advantage over the steppe Iranians is

less obvious, but they may have had stronger political organizations.

 


The general assumption is that the winning advantage is cultural—that is to

say, learned. Weapons, tactics, political organization, methods of agriculture:

all learned. The expansion of modern humans is the exception to the rule—

most observers suspect that biological differences were the root cause of their

advantage. Biological advantages are particularly potent because they last:

Archaic humans such as Neanderthals may have been able to copy some of

the cultural attributes of modern humans (exemplified by the Châtelperronian

toolkit), but they couldn’t become modern humans, couldn’t copy or acquireabilities  that  were  consequences  of  modern  human  biology.  So  being  an

anatomically modern human was an enduring advantage, and thus genetics

can explain a replacement process that seems to have taken about 20,000

years (from the original trek out of Africa to the last Neanderthals).

 


The  assumption  that  more  recent  expansions  are  all  driven  by  cultural

factors  is  based  on  the  notion  that  modern  humans  everywhere  have

essentially  the  same  abilities.  That’s  a  logical  consequence  of  human

evolutionary stasis: If humans have not undergone a significant amount of

biological change since the expansion out of Africa, then people everywhere

would  have  essentially  the  same  potentials,  and  no  group  would  have  a

biological advantage over its neighbors. But as we never tire of pointing out,

there has been significant biological change during that period—tremendous

amounts  of  change,  particularly  in  those  populations  that  have  practiced

agriculture for a long time. Therefore, the biological equality of human races

and ethnic groups is not inevitable: In fact it’s about as likely as a fistful of

silver dollars all landing on edge when dropped. There are important, well-

understood examples of human biological inequality: Some populations can

(on average) deal far more effectively with certain situations than others.

 


  New alleles that have undergone selective sweeps under agriculture show

up randomly—so they might occur more in some groups than in others by

sheer  chance.  We  know  that  they  become  common  first  where  they’re

favored—in the new agricultural ecology, which some peoples experienced

before  others.  Thus,  the  early  adopters  got  a  head  start  on  new  adaptive

genes. And the way these advantageous alleles propagate, people along lines

of communication are likely to pick up more of them than people who live

off the beaten path.

 


  Early  adopters  ought  to  be  better  at  agriculture  than  late-comers:  They

should be better adjusted to the new diet, tougher against the new diseases,

and better at tolerating crowding and hierarchy.

 


  Those  new  advantages  all  had  to  increase  individual  fitness,  but  theireffects at the level of the tribe or ethnic group varied. Some aided individual

survival  but  didn’t  have  much  effect  at  the  group  level.  For  example,  a

mutation that protected against an infectious disease wouldn’t have had much

effect on overall population size if food shortages were the major limiting

factor. However, a new allele that allowed its bearers to digest a new food

more effectively might well have increased the size of that same group. A

mutation  that  helped  its  bearers  compete  with  other  humans  without

conferring  any  other  advantage,  one  that  changed  the  winners  without

bringing any more money into the game, probably wouldn’t have helped the

group; it might even have weakened it.

 


If  a  group  happened  to  acquire  one  (or  a  few)  of  those  mutations  that

increase group fitness as well as individual fitness, it would have had a real

advantage over its neighbors. Its population would have expanded. Tribes

and bands fight, of course—they always have. War goes back well before the
                      1
birth of civilization. But populations with a biological advantage, more often

than not, should have won the wars. They would have been able to generate

more young warriors than their neighbors. They would have been able to

afford to fight more often and recover faster from defeat. If the expanding

group’s  success  depended  upon  some  improved  tactic  or  weapon,  the

defenders could have copied it. But they couldn’t copy a gene. It’s hard to

fight biological superiority, and expansions based on such superiority could

have gone on far longer than ones based upon cultural advantages, which are

ephemeral.

                     THE COLUMBIAN EXPLOSION


 



Other  writers  have  discussed  the  crucial  role  of  epidemic  Eurasian  and

African diseases in the European expansion into the Americas, but most shy

away  from  clearly  stating  that  this  was  driven  by  underlying  biological

differences—differences  that  conferred  a  practical  advantage,  a  kind  of

superiority, in this particular situation. But there is plenty of evidence that

these  biological  differences  existed.  When  Europeans  launched  their  first

ships to the “New World,” their diseases came along for the ride, and the

Amerindians simply lacked the biological defenses they would have needed

to withstand that onslaught.

 


The Amerindians migrated from Northeast Asia some 15,000 years ago.

They did not carry with them crowd diseases that arose after the birth of

agriculture,  nor  did  they  carry  the  genetic  defenses  that  later  developed

against those diseases. Since their path to the New World went through frigid

landscapes  like  Siberia  and  Alaska,  they  left  behind  some  of  the  ancient

infectious  diseases  that  were  vectorborne  or  had  complex  life  cycles—

malaria and Guinea worm, for example. The world they entered had never

before  been  settled  by  hominids  or  great  apes,  so  there  were  few  local

pathogens preadapted to humans. Many of the infectious diseases found in

the Old World are thought to have originated in domesticated animals, but

this does not seem to have been an important factor in the Americas.

 


  Although  Amerindians  did  develop  agriculture  independently—a  very

effective agriculture that included some of the world’s most important crops,

such as maize and potatoes—they domesticated few animals, mostly because

they had already wiped out most of the species suited to domestication. That

happened whenever modern humans, who were competent hunters, entered aland that had never known any kind of humans before, one in which none of

the  large  animals  had  had  a  chance  to  adapt  to  humans.  It  happened  in

Australia, New Zealand, and Madagascar as well as the New World.

 


So the selective pressures favoring disease resistance were weaker among

the  Amerindians  than  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  Old  World—possibly

weaker than that experienced by any of our ancestors for millions of years.

 


One sign of this reduced disease pressure is the unusual distribution of

HLA alleles among Amerindians. The HLA system (for human leukocyte

antigen)  is  a  group  of  genes  that  encode  proteins  expressed  on  the  outer

surfaces  of  cells.  The  immune  system  uses  them  to  distinguish  self  from

nonself, so they play an important part in rejection of transplanted organs.

But  their  most  important  role  is  in  infectious  disease.  There  they  present

protein fragments from pathogenic organisms such as bacteria to immune

system cells that then attack the pathogen. In addition, when a virus infects a

cell, HLA molecules display viral proteins on the outside of the cell, so that

those infected cells can be destroyed by the immune system.

 


  HLA genes are among the most variable of all genes. There are ten or more

major variants of each HLA gene, and most have more than 100 variants.

Because these genes are so variable, any two humans (other than identical

twins) are almost certain to have a different set of them. Because the alleles

are codominant, having different HLA alleles expands the range of pathogens

that our immune systems can deal with. Natural selection therefore favors

diversification of the HLA genes, and some alleles, though rare, have been

preserved for a long time. In fact, some are 30 million years old, considerably

older than Homo sapiens. That is to say, there are HLA alleles in humans that

are more similar to an allele in an orangutan than to other human alleles at

that locus. Selection favoring HLA diversity—a selective pressure stemming

from infectious disease—has existed more or less continuously for tens of

millions of years. This is why even small populations in the Old World retain

high HLA diversity.

 But  Amerindians  didn’t  have  that  diversity.  Many  tribes  have  a  single
                                                              2
HLA  allele  with  a  frequency  of  over  50  percent.  Different  tribes  have

different predominant alleles: It seems as if the frequencies of HLA alleles

have drifted randomly in the New World, which hasn’t happened since the

Miocene  in  the  Old  World.  A  careful  analysis  of  global  HLA  diversity

confirms  continuing  diversifying  selection  on  HLA  in  most  human

populations but finds no evidence of any selection at all favoring diversity in
                              3
HLA among Amerindians.

 


And  if  infectious  disease  was  so  unimportant  among  Amerindians,

selection most likely favored weaker immune systems, because people with

weaker immune systems would be better able to avoid autoimmune disorders,

in which the immune system misfires and attacks some organ or tissue. Type

1 diabetes, in which the immune system attacks the pancreatic cells that make

insulin, and multiple sclerosis, where it attacks the myelin sheaths of the

central  nervous  system,  are  well-known  examples—both  are  rare  among

Amerindians. A less vigorous immune system would have been an advantage

under those conditions.

 


So, there is every reason to think that the inhabitants of the Americas were

not  just  behind  the  immunological  times:  While  the  Old  Worlders  were

experiencing intense selection for increased resistance to infectious disease,

the  Amerindians  were  actually  becoming  more  vulnerable.  They  were

adapted to the existing circumstances, but not to the coming collision with the

Old World.

 


  These  long-term  differences  in  selection  pressures  had  dramatic

consequences when Columbus brought the Old and New Worlds into regular

contact. Eurasian infectious diseases such as smallpox, measles, diphtheria,

whooping  cough,  leprosy,  and  bubonic  plague  were  introduced  to  the

Americas  in  short  order.  In  tropical  and  subtropical  areas,  they  were

eventually  joined  by  yellow  fever,  dengue  fever,  falciparum  malaria,

lymphatic  filariasis,  schistosomiasis,  and  onchocerciasis  (river  blindness),

most  of  which  came  from  Africa.  Relatively  few  pathogens,  however,
                                                                                          4
traveled in the other direction, from the Americas to the Old World. Syphilisand tungiasis (a flea that burrows into the skin) are the only human pathogens

we are aware of that originated in the New World and have spread to the Old,

although there may be others we haven’t yet recognized—for example, some

epidemiologists suspect that rheumatoid arthritis is caused by a cryptic New

World pathogen.

 


  Suddenly  exposed  to  this  avalanche  of  unfamiliar  infectious  diseases,

Amerindians were devastated. Some estimates suggest that the indigenous

population of the Americas dropped by more than 90 percent over a few
                                                                        5
centuries, with almost all of the loss due to infectious diseases.

 


This Amerindian vulnerability was a primary reason for European success

in  the  Americas.  Epidemic  disease,  particularly  smallpox,  interfered  with

armed resistance by Amerindians and thus played an important part in the

early Spanish conquests. In Mexico, where Hernán Cortés and his troops had

made the Aztec emperor their puppet, the Aztecs rose against them, killing

Moctezuma II and  two-thirds of the Spanish force in the famous “Noche

Triste.” The Aztecs probably would have utterly destroyed the invaders, were

it not for the smallpox epidemic under way at the same time. The leader of

the Aztec defense died in the epidemic, and Cortés and his men conquered

the Aztec Empire.

 


It is hard to see how Cortés could have won without those microscopic

allies,  since  he  was  trying  to  conquer  an  empire  of  millions  with  a  few

hundred men. Moreover, major Indian polities such as the Mayan city-states

were still intact after the defeat of the Aztecs, and the Spaniards might well

have lost control except for the series of epidemics that followed. Francisco

Pizarro’s  conquest  of  the  Incan  Empire  was  also  aided  by  a  smallpox

epidemic. It killed the emperor and his heir, causing a convenient succession

struggle. Considering that Pizarro was invading another empire of millions

with only 168 soldiers, it’s obvious that he needed all the help he could get.

 


  Amerindian vulnerability to infectious disease shaped history again and

again. The first Spanish attempts at colonization in the West Indies wereactually jeopardized by it, since the Taino and Arawak peoples diminished so

rapidly (they were almost gone by 1530) that the Spanish were left without a

labor  force.  Inhabitants  of  those  Caribbean  islands  had  been  even  more

isolated and shielded from disease than the Amerindians of the mainland, and

so were even more vulnerable.

 


The Pilgrims’ first settlement was on land that already had been cleared by

an Indian tribe that had been ravaged by some plague (possibly smallpox)

just three years earlier. Squanto, the Indian who taught the Pilgrims survival

skills, seems to have been one of the few survivors of that tribe. The later

Puritan  settlement  of  New  England  was  also  furthered  by  devastating

epidemics  among  the  Amerindians,  while  Jamestown’s  safety  was  only

secured when epidemic disease had weakened the local tribes.

 


The Amerindians survived best in the highlands, where they could avoid
                                      6
most of the new African diseases. In fact, in the Altiplano of South America,

which  has  an  altitude  of  over  11,000  feet,  local  Amerindians  had  a

compensating advantage over the Spaniards because they were better adapted

to the thin air.

 


  Europeans had multiple advantages, of course. They had superior weapons

and tactics, honed over thousands of years of organized conflict. Their form

of warfare was more realistic and less ritualistic, at least in comparison to that

of the Aztecs, who had “flower wars”—wars aimed at acquiring captives for

sacrifice rather than achieving decisive results—with neighboring city-states

such  as  Tlaxcala.  Europeans  had  a  varied  and  useful  set  of  domesticated

animals  to  use  for  food,  raw  materials  such  as  wool  and  leather,  and

transportation.  They  had  advanced  metallurgy  (iron  and  steel)  and  large

sailing ships. They were the heirs of literate cultures going back thousands of

years,  and  although  there  were  exceptions,  such  as  Pizarro,  who  never

learned  to  read  or  write,  many  of  the  early  explorers  and  settlers—the

Puritans, for example—were highly literate and well educated.

 


The  most  complex  Amerindian  civilizations  in  1492  were  similar  tocivilizations found in the Middle East 3,000 to 4,000 years earlier—so the

Europeans were, in a sense, invaders from the future.

 


The European advantage in disease resistance was particularly important

because  those  early  attempts  at  conquest  and  colonization  were  marginal.

Shipping  men  and  equipment  across  the  Atlantic  Ocean  presented  huge

logistical difficulties. European military expeditions to the New World were

tiny and poorly supplied. The successes of the conquistadors are reminiscent

of ridiculous action movies in which one man defeats a small army—and

that’s a lot harder to do with an arquebus than an Uzi. Early colonization

efforts often teetered on the edge of disaster, as when half the Pilgrims died

in their first winter, or when most of the settlers in Jamestown starved to

death in the winter of 1609.

 


  Epidemic disease didn’t just grease the skids for the initial conquests: It

reduced Amerindian populations and made later revolts far weaker than they

would have been otherwise. If they had not died of disease, the Amerindians

would have had time to copy and use many European military innovations in

the second or third round of fighting.

 


We  know  a  lot  about  the  genetic  basis  of  resistance  to  malaria,  but

relatively little about the genetic basis of European resistance to diseases like

smallpox, although there are some hints. As we have said before, there is

plenty of evidence for selection acting recently on many genes involved with

disease defense, but in most cases we don’t know the biochemical details—

for example, which particular infectious organism a particular selected allele

defended against. We suspect that delta CCR5 (for chemokine receptor 5), a

common mutation among northern Europeans, protects against smallpox, but

since smallpox is dangerous to work with and now exists only in a couple of
                                                7
genetic repositories, it’s hard to be sure. Some recessive genetic diseases

that are common in Europe and the Middle East also probably have conferred

resistance to some infectious diseases: That list would include cystic fibrosis,

alpha-1-antitrypsin  deficiency,  familial  Mediterranean  fever,  connexin-26

deafness,  and  hemochromatosis.  All  are  nonexistent  in  Amerindians,

discounting recent admixture. 


  There is another way we may be able to detect some of the alleles that

helped  protect  Europeans  from  infectious  diseases  that  devastated  the

Amerindians: admixture studies. Many of the present inhabitants of Latin

America are descended from both Europeans and Amerindians, along with a

smaller amount of African ancestry. In the absence of natural selection, you’d

expect that admixture would be the same at each gene, allowing for chance—

if 40 percent of overall ancestry was European, then 40 percent of the copies

of each gene would also be European. But as we pointed out in Chapter 2,

this no longer remains the case if a particular allele of some gene causes

increased reproductive fitness. For example, if the European allele of some

gene conferred substantial protection against smallpox, the average inhabitant

of Mexico might be considerably more European at that locus than average—

even though the admixed population is no more than 500 years old. In other

words, there could be adaptive introgression of the European version of that

gene. Some Amerindian or African alleles might also have advantages: But

considering  the  relatively  short  time  available  for  introgression  (at  most

twenty generations) and the sheer destructive power of smallpox, a European

smallpox  defense  seems  one  of  the  more  likely  candidates  for  detectable

introgression. There is evidence of such an unusually European chunk of the
                                                                8
genome in at least one Mexican American population. It is remarkable that

the same principles apply to Neanderthals and conquistadors.

 


We do know a bit about immunological differences between Amerindians

and other peoples. We know that the Yanomamo (a much-studied group of

Amerindians in the backwoods of Venezuela) tend to produce high levels of

antibodies against tuberculosis antigens rather than the more effective cell-

mediated responses seen in Europeans. Even though tuberculosis is common

among  the  Yanomamo,  few  individuals  have  a  positive  response  to  a

tuberculin  test.  This  is  important,  because  most  Old  Worlders  exposed  to

tuberculosis mount an effective immune response (which causes a positive

response on a tuberculin test) and avoid symptoms. Only a minority develop

active  disease.  The  Yanomamo  also  have  extremely  high  levels  of

Immunoglobulin E (a molecule involved in defense against parasitic worms)

—much  higher  than  levels  seen  in  Europeans  with  the  same  level  of

infestation. Pre-Columbian Amerindians were subject to some parasitic worminfections but relatively few bacterial or viral diseases, and it may be that

natural selection adjusted their immune system to face those threats.

 


We  know  more  about  the  practical  consequences  of  these  genetic

differences than we do about their biochemical details, in part because of

historical accounts of the relative impact of infectious diseases in European

and Amerindian populations, but also because of well-documented epidemics

during the era of scientific medicine—the past 100 years or so.

 


  Even during the twentieth century, first contacts between Amerindians and

people of European descent killed one-third to one-half of the natives in the
                                                                                    9
first five years unless there was high-quality medical care available. This

was the case during a period in which some of the worst Eurasian diseases

(smallpox, bubonic plague, and typhus) were no longer major threats. For

example, of the 800 Surui contacted in 1980 in Brazil, 600 had died by 1986,

most of tuberculosis.

 


  Judging from historical accounts, the fatality rate of smallpox was much

higher among Amerindians than among Europeans. Roughly 30 percent of

the  Europeans  who  were  infected  died,  whereas  for  the  Amerindians,  the

fatality rate sometimes reached 90 percent. For example, in an epidemic in

1827, smallpox spared only 125 out of 1,600 Mandan Indians in what later

became North Dakota.

 


  Some  historians  have  argued  that  a  virulent  epidemic  hitting  an

epidemiologically inexperienced population would be especially damaging

because it kills adults rather than children. It takes a long time and a lot of

investment to produce an adult, so they are hard to replace. Since adults do

most of the productive labor and produce most of the food, this matters. A

population can survive a disease that kills 20 percent of the population in

childhood more easily than it can survive one that kills 20 percent of the

population in early adulthood. This effect may have increased the impact of

the first wave of epidemics in the New World. Along the same lines, an

epidemic that sickens nearly everybody may leave too few caretakers to nursethose who could survive if they were fed and kept warm. However, this effect

can’t explain why infectious diseases kept hitting Amerindians harder than

Europeans in epidemic after epidemic over hundreds of years.

 


  Although factors such as a paucity of domesticated animals decreased the

probability  that  the  Amerindians  would  develop  really  potent  infectious

diseases of their own, it must have been possible. In principle, they might

have had their own equivalents of smallpox and malaria. But if such potent

diseases had been brought back to the Old World by European explorers,

civilization would have fallen and you wouldn’t be reading this right now.

Some have also said that cultural inexperience might have worsened these

epidemics, as when stricken Indians ran from epidemics (thus spreading the

disease further) or tried various ineffective therapies. But Europeans ran from

epidemics, too (as in Boccaccio’s Decameron), and European medicine in

those days was generally useless. (Charles II’s doctors in the 1600s treated

his fits with bleeding, cupping, emetics, laxatives, enemas, blistering plasters,

Spanish Fly, and more bleeding, then plastered the soles of his feet with tar

and pigeon dung, gave him a bezoar [a concretion found in the stomach of a

goat,  thought  to  neutralize  any  poison],  and  followed  this  up  with  more
                                  10
bleeding. None of it worked.)

 


But  wasn’t  Spanish  oppression  of  the  Amerindians  the  main  factor

reducing their numbers? We think not. Of course, the Spanish did oppress the

Amerindians, but they were hoping to become the new lords of those lands,

rather  than  farming  the  land  themselves.  Lords  need  serfs—live  serfs.

Spanish demands for labor and food must have made the situation worse, but

depopulation raced far ahead of Spanish administrative control. For example,

when  Hernando  de  Soto  explored  the  American  South  in  1539,  he  found

many  fair-sized  towns,  but  also  ghost  towns  that  had  been  recently

abandoned. Old World diseases (likely smallpox) had gotten there first, just

as smallpox had reached Peru before Pizarro.

 


  Furthermore, the Spanish began to conquer the Philippines in the sixteenth
                                                                                          11
century, and there’s no sign that they caused a population collapse there.

Whenever  Europeans  made  contact  with  a  long-isolated  people,  whetherAmerindians or Australian Aborigines or Polynesians, there was a population

crash. When Europeans conquered peoples who had already had extensive

contact with other Old World populations, as the British did in India or the

Dutch in Indonesia, there was no crash. As Charles Darwin said, “Wherever

the European has trod, death seems to pursue the aboriginal. We may look to

the wide extent of the Americas, the Cape of Good Hope, and Australia, and
                            12
we find the same result.”

 


  Those who refuse to acknowledge the crucial role of biological differences

in  the  European  conquest  and  settlement  of  the  Americas  are  rejecting

Darwinian  evolution.  Thousands  of  years  of  high  disease  load  among

Eurasian agriculturalists had to select for increased disease resistance. This

isn’t particularly unusual or unorthodox, yet many who claim to accept the

idea of natural selection reject most of the obvious implications of the theory

when it is applied to humans.

 


Of course, as the Duke of Wellington said, two can play at this game.

When the Europeans tried to conquer and settle sub-Saharan Africa, the shoe

was on the other foot.

                           HEART OF DARKNESS


 



Europeans had long been aware of the lands south of the Sahara, but in the

fifteenth century they knew very little about them. The information they did

have  was  largely  an  inheritance  from  classical  civilization.  Hanno  the

Navigator (of Carthage) had explored the west coast of Africa, and Herodotus

tells us of an earlier Phoenician expedition, sent out by the Pharaoh Necho

around 600 BC, that seems to have circumnavigated the continent. Somehow,

the Greeks acquired some information about central Africa, including facts

about the Pygmies: Aristotle said, “These birds migrate from the steppes of

Scythia to the marshlands south of Egypt where the Nile has its source. And

it is here, by the way, that they are said to fight with the pygmies; and the
                                                                                          13
story  is  not  fabulous,  but  there  is  in  reality  a  race  of  dwarfish  men.”

Another interesting hint is a 2,500-year-old frieze in Persepolis, the capital of

the Persian Empire, which shows peoples from many lands bringing tribute.

One panel shows a Pygmy with an okapi, a deep-forest relative of the giraffe

that was only rediscovered by Europeans in 1901.

 


  Sub-Saharan Africa may actually have been easier to reach and explore in

classical times than it is today. The Sahara had not yet become as bone-dry as

it is now: Horses could cross the desert until Roman times, and there are old,

shallow wells in places where the water table is now thousands of feet below

the surface. It’s also possible—although this is speculation—that falciparum

malaria wasn’t as widespread in Africa in classical times as it is today. If true,

African exploration might have been safer in those days.

 


  When modern Europeans (Portuguese in the beginning) did start showing

up along the coast of West Africa around 1500, they found wealth (mainly in

gold and slaves), but they also faced incredible disease risks. The king ofPortugal sent an expedition of eight up the Gambia River in about 1500: One

came  back  alive.  João  de  Barros,  a  Portuguese  historian  of  the  sixteenth

century,  said,  “But  it  seems  that  for  our  sins,  or  for  some  inscrutable

judgment  of  God,  in  all  the  entrances  of  this  great  Ethiopia  we  navigate

along, He has placed a striking angel with a flaming sword of deadly fevers,

who  prevents  us  from  penetrating  into  the  interior  to  the  springs  of  this

garden, whence proceed these rivers of gold that flow to the sea in so many
                            14
parts  of  our  conquest.”  Europeans  typically  bought  slaves  in  coastal

outposts or islands: Going inland to seize them was just too dangerous to

their health. Arab slavers ranged further, but many Arabs had genetic malaria

defenses such as alpha-thalassemia, and many were part African.

 


  These difficulties persisted for centuries. British soldiers stationed on the

Gold Coast would lose half their numbers in a year. Early explorers did no

better. Mungo Park began his second attempt at African exploration (in 1805)

with a party of forty-five Europeans; only eleven were alive by the time they

reached  the  Niger.  He  was  eventually  killed  at  the  Bussa  rapids—by

Africans, not parasites—but when his son Thomas went in search of him, he

died of fever before getting far. We presume you’ve heard of Dr. Livingston

—Dr.  David  Livingston,  that  is,  the  nineteenth-century  British  medical

missionary to central Africa. His wife died of malaria during their travels, and

the doctor himself later died of malaria and dysentery. John Speke and Sir

Richard  Francis  Burton,  nineteenth-century  British  explorers,  sought  and

eventually found the sources of the Nile—but both men fell ill of tropical

diseases.  Speke  suffered  greatly  when  a  beetle  crawled  into  his  ear.  He

removed it with a knife, but he became temporarily deaf and later temporarily

blind. Consider that these are the famous explorers, the ones who enjoyed

some degree of success. What happened to the unlucky ones?

 


  Europeans had a vast technological edge over most of the inhabitants of

sub-Saharan Africa. In most ways (except for their use of iron tools), African

technology and social organization were simpler than that of the Amerindians

—at any rate simpler than the Andean and Mesoamerican civilizations. (Here

we’re speaking of the inhabitants of what has been called the “isolated zone,”

areas that had not been much influenced by Islamic civilization—especially

west, central, and southern Africa.) Literacy, the wheel, sailing ships, andguns gave the Europeans a huge military advantage, but nothing came of it

for hundreds of years, except in the far south, where a temperate climate

allowed Dutch colonization.

 


In the 1800s, quinine became widely available, and that allowed Europeans

to  venture  into  interior  Africa  with  moderate  success,  since  falciparum

malaria  had  been  the  deadliest  of  many  African  diseases.  Later  scientific

advances controlled or eliminated a number of other local diseases, including

yellow fever and sleeping sickness. This made possible the “scramble for

Africa,”  in  which  European  countries  ranging  from  Great  Britain  to  Italy

conquered  almost  the  entire  continent.  In  these  efforts,  European  military

technology was a trump card. As Hilaire Belloc wrote in a poem, “Whatever

happens / We have got / The Maxim gun /And they have not.”

 


But Africa did not become another America: Africans were not displaced

by  Europeans.  In  order  for  limited  numbers  of  colonists  to  become  the

predominant  population,  the  locals  must  die  off,  and  Africans  didn’t.

Powerful  tropical  diseases,  combined  with  the  local  biological  defenses

(evolved at vast cost), kept Africa African. As in the case of the Columbian

expansion,  recent  human  evolution  played  a  key  role  in  determining  the

victors.

                                 THE COWBOYS


 



The genetic advantages in the two examples we have just discussed—for the

Europeans  in  America  and  for  the  Africans  in  Africa—were  huge:  Those

lacking the required resistance to the infectious diseases in play were almost

wiped out. There is no reason to think that differences in disease resistance

were the only biological differences between Europeans and Amerindians, or

the only advantage, but they must have had the largest impact. European

colonization could not have prevailed without a huge edge. Africans, too,

may  have  needed  a  large  biological  advantage  to  resist  Europeans,

considering their technological and social disadvantages. Although we can’t

be sure, it looks as if anatomically modern humans also needed a fairly large

advantage during the Upper Paleolithic as they displaced the Neanderthals,

since they had to outcompete populations of archaic humans that must have

been better adapted to Eurasian climates than they were.

 


And  yet,  there  must  have  been  occasions  in  which  smaller  biological

advantages were enough to drive a population expansion, particularly when

those expanding didn’t have to cross oceans. Again, we’re not saying that all

expansions had such causes, but some could have, and the enduring nature of

biological advantage makes it a good candidate for the cause of particularly

widespread and long-winded expansions.

 


One  of  the  largest  of  all  known  expansions—the  spread  of  the  Indo-

Europeans—was  likely  driven  by  the  mutation  that  conferred  lactose

tolerance, one of the most strongly selected alleles that Europeans possess.

 


  “Indo-European” refers to a family of related languages that have spreadover western Eurasia, the Americas, and Australasia. In terms of numbers, it

is the largest of all language families, with about 3 billion native speakers,

half of the human race. The largest Indo-European languages are Spanish,

English, Hindi, Portuguese, Bengali, Russian, German, Marathi, and French.

 


In these languages, basic words in a number of categories are recognizably

similar. In each of them, many of the words for numerals from one to ten,

body  parts  (head,  heart,  and  foot),  plants  and  animals  (oak,  wolf,  bear),

natural phenomena (air, snow, moon), and close relations (father, mother,

daughter) ultimately derive from a common ancestral language. For example,

the word for “three” is treis in Greek, tres in Latin, drei in German, tri in

Russian, tri in Bengali, and tre in Tocharian A, an extinct language of central

Asia.

 


  These  languages  were  first  acknowledged  as  a  family  when  various

Europeans in India noted similarities between Indian languages and European

languages, particularly in regard to their connections with Latin and Greek. It

was then suggested that a wide swath of languages in Europe and India had a

common  origin,  just  as  it  had  long  been  recognized  that  the  Romance

languages (Spanish, Portuguese, French, Italian, and Romanian) derived from

Latin. Most of those early observations were not followed up, but after Sir

William Jones, an eminent scholar and chief justice of India, mentioned the

pattern in a lecture on Indian culture in 1786, people began to take the idea

seriously. Many people studied Indo-European language over the next two

centuries, and today it is the most successful theory in historical linguistics.

 


People of many races and ethnic groups speak an Indo-European tongue:

There is nothing genetic about that. Chinese pilots talk to Japanese air-traffic

controllers in English, for that matter. But there is every reason to believe that

the ancestor of all of these languages was once spoken by a particular people,

living in some particular region. They were relatively few in number, and the

region they occupied was small compared to the lands inhabited by Indo-

European  speakers  today.  There  were  many  other  small  ethnolinguistic

groups in Eurasia in those days, but this group spread, while others did not.

Perhaps there was something unusual about them.                   THE PROTO-INDO-EUROPEANS


 



What we know about the Proto-Indo-Europeans, as we call this group, is

mostly derived from comparative linguistics, supplemented by archaeology.
15
  We  know  that  they  were  stock-raisers  and  grain  farmers,  probably

depending more on their animals than on grain. They raised cattle and sheep,

along with goats and pigs. The cow played a paramount role, both in daily

life and in religion. They had domesticated the horse, and in fact may have

been the first to do so.

 


The  Proto-Indo-Europeans  knew  copper,  and  probably  bronze,  but  not

iron.  They  used  silver  and  possibly  gold.  They  had  wheeled  vehicles,

probably carts pulled by oxen. Woolen textiles were produced by weaving.

They made and drank mead.

 


  Their system was patriarchal, with clans tracing descent through the male

line.  They  were  warlike,  constantly  raiding  for  cattle  and  revenge.  They

probably had egalitarian warrior brotherhoods made up of single young men,

with difficult initiation rites. Those warriors sometimes acted as berserkers in

battle, probably had a wolf as a totem, and often were not quite kept under

control by older and wiser heads.

 


    Proto-Indo-European society as a whole was divided into three orders: a

clerical class that administered the sacrificial rites of a polytheistic religion, a

warrior class, and herder-cultivators. This division of society shows up in far-

flung parts of the Indo-European dispersal: Ancient India has brahmanas,

ksatriyas, and vaisyas, while Rome had flamines, milites, and quirites. French

linguist George Dumézil and others have argued that this “tri-partition” playsa key role in the religion and mythology of the Indo-European peoples, as

when Herodotus tells how the kingship of the Scythians was awarded to one

of three brothers who could pick up a burning cup, an axe, and a plow with a

yoke. The three orders were color-coded. Priests wore white, warriors wore

red, and the common people were symbolized by blue or black.

 


The Indo-Europeans practiced epic poetry, a form that used stock phrases,

some of which show up in poetry that has been preserved to the present day,

such as the Iliad or the Rig Veda. When someone refers to “driving cattle,” or

“undying fame,” or “immortal gods,” they are not being very original. Some

of the Proto-Indo-European myths seem to have involved a world-tree or a

hero slaying a dragon.

 


  What we don’t know, at least with any precision, is when and where the

Proto-Indo-Europeans lived. Comparative linguistics offers a few hints about

the time in which they still lived as one people (and had not yet begun to

spread out) through the identification of technologies they had or didn’t have.

The overall level of technology (for example, bronze but no iron) suggests

that dispersal began in the early Bronze Age, perhaps around 3000 BC. It had

definitely begun by 2500 BC, since a settled Indo-European state (the Hittite

Empire) shows up in the historical record a few hundred years later. We also

see  other  Indo-European  languages,  such  as  Luwian  and  Palaic,  in  areas

adjacent to the Hittite homeland in central Turkey: They are clearly related to

Hittite, but must have been differentiating for some time (several centuries, at

least) before they appeared in the historical record.

 


It’s  fair  to  say  that  the  problem  of  the  location  of  the  Indo-European

homeland, called “the Urheimat” (German for “original homeland”), has been

a subject of controversy—indeed, the question has had a tendency to drive

men mad. Various fruit-cakes have suggested Tibet, North Africa, the shores

of the Pacific, and the North Pole. There’s a distinct tendency for scholars to

place  the  wellspring  of  the  European  peoples  somewhere  in  their  own

backyard. So far, thank God, we haven’t seen any American linguists try that.

 The two most popular theories regarding Urheimat locations place it either

in Anatolia (modern Turkey) or the grasslands of southern Russia. Anatolia is

the origin in the British archaeologist and linguist Colin Renfrew’s model:

His  idea  is  that  the  Indo-European  languages  were  carried  along  by  an

expansion of early farmers out of the Middle East around 7000 BC. There

certainly was such an expansion: There is plenty of archeological and genetic

evidence for it. The question is whether that expansion spread Indo-European
          16
languages.

 


That idea is powerful because of the great population expansion associated

with  farming;  numbers  usually  bring  the  victory.  The  idea  is  even  more

powerful than Renfrew suggested, in fact, because those Anatolian farmers

had already been farming for millennia when they began to expand into the

Balkans. As early adopters, they must have already been somewhat better

adapted to the agricultural way of life than the native Europeans, and so they

almost certainly had biological strengths that Europeans could not duplicate

through observation and learned behavior.

 


  Unfortunately,  Renfrew’s  theory  also  has  many  fatal  weaknesses.

Linguistic paleontology supports a far later common origin than would be

possible if the Proto-Indo Europeans were part of that Middle East expansion

to the northwest into Europe. For example, there are several words referring

to  wheeled  vehicles  that  are  shared  among  Indo-European  languages,  but

wheeled vehicles simply don’t go back as far as 7000 BC. Hittite shows clear

signs  of  a  strong  non-Indo-European  substratum,  as  if  Hittite  invaders

imposed  their  language  on  some  other  group  that  was  already  present  in

Anatolia. This can’t make sense for the zone of origin. Uralic languages (the

language  family  containing  Finnish  and  Hungarian)  appear  to  have  had

extensive contact with early Indo-European, and they may share a common

ancestry. Since the Finnish peoples lived in the forest zone of what is now

Russia, this suggests that the Indo-Europeans did not originate in the Middle

East.

 


The second, more popular explanation is the Kurgan hypothesis, originated

by Marija Gimbutas. In the 1950s she identified the Kurgan people of thePontic-Caspian steppe (the grasslands between the Black Sea and the Caspian

Sea)  as  the  Proto-Indo-Europeans.  If  she  is  correct,  they  were  a  pastoral

people who went through a series of expansions, which probably took the

form of military conquests. Gimbutas thought they were mounted warriors

and that their advantage stemmed from their early domestication of the horse.

The problem is that there is no evidence at all of mounted warriors in this

time period: indeed, not for at least another 2,000 years. The earliest horse-

drawn  chariots  also  appear  far  too  late  to  explain  Indo-European  military

expansion. Moreover, there is reason to believe that the winners in military

conquests usually set themselves up as a dominant elite rather than wiping

out those they conquered.

 


  There is also a strain of thought that argues that Indo-European expansion

was gradual and peaceful, in definite contrast to the way in which humans act

today and have acted over the course of recorded history. Perhaps Gimbutas

was correct in identifying the Kurgans as the Proto-Indo-Europeans, but had

their modus operandi all wrong.

                         MILK AND THE KURGANS


 



Improved variants of the Kurgan hypothesis fit many facts, but what they

don’t do is explain why the Proto-Indo-Europeans expanded at the expense of

neighboring peoples with similar technology. Effective use of the horse in

warfare doesn’t seem to have occurred early enough to explain Proto-Indo-

European  expansion—but  even  if  it  had,  what  would  have  stopped  other

peoples from rapidly acquiring horses and using them in the same way? The

Plains  Indians  certainly  managed  to  master  light  cavalry  warfare  in  short

order: Why couldn’t non-Indo-European peoples have done the same?

 


  Later empires succeeded in part thanks to a snowball effect: The larger

they grew, the stronger they were, until they were stopped by geographic

barriers or long lines of communication. Once the Romans unified Italy, they

were hard to stop. But as far as we can tell, nothing like this happened in the

Indo-European  expansion.  It  was  too  early  for  that  kind  of  imperial

organization.  There  was  no  central  command,  no  capital,  no  state.  If  a

peripheral  Indo-European  tribe  had  a  dustup  with  neighboring  non-Indo-

Europeans, it had to win on its own, more or less. At most they had local

allies. In order to expand as much as they did, early Indo-Europeans must

have had some kind of edge, and in order to expand again and again over

millennia, they had to have an edge that was hard to copy.

 


To solve the mystery, let’s start with what we know about the Proto-Indo-

Europeans from the linguistic evidence. We know that the Indo-Europeans

weren’t especially skilled at grain agriculture or adapted to it, since they were

primarily pastoralists. They were removed from the first centers of farming in

the  Middle  East.  We  also  know  that  that  the  Proto-Indo-Europeans  were

rather  backward  in  the  realms  of  technology  and  social  complexity.Sumerians  invented  the  wheel,  writing,  and  arithmetic  and  had  cities  and

extensive irrigation systems at a time when the Proto-Indo-Europeans had, at

most, domesticated the horse.

 


We suggest that the advantage driving those Indo-European expansions

was biological—a high frequency of the European lactose-tolerance mutation

(the 13910-T allele). The usual story about lactose tolerance is that it’s the

result of a cultural innovation, the domestication of cattle. That innovation

led  to  selection  for  a  new  mutation  that  extended  lactase  production  into

adulthood. But there’s more to the story.

 


  Initially,  selection  favored  individual  carriers  of  the  lactose-tolerance

mutation, but the mutation was rare and had little social effect. Cattle were

used  for  plowing  and  pulling  wagons,  for  their  beef,  and  as  a  source  of

secondary products like leather and tallow. But when the lactase-persistence

allele became common, so that a majority of the adult population could drink

milk, a new kind of pastoralism became possible, one in which people kept

cattle primarily for their milk rather than for their flesh. This change is very

significant, because dairying is much more efficient than raising cattle for
                                                                              17
slaughter: It produces about five times as many calories per acre. Dairying

pastoralists produce more high-quality food on the same amount of land than

nondairy pastoralists, so higher frequencies of lactose tolerance among Indo-

Europeans would have caused the carrying capacity of the land to increase—

for them.

 


  Standard ecological theory indicates that when two similar populations use

the same resources, the one with the greater carrying capacity always wins. In

more familiar terms, the Proto-Indo-Europeans in our scenario could raise

and feed more warriors on the same amount of land—and that is a recipe for

expansion.  The  same  basic  idea  is  behind  theories  of  the  expansion  of

farming through local population growth (called demic expansion): Farming

produces more food per acre, therefore farmers will outnumber foragers, and

so farmers will expand at the expense of foragers.

   Proto-Indo-Europeans  probably  were  most  competitive  in  areas  where

grain  agriculture  was  marginal.  In  the  steppe,  the  problem  was  limited

rainfall. Since raising cattle there had been competitive with grain farming

even before dairying arose, milk-drinking Indo-Europeans would have had an

absolute advantage and should have spread rapidly over the steppe. In much

of  northern  Europe,  shorter  growing  seasons  must  have  interfered  with

production of cereal crops such as wheat, particularly when agriculture was

new there, as those crops had had little time to adapt to the local climate.

Eventually, other cereal crops, such as oats and rye that could do well in

those climates, were developed—probably by accident, starting as weeds in

wheat or barley fields. But that happened in the Bronze Age, long after the

introduction of farming. Dairying may have been more productive than grain

farming in northern Europe during the late Neolithic. Even if it was not, it

may have been close enough to let other advantages of that pastoral way of

life  tip  the  scales.  It  seems  clear  that  the  Proto-Indo-European  form  of

pastoralism did have other advantages in intergroup competition.

 


As the Proto-Indo-Europeans became dairymen, they should have come to

rely  more  and  more  on  their  cattle  and  less  on  grain  farming.  As  that

happened, they would have become mobile, which is a military advantage,

especially against farmers. Farmers have homes and villages that they must

defend, whereas pastoralists can fight at a time and place of their choosing.

Herodotus tells us how Darius, the head of the Persian Empire, decided to

invade  the  Russian  grasslands  in  512  BC,  then  held  by  the  Scythians.

Scythians were a people whose way of life was probably similar to that of the

Proto-Indo-Europeans, but further developed in that they had fully mastered

the horse. They appear to have been milk drinkers early on: In fact, this is
                          18
mentioned in the Iliad.

 


  When Darius invaded, the Scythians kept retreating farther and farther into

the sea of grass: They had no cities or fields and thus had nothing to lose by

retreating. Darius eventually realized that his expedition had been fruitless
                                                            19
and turned back before his army ran out of supplies.

 


  Darius at least had a powerful state and a powerful army: He could copewith Scythian invasions, even if he couldn’t conquer Scythia. Back in the

early days of their expansion, the Indo-Europeans appear to have encountered

farmers in the Balkans who had been farming since about 6000 BC, but who

weren’t under a powerful central government. Around 4200 BC, things went

sour. Ancient village sites were abandoned, advanced work in metals and

ceramics became rare, and the inhabitants shifted to easily defended sites

such as caves, hilltops, and islands. We find an increasing number of Kurgan

burials similar to those found earlier on the steppe. (Interestingly, the bodies

in those Kurgan burials averaged almost four inches taller than the earlier

peoples of the region—milk does a body good.)

 


We suspect that pre-state farmers had a lot of trouble with invading Indo-

European  pastoralists.  It  wasn’t  just  that  dairying  was  productive  and

conferred increased mobility. It made cattle very valuable, and cattle are far

easier to steal than heaps of grain: They can walk. It looks as if the early

Indo-Europeans spent a lot of time rustling each other’s cattle, fighting over

cattle, planning revenge for previous raids, and in general raising hell. They

became a warrior society. That general tendency of pastoral society—a gift

for causing trouble—was a key theme in Eurasian history for millennia. The

threat receded as agricultural peoples built strong states, intensified again in

the  Middle  Ages  as  states  weakened  and  steppe  techniques  improved

(reaching an apogee with Genghis Khan), and ended only with the invention

of gunpowder.

 


Our  picture  of  the  Indo-European  expansion  begins  with  a  very  rapid

spread across the steppe as soon as the increased frequency of the lactase-

persistence  mutation  became  common  enough  to  allow  the  switch  to  a

dairying economy. This rapid spread would have resulted in a population that

spoke similar dialects over a wide region all the way from the Ukraine to the

Urals—similar because there hadn’t been time for linguistic divergence. The

wave of advance continued on into Europe, where dairying was ecologically

competitive  with  early  agriculture  and  produced  a  far  more  aggressive

culture.  Most  likely,  Indo-European  culture  also  became  more  warlike  as

their mobility, superior numbers, and better nutrition allowed them to win

battles more often than other peoples. Their victories, in turn, may have led to

further advantages in military efficiency: Success feeds success. 


  Judging from their relatively low contribution to the European gene pool,

Indo-Europeans appear to have practiced elite dominance, conquering rather

than exterminating and replacing the previous inhabitants. A relatively small

elite population can often impose its language on the rest of the population.

In addition, the Indo-Europeans would have added the lactose-tolerance allele

to the local mix. Although it appears to have been rare or nonexistent in

Europe  before  the  Indo-European  invasions,  it  became  common  in  those

areas  where  a  dairying  economy  was  favored,  particularly  in  northern
        20
Europe. Indo-European languages and culture spread past those regions in

which dairying was favored—for example, into southern Europe and Iran—

but strong states probably limited their expansion into the Middle East.

 


As much as anything, those peripheral expansions were probably driven by

what might be called historical momentum: Peoples with a long record of

success in war and raiding kept expanding even in areas where they had no

special ecological advantages. Something similar happened when the Indo-

Aryans moved into India: Internal weaknesses, possibly even collapse, of the

Indus civilization may have allowed that expansion to occur. Today the LCT

13910-T lactase variant has reached almost 100 percent frequency in some

parts of northern Europe; it is common in northern India and can even be

found at low levels among some pastoral peoples of sub-Saharan Africa, such

as the Fulani and Hausa.

 


  Moreover,  there  is  reason  to  think  that  this  historical  phenomenon  has

happened at least three times. Cattle herders of East Africa in the region of

the Upper Nile and further south are lactase-tolerant milk drinkers due to a
                                      21
younger  mutation  of  their  own.  They,  too,  have  expanded:  They  have

become warlike, and there are fascinating parallels between their religions
                                                                              22
and  social  structure  and  those  of  the  ancestral  Indo-Europeans. Another

separate pair of mutations causing lactose tolerance happened in the Arabian

peninsula, driven in this case by the domestication of camels. This may have

been  an  important  cause  of  the  explosive  growth  of  Islam  and  the  Arab
                                                      23
conquests of the seventh century AD and later.

 If this picture is correct, the occurrence of a single mutation in a particular

group of pastoralists some 8,000 years ago eventually determined the spoken

language of half of mankind. It may not be possible to reconcile this with

Tolstoy’s ideas of the unimportance of the individual in history. Of course,

champions  of  individual  importance  have  typically  emphasized  ideas,

intelligence, and character—not digestion.

                                             7

 



MEDIEVAL EVOLUTION: HOW THE ASHKENAZI JEWS

                            GOT THEIR SMARTS

 



The Ashkenazi Jews—the Jews of Europe—began as a distinct community

about  1,200  years  ago  along  the  Rhine.  The  word  “Ashkenaz”  was  the

Hebrew name for Germany, so the Ashkenazim are literally “German Jews,”

although they later came to inhabit other areas, particularly Poland.

 


  Today the Ashkenazi Jews, some 11 million strong, live throughout the

world, with the largest concentrations in Israel and the United States. There

are many other Jewish communities—such as the Sephardic Jews who once

lived in Spain, the Mizrahi Jews of the Middle East and North Africa, and the

Bene  Israel  of  India—but  the  vast  majority  of  the  world’s  Jews  are

Ashkenazi.

 


  They have had a surprisingly large influence on the world over the past

couple  of  centuries,  and  they  have  played  an  out-sized  role  in  science,

literature,  and  entertainment.  Might  they  be  smarter  than  other  groups  of

people?

 


  Apparently so. Ashkenazi Jews have the highest IQ of any ethnic group

known. They average around 112-115, well above the European norm of 100.

This fact has social significance, because IQ (as measured by IQ tests and

their equivalents, like the Graduate Record Exam [GRE] or the Scholastic

Aptitude Test [SAT]) is the best available predictor of success in academic
                            1
subjects and many jobs. Jews are just as successful in such jobs as their

tested IQ would predict, and they are hugely overrepresented in those jobs

and accomplishments with the highest cognitive demands. 


We’re not the first to notice this. Popular opinion has held that European

Jews are smart for a long time. At the turn of the century in London, for

example,  Jews  took  a  disproportionate  share  of  prizes  and  awards  in  the
                2
school system. This was not the case in classical times: Surviving writings

from  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans  offer  no  hint  that  the  Jews  were

considered unusually smart.

 


So why are the Ashkenazim especially intelligent?

 


To solve this puzzle, it may be useful to look at what we know about the

DNA  of  the  Ashkenazi  Jews,  because  it  turns  out  that  they  have  another

interesting characteristic. Namely, they have an unusual set of serious genetic

diseases,  such  as  Tay-Sachs  disease,  Gaucher’s  disease,  familial

dysautonomia, and two different forms of hereditary breast cancer (BRCA1

and  BRCA2),  and  these  diseases  are  up  to  100  times  more  common  in

Ashkenazi Jews than in other European populations. For a long time, those

disorders  have  posed  another  puzzle—why  are  they  so  common  in  this

particular group?

 


We believe that these two puzzles have a single explanation. We propose

that the Ashkenazi Jews have a genetic advantage in intelligence that arose

from natural selection for success in white-collar occupations during their

sojourn in northern Europe. Strong selection for intelligence also produced

some unpleasant side effects, in the form of alleles that boost IQ in carriers

while causing harm to homozygotes.

 


This kind of explanation is controversial, of course. It is true that many

dismiss the idea that intelligence is measurable, is influenced by genes, or can

vary  from  group  to  group.  These  criticisms  and  dismissals,  interestingly,

hardly ever come from scientists working in the area of cognitive testing and

its outcomes: There is little or no controversy within the field. IQ tests work

—they predict academic achievement and other life outcomes, and IQ scoresare  highly  heritable.  If  genes  influence  intelligence,  then,  over  time,  a

situation  in  which  intelligence  boosts  fertility  must  result  in  higher

intelligence. That simple logic is the very essence of the theory of evolution

by  natural  selection:  Genes  that  cause  increased  reproduction  gradually

become more and more common in a population.

           ASHKENAZI INTELLECTUAL PROMINENCE


 



Jewish intellectual prominence is striking. As we have said, Ashkenazi Jews

are  vastly  overrepresented  in  science.  Their  numbers  among  prominent

scientists are roughly ten times greater than you’d expect from their share of

the population in the United States and Europe. Over the past two generations

they have won more than a quarter of all Nobel science prizes, although they

make up less  than one-six-hundredth of the world’s population. Although

they represent less than 3 percent of the U.S. population, they won 27 percent
                                                                3
of the U.S. Nobel Prizes in science during that period and 25 percent of the

A.  M.  Turing  Awards  (given  annually  by  the  Association  for  Computing
            4
Machinery).  Ashkenazi  Jews  account  for  half  of  twentieth-century  world

chess  champions.  American  Jews  are  also  overrepresented  in  other  areas,
                                                                                    5
such  as  business  (where  they  account  for  about  a  fifth  of  CEOs)  and
                                                                                        6
academia (where they make up about 22 percent of Ivy League students).

Although these statistics show intelligence in a broad range of disciplines, we

emphasize  measures  of  scientific  and  mathematical  achievement  in  our

present argument because we believe they are more objective measures than

the others. Everyone agrees about what constitutes important discoveries in

science and mathematics, whereas there are no comparable objective criteria

to evaluate accomplishments in art and literature. Was Freudian theory, for

example, a landmark achievement in psychology or the equivalent of the pet

rock, a silly passing fad? We don’t know (although we do have a strong

suspicion), and we have no objective way of finding the answer.

 


The statistics about Ashkenazi accomplishment may seem pretty dry, but

they’re referring to people like Albert Einstein, who developed the special

theory of relativity. This theory unified mechanics and electromagnetism and

led to atomic energy. We’re talking about John von Neumann, who was one

of the developers of game theory and who played an important part in theManhattan Project and in the development of the hydrogen bomb; and about

Richard Feynman, Julian Schwinger, and Murray Gell-Mann, who developed

many of the most important ideas in particle physics.

 


The trend continues today, with scientists of Ashkenazi descent such as Ed

Witten and Grigori Perelman. Witten, a professor of physics at the Institute

for  Advanced  Study,  has  done  important  work  in  string  theory  and  on

emerging  connections  between  mathematical  physics  and  low-dimensional

topology. He was the first physicist to win the Fields Medal (in 1990), the

highest international award in mathematics, and won the Crafoord Prize, an

international science award, in 2008. In 2002, Perelman, a Russian-Jewish

mathematician, proved the Poincaré conjecture, the most famous unsolved

problem in topology. For this work, he was offered—but refused—the Fields

Medal (his refusal had to do with attempts by others to claim credit for his

solution and his disappointment with the ethical standards of professional

mathematics).

 


  None of this means that typical Ashkenazi Jews are especially intelligent.

Their average IQ is around 112, about three-quarters of a standard deviation

above the European mean. However, a modest difference like this has a very

strong  impact  on  the  number  of  individuals  out  at  the  far  edge  of  the

distribution because of the shape of the bell curve. It’s enough to greatly

increase the fraction of individuals with high intelligence.

 


This pattern among the Ashkenazim is far more interesting than most other

kinds of human diversity. If a particular ethnic group had incredibly large

ears, for example, we’d be amazed, but it wouldn’t have much impact on our

lives. Ideas originated by Ashkenazi Jews, such as special relativity and game

theory, however, affect our lives every day, whether we know it or not. Their

intelligence has influenced the world in important ways, driving many of the

most significant developments, advances, and creative works of our time.

 Two bell curves with different means

 


  Ashkenazi  intellectual  prominence  is  also  very  recent,  in  evolutionary

terms. This high level of intellectual achievement among the Ashkenazi Jews

is less than two centuries old.

                   ASHKENAZI HISTORY UP TO 1800


 



The  ancient  Jewish  population  suffered  remarkable  vicissitudes—the

Babylonian  exile,  the  Hellenistic  conquest  and  Hasmonean  state,  and  the

revolts against the Roman Empire, for example—but most of that history is

irrelevant to our thesis, except to the extent that it helped create necessary

cultural preconditions. That history is irrelevant because the Jews, in those

days, were much like other people. Most Jews then were farmers, just like

most other people in settled populations, and they must have experienced

evolutionary  pressures  similar  to  those  experienced  by  other  agricultural

peoples. They were not intellectually prominent at that time.

 


  They made no contributions to the mathematics and protoscience of the

classical era. A fair amount of classical commentary on the Jews has been

preserved, and there is no sign that anyone then had the impression that Jews

were unusually intelligent. By “no sign,” we mean that there is apparently no
                                                                                          7
single statement to that effect anywhere in preserved classical literature. 

This is in strong contrast with the classical Greeks, whom everyone thought

unusually clever.

 


The key cultural precondition among the Jews—key, that is, to later events

among the Ashkenazim—was a pattern of social organization that required

literacy, that strongly discouraged intermarriage, and that could propagate

itself over long periods of time with little change. That pattern (Rabbinical

Judaism) had not always existed but gradually emerged in the centuries after

Titus’s destruction of the Temple in the first revolt against the Roman Empire

in AD 70. This happened first in Israel, then later in the Jewish community of

Mesopotamia. It coincided with the development of the Talmud, a collection

of  writings  about  Jewish  law,  customs,  and  history.  The  Torah  and  theTalmud are the central documents of rabbinical Judaism.

 


  Literacy,  which  does  not  itself  require  high  intelligence,  was  probably

important to the Jews in their shift from a nation to an urban occupational

caste during and following the Diaspora, acting as an entrée to many urban
                                                                                    8
professions in which they at first had no special biological advantages. The

prohibition against intermarriage mattered, because local selective pressures

cannot change a population that freely mixes with neighbors. Intermarriage

quickly dilutes the effect of beneficial alleles within a population, since the

introduction of alleles from outside easily swamps the effects of selection

within  the  group.  Rabbinical  Judaism’s  long-term  stability  was  also  key,

since natural selection takes many generations to effect large changes.

 


In fact, pre-Diaspora Jewish genetics seems not to have been remarkable in

any way. We make use of genetic markers indicating the amount of Middle

Eastern ancestry among the Ashkenazim, but that is only important to our

thesis insofar as it helps us estimate the extent of gene flow between the

Ashkenazim and neighboring populations. In much the same way, the details

of the Ashkenazi settlement of and migrations in Europe interest us because

of their potential for creating genetic bottlenecks.

 


  After the Bar-Kochba revolt of AD 135, most Jews lived outside of Israel.

They were concentrated in the Parthian (later Sassanid) Empire and in the

eastern half of the Roman Empire. There was  a substantial population of

Roman Jews, and there were other western settlements, such as Cologne,

though these are poorly documented. The Jewish Diaspora in classical times

was largely urban, but those Jews were on average poor; they were artisans
                                                            9
and laborers rather than moneylenders or managers.  There is a temptation to

project recent cultural patterns, such as Jewish concentration in finance or

Talmudic scholarship, back into the past, well before those patterns came into

existence—but this is a mistake. After the Muslim conquests, the majority of

Jews lived under Islamic rule.

 


The  Ashkenazim,  the  Jews  living  north  of  the  Alps  and  the  Pyrenees,appear in the historical record in the eighth and ninth centuries. Their origins

are somewhat unclear. There are three different threads of history that may

have led to the foundation of the Ashkenazi Jews in the centuries preceding,

but the relative strengths of the theories are uncertain.

 


The first possibility is that the Ashkenazim—or some fraction of them—

had already lived in France and the Rhineland for a long time, perhaps going

back to Roman times. We know that there were Jews in Cologne around AD

300,  and  that  there  were  Jews  living  in  France  under  the  Merovingian
                                                10
monarchs in the fifth and sixth centuries. However, in 629 King Dagobert

of  the  Franks  ordered  the  Jews  of  his  lands  to  convert,  leave,  or  face

execution.  This  conversion  edict  may  have  pushed  them  out  of  most  of

France. Certainly we hear little about French Jews for the next 150 years or

so. The size and even the existence of this population is uncertain.

 


The second thread involves Jewish merchants originating from the lands of

Islam as distant as Palestine and Iraq. The Carolingian kings encouraged and

protected these merchants, who brought luxury items such as silks and spices
                                                      11
from the East, according to Agobard of Lyons. A few such traders served as

interpreters on diplomatic missions; one brought Charlemagne an elephant

from Haroun al-Rashid.

 


The third thread, generally thought to be the best supported, is that most of

the  founding  Ashkenazi  population  migrated  from  southern  Europe,

especially Italy. There are accounts of particular Jews—both individuals and

families—moving from Italy to this area in the early Middle Ages. One was

the Kalonymus family, which is said to have migrated from Lucca in Italy to
              12
Mainz in 917.

 


  When they first appear in the historical record, the Ashkenazim are long-

distance merchants who trade with the Muslim world. This is the beginning

of a unique occupational pattern; there were no other European groups—or

other Jewish groups, for that matter—who were noted for this. The majority

of Jews had already given up agriculture, but the Jews of Islam, although                                              13
urban, mostly worked in various crafts. The Ashkenazim apparently seldom

had such jobs. This pattern is detailed by one historian as follows: “Two

entirely different patterns in the practice of crafts and their place in Jewish

life  and  society  are  discernible  throughout  the  Middle  Ages.  One

characterizes  the  communities  in  countries  around  the  Mediterranean,

including in the south those in the continents of Asia and Africa, and in the

north  extending  more  or  less  to  an  imaginary  demarcation  line  from  the

Pyrenees  to  the  northern  end  of  the  Balkans.  The  other,  in  the  Christian
                                                                                          14
countries of Europe, was more or less north of the Pyrenees-Balkans line.”

Furthermore, “North of the Pyrenees and in the Balkans crafts played a very

small role as a Jewish occupation, from the inception of Jewish settlement

there.”

 


The  Ashkenazi  population,  established  in  northern  France  by  the  early

900s, prospered and expanded. They settled in the Rhineland and then, after

the Norman Conquest, in England. At first they were international merchants

who  acted  as  intermediaries  with  the  Muslim  world.  As  Muslims  and

Christians, especially Italians, increasingly found it possible to do business

directly, Ashkenazi merchants moved more and more into local trade. When

persecution became a serious problem and the security required for long-

distance travel no longer existed, the Ashkenazim increasingly specialized in

one  occupation,  finance,  left  open  to  them  because  of  the  Christian

prohibition of usury. The majority of the Ashkenazim seem to have been
                                                                                          15
moneylenders  by  1100,  and  this  pattern  continued  for  several  centuries.

Such occupations (trade and finance) had high IQ demands, and we know of

no other population that had such a large fraction of cognitively demanding

jobs for an extended period.

 


In some cases, we have fairly detailed records of Ashkenazi commercial

activity. For example, concerning the Jews of Roussilon circa 1270: “The

evidence is overwhelming that this rather substantial group of Jews supported

itself  by  money  lending,  to  the  virtual  exclusion  of  all  other  economic

activities. Of the 228 adult male Jews mentioned in the registers, almost 80

percent appear as lenders to their Christian neighbors. Nor were loans by

Jewish women (mostly widows) uncommon, and the capital of minors wasoften  invested  in  a  similar  manner.  Moreover,  the  Jews  most  active  as

moneylenders  appear  to  have  been  the  most  respected  members  of  the
              16
community.”

 


The Jews in this period were prosperous. Historian H. Ben-Sasson pointed

out that “Western Europe suffered virtual famine for many years in the tenth

and eleventh centuries, [but] there is no hint or echo of this in the Jewish

sources of the region in this period. The city dweller lived at an aristocratic
                                                                                          17
level, as befitted international merchants and honored local financiers.” 
                                                                18
Their standard of living was that of the lower nobility. The Ashkenazi Jews

were  thus  spared  malnutrition  and  occasional  famine.  This  helped  Jewish

populations recover from their losses due to persecution; it may have affected

selective pressures as well.

 


And  persecution  was  a  very  serious  matter.  Although  the  Jews  of  this

region were prosperous, they were not safe. The first major crisis was the

First  Crusade  of  1096,  which  resulted  in  the  deaths  of  something  like  a

quarter  of  the  Jews  in  the  Rhineland.  Religious  hostility,  probably

exacerbated by commercial rivalries, increased in Europe during this period,

manifesting itself in the form of massacres and expulsions. This pattern of

persecution  kept  the  Ashkenazi  Jews  from  overflowing  their  white-collar

niche during the High Middle Ages, which otherwise would have happened

fairly  rapidly.  It  culminated  in  the  expulsion  of  the  Jews  from  most  of

Western  Europe—from  England  in  1290,  from  France  in  1394,  and  from

various  regions  of  Germany  in  the  fifteenth  century.  The  expulsions  had

greater  effect  on  the  demography  of  the  region,  in  the  long  run,  than

massacres and persecutions. Jewish population growth rates were high due to

both their prosperity and their belief system, as they favored large families,

so their numbers tended to recover from attacks after a generation or two. But

the potential for recovery decreased as Jews were excluded from more and

more of Western Europe.

 


  Many  of  the  Jews  who  were  expelled  moved  east,  first  to  Austria,

Bohemia, and Moravia, and later to the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.

The Polish rulers welcomed Jewish immigrants who could help modernizeand reconstruct the country, which had been devastated by Mongol raids.

Jews were welcomed as urban developers, investors, and initiators of trade.

Other  skilled  immigrants  were  also  welcomed,  but  some  of  those  groups

brought political risks, particularly the Germans because of their connection

with the Teutonic Knights. The Jews were politically neutral and therefore

safe.

 


As had been the case in Western Europe, the Jews of Poland had a very

unusual occupational profile. None were farmers, and few were craftsmen, at

least in the early centuries of that settlement. The very first to immigrate were

mainly  moneylenders,  but  that  soon  changed.  They  became  tax-farmers

(something like a freelance tax collector), toll-farmers, estate managers, and

proprietors of mills and taverns. According to the historian B. D. Weinryb, in

the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century  “about  15  percent  of  the  Jewish

population  were  earners  of  wages,  salaries  and  fees.  The  rest  were
                                                      19
independent owners of business enterprises.” They were the management

class of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. Besides literacy, success in

those  specialized  occupations  depended  upon  skills  similar  to  those  of

businessmen today, not least the ability to keep track of complex transactions

and money flows.

 


  Eventually,  as  the  Ashkenazi  population  of  the  Polish-Lithuanian

Commonwealth  increased,  more  and  more  Jews  became  craftsmen—there

are, after all, only so many managerial and financial slots. Still, for 800 to

900  years,  from  roughly  800  to  1650  or  1700,  the  great  majority  of  the

Ashkenazi Jews had managerial and financial jobs, jobs of high complexity,

and were neither farmers nor craftsmen. In this they differed from all other

settled peoples of which we have knowledge. In fact, it would have been

impossible (back then) for the majority of any territorial ethnic group to have

such white-collar jobs, because agricultural productivity would have been too

low. Ninety percent of the population had to farm in order to produce enough

to feed themselves and a thin crust of rulers, scribes, soldiers, craftsmen, and

merchants.  Selection  for  success  at  white-collar  tasks  could  only  have

occurred if those scribes and merchants could somehow become an ethnic

group, one defined by occupation rather than location.

 Jews who were particularly good at these high-complexity jobs enjoyed

increased reproductive success. As Weinryb noted: “More children survived

to  adulthood  in  affluent  families  than  in  less  affluent  ones.  A  number  of

genealogies of business leaders, prominent rabbis, community leaders, and

the like—generally belonging to the more affluent classes—show that such

people  often  had  four,  six,  sometimes  even  eight  or  nine  children  who

reached adulthood. . . . On the other hand, there are some indications that

poorer families tended to be small ones. . . . It should also be added that

overcrowding, which favors epidemics, was more prevalent among the poorer
        20
classes.” In short, Weinryb wrote, “the number of children surviving among

Polish  Jews  seems  to  have  varied  considerably  from  one  social  level  to
        21
another.” He also suggested that wealthier Jews were less crowded, as they

lived in bigger houses; could keep their houses warmer; could afford wet-

nurses; and had better access to rural refuges from epidemics. As an example,

he cites a census of the town of Brody in 1764 showing that homeowner

households had 1.2 children per adult member, while tenant households had
  22
0.6.

 


The  occupational  pattern  of  the  Jews  living  in  the  Islamic  world  was

different from that of the Ashkenazim. The Jews of Islam did not have a high

concentration of white-collar occupations. Some had such jobs in some parts

of the Islamic world, in some periods, but it seems it was never the case that

most did in any given place and time. In part this was because other minority

groups—Greek Christians, Armenians, and so on—competed successfully for

these  jobs,  and  in  part  it  was  because  Muslims,  valuing  nonwarrior

occupations more highly than medieval Christians did, took many of those

jobs themselves. In addition, because there was less persecution overall, there

were many more Jews in the Islamic world than in Europe—more Jews, in

fact, than there were white-collar jobs.

 


In fact, to a large extent, and especially during years of relative Muslim

decline  from  the  fourteenth  to  the  twentieth  centuries,  the  Jews  of  Islam
                                    23
tended  to  have  “dirty”  jobs.  These  included  such  tasks  as  cleaning

cesspools  and  drying  the  contents  for  use  as  fuel—a  common  Jewish

occupation in Morocco, Yemen, Iraq, Iran, and Central Asia. Jews were alsofound  as  tanners,  butchers,  and  hangmen  and  in  other  disagreeable  or

despised occupations. Such jobs must have had low IQ elasticity: Brilliant

tanners and hangmen almost certainly did not become rich.

       EMERGENCE OF INTELLECTUAL DIFFERENCES


 



The selection process we are interested in may have been under way during

the Middle Ages, but its results were not yet evident in 1800. Of course, there

were no IQ tests then, but there were as yet no Ashkenazi discoveries in

science or mathematics either.

 


  Perhaps if anti-Semitism had not prevented Jews from a wide range of

career  choices,  this  would  not  have  been  the  case.  Severe  restrictions  on

Jewish occupations and participation in public life were just beginning to be

lifted. But another reason they were not found among the early European

scientists and mathematicians was that the Ashkenazim had been uninterested

in natural philosophy for some centuries. Indeed, at times Ashkenazi leaders

were positively hostile to such inquiries. Ever since the work of Maimonides

in the twelfth century, the majority of Jewish religious leaders had tended to

subordinate philosophy to the literal interpretation of the Torah (the first five

books of the Hebrew Bible).

 


A herem, or religious ban, had been placed on Maimonides’ philosophical

work after his death in 1204, while Solomon ben Abraham Adret, a rabbi and

scholar at the beginning of the fourteenth century, issued another herem on

“any member of the community who, being under twenty-five years, shall
                                                                                          24
study  the  works  of  the  Greeks  on  natural  science  and  metaphysics.” 

Although the Ashkenazim put a tremendous amount of intellectual energy

into Talmudic analysis during this period, we do not believe that the resulting

body  of  work  provides  evidence  of  unusual  mental  acuity.  Despite  its

historical significance and its importance to the Jewish culture and religion, it

is fair to say that it hasn’t drawn a great deal of interest outside of the Jewish

community. 


  Another factor is that the Ashkenazi Jews were in the wrong place: Science

and  technology  were  sprouting  in  Western  Europe,  not  in  the  Polish-

Lithuanian Commonwealth. In fact, the Jews had been welcomed because

Eastern Europe was backward and therefore in need of their skills.

 


All of these factors had begun to change by 1800. In 1791, France became

the first country in Europe to grant legal equality to the Jews, and Napoleon’s

conquests spread that policy over much of Europe. Even in countries without

full civil equality, such as Great Britain, Jews generally enjoyed increased

rights. Movements within Judaism began to support Enlightenment values

and  escape  from  the  ghetto,  and  things  began  to  happen.  As  the  British

historian Eric Hobsbawm has said, “It is as though the lid had been removed
                            25
from a pressure cooker.”

 


A trickle of Ashkenazi scientists and mathematicians began to appear in

the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century—major  talents  like  the  eminent

mathematicians  Carl  Jacobi  and  Leopold  Kronecker.  They  originated  in

Germany, home to a comparatively small fraction of the Ashkenazim. Over

time, more significant Jewish figures appeared in the arts and sciences. This

might have happened more rapidly, except that the majority of Jews (after the

partition of Poland) lived in Russia, which was slow to emancipate. Many

Ashkenazim from Eastern Europe emigrated—some to Western Europe and

some to the United States, Canada, Argentina, and South Africa. In those new

lands they were much freer to exercise their talents, and by the beginning of

the twentieth century, Ashkenazi Jews were playing a major role in all areas

of science and mathematics. This trend strengthened in the second half of the

twentieth  century—even  though  the  Nazis  had  murdered  most  of  the

Ashkenazim remaining in Europe—and it continues today.

               A GENETICALLY DISTINCT GROUP


 



One standard counterargument to any thesis suggesting that the Ashkenazi

Jews  are  in  some  way  biologically  different  or  special  is  that  they  are

adherents of a religion rather than a race or ethnic group in the strictest sense,

and that therefore they cannot be genetically distinct. Some have brought up

conversion as a mixing mechanism, often mentioning Elizabeth Taylor or

Sammy Davis Jr., prominent converts to Judaism, as contemporary examples.

Raphael and Jennifer Patai argued in The Myth of the Jewish Race that an

inflow of genes from neighboring populations, via conversion, intermarriage,

and  illicit  sex,  kept  Jewish  populations  from  developing  distinct  genetic
        26
features. It’s true that Jews as a whole are not a single genetically distinct

group; however, some subgroups are—in particular, the Ashkenazim. Strong

evidence  exists  in  the  prevalence  of  genetic  diseases  like  Tay-Sachs  and

others, but there is much more information these days as a result of new
                                                                        27
technologies for studying DNA. Take a look: SNPs don’t lie.

 


The  plot  shown  on  page  205  makes  use  of  those  alleles  that  are

considerably more common in one group than in others to determine group

membership. Ashkenazi Jews (represented by circles and squares, the cluster

in the upper-righthand corner) can easily be distinguished from the general

European  population  (triangles).  Irish,  Scandinavians,  Germans,  and  Brits

occupy the upper left end of the archipelago, while Greeks and Italians are

found at the lower left end. The Ashkenazi Jews are a distinct group; this is

made especially clear by the cluster of dark squares, the group of Ashkenazi

Jews  with  four  Ashkenazi  Jewish  grandparents.  For  a  very  long  time,

Ashkenazi Jews (and most other Jewish groups as well) were endogamous,

rarely marrying outside their faith or accepting converts. An endogamous

group can remain genetically distinct, or become genetically different from

neighboring peoples, if that social pattern persists. This is especially likely ifsome major fraction of the group’s ancestors came from somewhere else (in

this case, the Middle East) or if the selective pressures they’ve experienced

have been different from those present in neighboring peoples.

 


  There is reason to believe that a fair fraction (≈40 percent) of Ashkenazi

ancestry is European, which we will discuss later, but it seems that for the

most part those genes were added to the mix a long time ago, possibly back

in the days of the Roman Empire. That notion is inherently plausible because

many of the Jews in Rome arrived as enslaved prisoners of war, captured in

the Great Revolt of AD 65-73 or in Bar-Kochba’s revolt of AD 132-135.

Many of those slaves eventually became freemen, and it is likely that they

were predominantly male. Many must have married local European women.

There should therefore be a significant southern European component in the

maternal ancestry of Roman Jews and, later, Ashkenazi Jews.

 























European genetic substructure analysis

 


  Admixture  has  not  kept  the  Ashkenazim  from  becoming  geneticallydistinct. Even if a population starts out as a mixture of two peoples, as in this

case, becoming endogamous (ending intermarriage) and staying so for a long

time  ensures  that  the  population  will  become  homogeneous.  If  the

population’s ancestry is 60 percent Middle Eastern and 40 percent European,

for example, a few dozen generations of endogamy will result in a population

in  which  each  individual’s  ancestry  is  quite  close  to  60  percent  Middle

Eastern  and  40  percent  European.  In  other  words,  you  eventually  get  a

population  that  has  a  flavor  all  its  own—even  more  so  if  it  experiences

special selective pressures.

 


This means that if you look at the most informative parts of the genome,

you can tell whether a certain individual is Ashkenazi (as opposed to, say, a

non-Jewish Italian, Greek, or German) just about every time, particularly if

all his or her recent ancestors are Jewish. In the plot, the circles represent

Ashkenazi Jewish individuals, but the shaded circles represent individuals

whose  grandparents  were  all  Ashkenazi  Jews  as  well.  That  distinction

matters,  because  Jews  haven’t  been  nearly  as  endogamous  over  the  past

century as they were during the Middle Ages.

 


  Could these same methods distinguish the Ashkenazi from other Jewish

groups,  such  as  Moroccan  Jews  or  Yemeni  Jews?  The  answer  is  almost

certainly yes. Although that particular measurement has not yet been made, it

should be easy to make that distinction because the genetic distance between

Ashkenazi Jews and Yemeni Jews is considerably larger than that between

Ashkenazi Jews and Western Europeans.

 


  Members of the general public sometimes believe that individual genetic

profiles do not necessarily reflect nationality. Somebody who is Swedish, for

example, might be genetically closer to someone from Japan than to another

Swede, according to this view of things. If this was true, it would apply to a

group like the Ashkenazi Jews as well, even though they are not quite a

“nationality.” However, that belief is false. In fact, a case where a person of

one nationality is closer genetically to someone of a distant nationality than

to his or her own compatriots never happens. If you’re Swedish, every Swede

(not counting recent immigrants) is genetically closer to you than any personin Japan.

 


It’s possible to be closer to someone in Japan if you consider only one

gene: Both of you might have the same blood type while your next-door

neighbor might not, for example. Nevertheless, it is somewhat more likely

that your neighbor will have the same blood type as you, since the frequency

of blood types varies according to nationality. If you look over the whole

genome—about  20,000  genes—with  a  match  with  your  neighbor  being

somewhat more likely for every single gene, the chance of the overall match

with  someone  Japanese  being  closer  than  the  match  with  your  neighbor

becomes vanishingly small. Think of it this way: When you make a bet at the

casino, the odds favor the house, although not overwhelmingly so. You might

win that first bet—it’s not that unlikely. But what is the chance that you’ll

win most of the time over the course of a year—win the majority out of

thousands of bets, with the odds against you on every one? The probability of

that happening is vanishingly small, which is why the house always wins in

the long run.

 


As a practical matter, if you can distinguish between the members of two

populations by looking at them, genetic analysis will be able to do so as well.

And sometimes it will be able to make such distinctions when you can’t tell

by  looking  at  them.  The  question  as  to  whether  the  Ashkenazim  are

genetically distinct is now settled: We know from the data that they are. But

that by itself it not enough to prove our thesis that they are more intelligent

than the rest of us, or even that they are significantly different in any other

way—not by a long shot. Being measurably different is not necessarily the

same as being significantly different, and knowing that systematic genetic

differences exist does not automatically tell us what their consequences are.

 


  However, this initial set of data could have disproved our thesis. If the

genetic evidence had indicated that the Ashkenazi Jews could not constitute a

genetically distinct group—if there had been significant continuing gene flow

—then  we  would  have  to  concede  that  our  proposed  mechanism  (natural

selection) could not have occurred. But the initial dataset did not disprove our

thesis. So what does the genetic evidence say about Ashkenazi intelligence?                                   NOTES ON IQ


 



IQ tests and scores are not in fact crucial to our thesis, but they are useful.

Intellectual accomplishment is all that really matters: If people routinely won

Nobel Prizes in physics with low IQ scores, or, for that matter, routinely aced

calculus  exams  but  flunked  the  IQ  test,  we’d  junk  the  IQ  tests.  But  that

doesn’t happen: IQ is an imperfect but useful measure of intelligence.

 


  You’ll frequently hear that we don’t really know what intelligence is, that

we don’t know how to measure it, that IQ tests are biased, and that IQ scores

don’t predict anything, or that they don’t predict anything outside of school.

Often  these  complaints  are  salted  with  personal  anecdotes  about  some

acquaintance that had a high IQ score but was lazy, crazy, or suffered from

unforgivable  personal  hygiene.  And  in  recent  years,  other  forms  of

intelligence  have  become  all  the  rage.  Daniel  Goleman  has  written  of

“emotional intelligence” and “social intelligence,” pointing out how they can

help  to  predict  job  success  and  personal  happiness.  And  other  forms  of

intelligence  have  been  proposed.  In  his  1993  book,  Howard  Gardner
                                            28
suggested  that  there  are  many  types.  But  the  data  hardly  support  these

attempts  to  complexify  cognitive  testing.  The  supposed  special  kinds  of

intelligence don’t predict anything useful or, when they do, predict only to

the extent that they are correlated with general intelligence.

 


Yet IQ tests work in the sense that they predict performance. They were

originally  developed  in  order  to  predict  how  well  children  would  do  in

school, and they do an excellent job of that. They also have moderate to high

predictive power on many other questions, such as job performance, health,

risk of accidental death, income, and other characteristics that may be less

obvious, such as susceptibility to Alzheimer’s disease. To make our positionperfectly  clear,  we’d  like  to  emphasize  that  saying  IQ  scores  have some

predictive  power  is  not  the  same  thing  as  saying  that  they  determine

everything.

 


Of course, exceptions don’t make trends disappear. Muggsy Bogues may

have played in the NBA while being 5 feet 3 inches tall, and there may be

numerous individuals who are 6 feet 8 inches but were so clumsy on their

high-school basketball teams that they sat on the bench the entire season. But

in  general,  height  still  matters  in  basketball.  It’s  not  the  only  thing  that

matters, it doesn’t absolutely determine success, but on average it makes a lot

of difference. The same can be said of IQ: For most life events it’s not as

important as height is in basketball, but it’s fairly important. Nor are IQ tests

biased:  They  predict  academic  performance  with  the  same  accuracy  in
                          29
different ethnic groups.

 


  Moreover, IQ is highly heritable. What this means is that an individual’s

IQ  is  partially  determined  by  genetic  factors,  so  that  it  tends  to  be  more

similar to that of his or her parents and siblings than a randomly chosen

person’s IQ would be. Siblings with the same biological parents have similar

IQs even when they are raised separately, whereas adopted siblings don’t,

even when raised together.

 


The same is true of height: Tall people tend to have taller-than-average

children.  In  fact,  IQ  in  adulthood  is  about  as  heritable  as  height.  IQ  in

childhood,  on  the  other  hand,  is  less  heritable  and  more  susceptible  to

environmental influences. These effects of environment on the measured IQs

of children, which disappear at or after puberty, are the basis for claims that

IQ can be improved by interventions like Head Start.

 


  Nongenetic factors also influence IQ, but for the most part, the ones that

matter  are  not  the  ones  people  thought  would  matter.  Prenatal  care,

breastfeeding, nutrition, access to early education, Mozart in the womb, and

oat bran all have little or no effect. Surprisingly, the way in which a family

raises children seems to have no effect on adult IQ. This argues against somepopular  environmental  explanations  for  high  intelligence  among  the

Ashkenazi Jews—in particular, the notion that Jewish mothers have a special

way of rearing children that boosts IQ.

                     ASHKENAZI PSYCHOMETRICS


 



As noted earlier, Ashkenazi Jews have the highest average IQ of any ethnic

group for which there are reliable data. Just how much higher is it? Many

studies have found that it is 0.75 to 1.0 standard deviations above the general
                                                                      30
European  average,  corresponding  to  an  IQ  of  112-115.  Another,  more

recent study concluded that the advantage is slightly less, only half a standard
          31
deviation. While the difference between the Ashkenazim and other northern

Europeans in average IQ may not seem large, it leads to a large difference in
                                                                      32
the proportion of the two populations with very high IQs. For example, if

the mean northern European IQ is 100, the mean Ashkenazi IQ is 110, and

the standard deviation in both populations is 15, then the number of northern

Europeans with IQs greater than 140 should be 4 per 1,000, whereas 23 per

1,000  Ashkenazim  should  exceed  the  same  threshold,  about  a  sixfold

difference. This is a general statistical effect, not something that happens only

with IQ.

 


The fact that Ashkenazi Jews have high IQs on average and corresponding

high academic ability has long been known. In 1900 in London, Jews took a

disproportionate number of academic prizes and scholarships in spite of their
        33
poverty. In the 1920s, a survey of IQ scores in three London schools with

mixed Jewish and non-Jewish student bodies—one prosperous, one poor, and

one very poor—showed that Jewish students, on average, had higher IQs than

their schoolmates in each of the groups. The differences between Jews and

non-Jews were all slightly less than one standard deviation, and the students

at the poorest Jewish school in London had IQ scores equal to the overall city
                                  34
mean of non-Jewish children.

 


That study, though conducted in 1928, is still important today because itcontradicts a widely cited misrepresentation of a paper authored by researcher
                            35
Henry Goddard in 1917.  Goddard  gave  IQ  tests  to  people  suspected  of

being retarded and found that the tests identified retarded Jews as well as

retarded people of other groups. The psychologist Leon Kamin reported in

1974 that Goddard had found that Jews had low IQ scores. Kamin’s reason

for citing the study was to claim that Goddard and other IQ researchers of the

1920s  had  been  biased  against  Jews  and  other  minority  groups.  This

erroneous analysis was picked up by many authors, including the well-known

Harvard evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould, who used it as evidence
                                        36
of  the  unreliability  of  IQ  testing.  Gould  seems  to  have  believed  that  a

popular impression that Jews had low IQs contributed to the passage of the

Immigration Act of 1924, which was aimed at restricting immigration from

southern and eastern Europe. However, by 1922 Jews already made up more

than  a  fifth  of  Harvard  undergraduates,  and  the  Ivy  League  was  already

instituting  admissions  policies  aimed  at  limiting  Jewish  admissions  (the

infamous  “Jewish  quotas”),  which  involved  placing  less  emphasis  on

academic merit. If some people in the 1920s had the impression that Jews had

low IQs, that impression cannot have been widely shared. The 1928 study of

IQ in three London schools shows that in fact there were already researchers

in the West who were noticing that Jews seemed to have higher IQs, on

average, than the members of other groups.

 


But the achievements of Ashkenazi Jews are certainly not confined to IQ

scores. They have an unusual ability profile when it comes to some other

forms of testing as well. They have high verbal and mathematics scores on

other types of standardized tests, though their visuospatial abilities—that is,

their ability to rotate three-dimensional objects in their minds, for example—

are typically somewhat lower, by about half a standard deviation, than the

European  average.  The  Ashkenazi  pattern  of  success  corresponds  to  this

ability distribution—great success in mathematics and literature, more typical

results in representational painting, sculpture, and architecture.

 


It is noteworthy that non-Ashkenazi Jews do not have high average IQ

scores.  Nor  are  they  overrepresented  in  cognitively  demanding  fields  like

medicine, law, and academics. In Israel, Ashkenazi Jews, on average, score14 points higher than Oriental Jews, almost a full standard deviation, which is
                                        37
15 or 16 points on most IQ tests. That difference means that the average

non-Ashkenazi Jew in Israel would have an IQ score that would be at the

20th  percentile  among  the  Ashkenazim.  Academic  accomplishment  in  the

two groups seems to vary in the same way, even among those born and raised

in Israel: Third-generation Ashkenazi Jews in Israel are 2.5 to 3 times more

likely to have graduated from college than third-generation Mizrahi Jews, for

example (the ancestors of the Mizrahim moved to Israel from Asia and North
        38
Africa).

                     THE ASHKENAZI MUTATIONS


 



The  best-known  of  the  genetic  diseases  disproportionately  affecting

Ashkenazi Jews are Tay-Sachs disease, Gaucher’s disease, and the breast-

cancer mutations BRCA1 and BRCA2, but there are a number of others, such

as Niemann-Pick disease, Canavan disease, and familial dysautonomia. Some

of these cause neurological problems. And they’re unusually common among

Ashkenazi  Jews—so  common  that  they  constitute  an  enduring  puzzle  in

human genetics.

 


In principle, absent some special cause, genetic diseases like these should

be rare. New mutations, some of which have bad effects, appear in every

generation,  but  those  that  cause  death  or  reduced  fertility  should  be

disappearing with every generation. Any particular harmful mutation should

be rare; however, one in every twenty-five Ashkenazi Jews carries a copy of

the Tay-Sachs mutation, which kills homozygotes in early childhood. This is

an alarming rate.

 


The mutations that so frequently affect Ashkenazi Jews are mysterious in

another way. Many of them fall into two categories or clusters involving

particular metabolic pathways: They affect the same biological subsystem.

Imagine a fat biochemistry textbook, where each page describes a different

function or condition in human biochemistry: Most of the Ashkenazi diseases

would  be  described  on  just  two  of  those  pages.  The  two  most  important

genetic disease clusters among the Ashkenazim are the sphingolipid storage

disorders (Tay-Sachs disease; Gaucher’s disease; Niemann-Pick disease; and

mucolipidosis,  type  IV)  and  the  disorders  of  DNA  repair  (BRCA1  and

BRCA2; Fanconi anemia, type C; and Bloom syndrome).

   What  is  the  explanation  of  this  odd  pattern?  We  know  of  only  two

mechanisms  that  can  create  high  frequencies  of  dangerous,  even  lethal

mutations: genetic drift in a bottleneck or natural selection.

                   THE BOTTLENECK HYPOTHESIS


 



Most  medical  geneticists  believe  that  these  common  Ashkenazi  genetic

diseases  are  a  product  of  population  bottlenecks.  A  population  bottleneck

occurs when a population goes through a period in which it is quite small.

This often happens in the founding of a population. In a bottleneck, gene

frequencies change almost randomly; just as you can get unrepresentative

results (different from 50-50) when you flip a coin just a few times, or when

you  poll  20  people  rather  than  1,000,  in  a  population  bottleneck  you  get

random changes that can affect large portions of the population in question.

 


  When  we  say  that  a  population  is  “small,”  we  generally  mean  a  few

hundred  individuals  at  most.  Europe,  for  example,  did  not  go  through  a

bottleneck following the Black Death in the Middle Ages. The plague may

have killed off half the population of Europe, but 40 million survivors is not a

small number. It left plenty of genetic variation intact.

 


If a few lethal mutations became common in a bottleneck and a dramatic

population  expansion  followed,  we  would  see  a  large  population  with  a

surprising number of genetic diseases—diseases that were rare in most other

populations. This has certainly happened in some cases. Amish communities

that  had  very  few  original  founders  have  seen  this  effect  with  their  high

incidence of several specific genetic disorders. It also happened in Pingelap, a

Pacific island that was devastated by a typhoon around 1775, leaving about

twenty survivors. Today almost 10 percent of the islanders suffer a form of

severe color blindness.

 


  Genetic diseases made common in a bottleneck are the product of chance,however,  so  there  is  no  particular  tendency  for  them  to  fall  into  a  few

metabolic pathways: They’re scattered all over the biochemistry book, not

concentrated on a few pages.

 


Our knowledge of human genetics has expanded rapidly over the past few

years, and we now have good estimates of the total number of human genes

(about 22,000) and the number of genes in different functional categories—in

particular, the number involved in sphingolipid metabolism (108). We looked

at  twenty-one  genetic  diseases  among  the  Ashkenazi  and  calculated  the

probability  of  finding  four  that  affect  sphingolipid  metabolism,  assuming

randomness, in a given population. That probability was very low, less than 1

in 100,000. That can’t be a coincidence.

 


We can say some other things about a population that has recently passed

through a tight bottleneck. There would be overall genetic changes: reduced

genetic  variety  in  nuclear  genes,  increased  genetic  linkage,  and  increased

genetic  differences  from  other  populations.  All  of  these  properties  are
                                                                            39
measurable, and none have occurred among the Ashkenazi Jews.

 


  Finally,  a  genetic  bottleneck  would  not  increase  a  population’s

intelligence.  If  it  was  severe  enough,  it  would  almost  certainly  decrease

intelligence as moderately deleterious genes became common.

 


  Therefore, although bottlenecks can explain high frequencies of genetic

disease in some cases, the bottleneck hypothesis cannot possibly explain the

genetic  data  and  the  spectrum  of  genetic  disease  observed  among  the

Ashkenazi Jews.

                           NATURAL SELECTION


 



The alternative explanation is natural selection, the process by which some

alleles cause increased reproduction in their bearers. Some gene variants have

favorable effects in a given environment (in this case, the physical and social

environment experienced by the Ashkenazi Jews during the Middle Ages), so

that people with those variants have more children, on average, than others in

that population. Those variants gradually become more common, ultimately

leading to significant changes. In some cases, certain gene variants can have

positive effects in individuals with one copy, and negative effects, such as

disease, in individuals with two copies—the people with one copy have a

“heterozygote advantage.” As we have discussed earlier, the most famous

example is sickle-cell anemia, where a mutation causing a very dangerous

form of anemia in those carrying two copies has risen to high frequency in

some parts of the world. There are a number of other malaria defenses of this

sort that are expensive in terms of human health.

 


  Clearly,  natural  selection  can  sustain  quite  high  frequencies  of  serious,

even lethal genetic diseases in some circumstances. Just as clearly, it can lead

to a set of common mutations that cluster in a few metabolic pathways. This

has  happened  with  the  malaria  defenses:  Many  affect  the  hemoglobin

molecule  (sickle-cell,  hemoglobin  C,  hemoglobin  E,  alpha-  and  beta-

thalassemia),  whereas others, such as G6PD deficiency or glycophorin C,

affect other aspects of the red blood cell. Since the malaria parasite attacks

red cells, this pattern is easy to understand.

 


  Heterozygote advantage isn’t confined to genetic defenses against malaria;

it can also occur in other cases where certain traits are favored by selection. It

seems  that  the  key  to  such  cases  is  that  there  has  been  strong  selection(carriers have a big advantage) applied over a relatively short time period.

Over longer periods, mutations with fewer side effects eventually occur and

win  out.  The  fact  that  heterozygote  advantage  can  favor  other  traits  is

important,  because  we  think  that  most  of  the  characteristic  Ashkenazi

mutations are not defenses against infectious disease. One reason is that these

mutations  do  not  exist  in  neighboring  populations—often  literally  people

living  across  the  street—that  must  have  been  exposed  to  very  similar

diseases. Instead, we think that the Ashkenazi mutations have something to

do with Ashkenazi intelligence, and that they arose because of the unique

natural-selection pressures the members of this group faced in their role as

financiers in the European Middle Ages.

 


We see a clear example of heterozygote advantage in a trait other than

disease resistance in whippets, a breed of dog similar to a small greyhound.

Some  whippets  carry  a  mutated  version  of  myostatin,  a  gene  that  limits

muscle development. Dogs with this mutation grow more muscle. Whippets

with  one  copy  are  faster,  on  average,  than  other  whippets  and  often  win
    40
races.  Those  with  two  copies,  called  “bully  whippets,”  are  extremely

muscular, have muscle spasms, and are not competitive as racers. One copy

gives an advantage in a particular ability; two copies actually have a negative

effect on the same ability.

 


Now, in order for natural selection to work in this way, the population has

to  be  genetically  isolated  from  its  neighbors;  otherwise  it  cannot  become

different. Admixture dilutes the effects of natural selection and can stop it in

its  tracks.  You  might  compare  it  to  boiling  down  soup  while  continually

adding  water—you  won’t  get  anywhere  that  way.  As  it  happens,  the

Ashkenazi  Jews were  genetically  isolated  during  the  Middle  Ages:  not

because of the Pacific Ocean, as happened with Pingelap, but owing to social

reasons—internal  rules  against  intermarriage  combined  with  external

prejudice.

 Whippets with 0, 1, and 2 copies of the myostatin mutation

 


For most of that period, both intermarriage with non-Jews and conversion

to  Judaism  were  very  rare.  That’s  certainly  what  the  historical  record

indicates, but we can check that record using genetics. If we look at alleles

that  are  clearly  from  the  Middle  East,  we  see  that  they  account  for  a

substantial  fraction  of  Ashkenazi  ancestry  today:  at  least  50  percent,

according to our analysis. This shows strong limits on the rate of genetic

admixture, since even 2 percent mixing per generation over the past 2,000

years would have caused the Ashkenazim to become almost completely (80

percent) European. A continuing process of admixture (as opposed to a lot of

admixture  in  the  early  stages)  interferes  the  most  with  ongoing  naturalselection, but even if we make that pessimistic assumption, it looks as if the

admixture rate was under 1 percent per generation—low enough to allow for

the  sort  of  natural  selection  we’re  suggesting.  In  fact,  early  European

admixture might even have furthered the selective process, since even low

levels of admixture can be an important source of beneficial alleles. More

generally, the position of Israel at a natural crossroads, subject to invasion by

Romans, Greeks, Persians, Babylonians, Assyrians, and Egyptians, may have

resulted in unusually high genetic variety, which would also have furthered

selection.

 


  Already it’s apparent that the Ashkenazi mutations were made common by

natural selection, since there was sufficient genetic isolation for selection to

occur,  while  nothing  other  than  selection  can  explain  the  existence  of

common genetic diseases that are concentrated in a few metabolic pathways.

You can also see why this kind of natural selection is usually confined to

geographically  isolated  human  populations,  since  such  strict  rules  against

intermarriage with neighboring groups are fairly unusual. But what kind of

selection occurred? What traits were more valuable among the Ashkenazi

than among their neighbors?

 


Well,  we  have  some  strong  hints.  What  trait  is  accentuated  among  the

Ashkenazim today? Are they as large as Samoans, as tall as the Tutsi, as

milk-tolerant as the Dutch? No: Their special trait is intelligence.

 


The  mutations  themselves  suggest  this:  Some  of  them look  like  IQ

boosters, considering their effects on the development of the central nervous

system.  The  sphingolipid  mutations,  in  particular,  have  effects  that  could

plausibly boost intelligence. In each, there is a buildup of some particular

sphingolipid,  a  class  of  modified  fat  molecules  that  play  a  role  in  signal

transmission and are especially common in neural tissues. Researchers have

determined that elevated levels of those sphingolipids cause the growth of

more  connections  among  neurons,  the  basic  cells  of  the  central  nervous

system (see page 221).

   There  is  a  similar  effect  in  Tay-Sachs  disease:  increased  levels  of  a

characteristic storage compound (GM2 ganglioside), which causes a marked
                                                                                          41
increase in the growth of dendrites, the fine branches that connect neurons.

This increased dendritogenesis also occurs in Niemann-Pick type A cells and

in animal models of Tay-Sachs disease and Niemann-Pick disease. These are

the only known disease alleles that cause increased neural connections.

 


We  also  have  evidence—not  definitive—that  some  of  the  mutations

common among the Ashkenazim may boost intelli-gence. We looked at the

occupations of patients in Israel with Gaucher’s disease, essentially all of

whom were being treated at the Shaare Zedek Medical Centre in Jerusalem.

These patients are much more likely to be engineers or scientists than the
                                                                                          42
average Israeli Ashkenazi Jew—about eleven times more likely, in fact.

There  are  similar  reports  on  torsion  dystonia,  another  Ashkenazi  genetic

disease. Ever since it was first recognized, observers have commented on the

unusual intelligence of the patients who suffer from it.

 


















Axon growth in Gaucher’s disease. The top frame shows normal cultured rat

neurons,  the  middle  frame  shows  stunted  axonal  growth  resulting  from

reduced levels of glucosylceramide, and the bottom frame shows increased

growth and branching in an experimental model of Gaucher’s disease with

increased  levels  of  glucosylceramide.  Glucosylceramide  is  the  storagemolecule involved in Gaucher’s disease. Elevated levels promote growth and

branching in axons, the transmission lines of the nervous system.

 


In 1976, Roswell Eldridge described early literature on torsion dystonia:

One patient showed “an intellectual development far exceeding his age,” and
                                                                              43
a second showed “extraordinary mental development for his age.” At least

ten  other  reports  in  the  literature  have  made  similar  comments.  Eldridge

studied fourteen Jewish torsion dystonia patients and found that their average

IQ before the onset of symptoms was 121, compared to an average score of

111 in a control group of fourteen unrelated Jewish children matched for age,
                          44
sex, and school district. There are also reports of individuals with higher-

than-average intelligence who have nonclassic congenital adrenal hyperplasia

(CAH),  another  common  Ashkenazi  genetic  disease.  CAH,  which  causes

increased exposure of the developing brain in a fetus to androgens (male sex

hormones), is relatively mild compared to diseases like Tay-Sachs. At least

seven studies show high IQ in CAH patients, parents, and siblings, ranging

from 107 to 113. The gene frequency of CAH among the Ashkenazim is
                    45
almost 20 percent.

                     HOW SELECTION HAPPENED


 



Our  picture  of  how  natural  selection  favored  higher  intelligence  among

European Jews in the Middle Ages relies upon three key observations. The

first  is  that  prosperous  individuals  had  considerably  more  children,  on

average, than nonprosperous individuals in those days, as was then typical in
                46
most societies. Second, Ashkenazi jobs were cognitively demanding, since

the members of this group were essentially restricted to entrepreneurial and

managerial roles as financiers, estate managers, tax farmers, and merchants.

These are jobs that people with an IQ below 100 essentially cannot perform.
                                                                                    47
Even  low-level  clerical  jobs  require  an  IQ  of  something  like  90.  So,

intelligence must have had greater rewards in those jobs than it does among

farmers. This has to be true, really, since physical strength and endurance,

which play a major part in success as a farmer, matter far less in finance and

trade. If physical strength accounts for less of the variance, then cognitive

and  personality  traits  must  account  for  more.  Third,  intelligence  is

significantly heritable. If the parents of the next generation are a little smarter

than average, the next generation will be slightly smarter than the current one.

 


We can construct a scenario using IQ scores that illustrates this principle.

We’ll  assume  that  parents  of  each  generation  averaged  a  single  IQ  point

higher than the rest of the Ashkenazi adult population. In other words, let’s

suppose there was a modest tendency (mediated through economic success)

for intelligent parents to have more surviving children than average parents—

a tendency that certainly would not have been noticed at the time. If we

assume a heritability of 30 percent for IQ, a very conservative assumption,

then the average IQ of the Ashkenazi population would have increased by

about a third of a point (0.30 point) per generation. Over forty generations,

roughly 1,000 years, Ashkenazi IQ would have increased by 12 points. If we

assume that the Ashkenazim began with a typical European IQ of 100 in theyear AD 600, they would have reached an average IQ of 112 by 1600, just

about what we see in the Ashkenazim today. This picture is consistent with

observations of high verbal and mathematical scores among Ashkenazi Jews,

paired with average or lower-than-average visuospatial scores. Verbal and

mathematical  talent  would  have  helped  medieval  businessmen  succeed,

whereas visuospatial abilities were irrelevant.

 


  There  may  well  have  been  some  selection  for  IQ  among  Europeans  in

general over this period. Christian merchants in London or Rotterdam may

have experienced selective pressures similar to those of the Ashkenazi Jews,

but  there  was  an  important  difference  between  those  merchants  and  the

Jewish  population:  Christian  merchant  families  intermarried.  The  mixing

would  have  caused  extensive  gene  flow  with  the  general  population,  the

majority of whom were farmers. It seems that if IQ increased in the general

European population, there was a greater increase among the Ashkenazim.

 


Our  hypothesis  also  explains  why  certain  things didn’t  happen—in

particular,  why  we  don’t  see  high  IQ  scores  and  unusual  intellectual

achievement among other Jewish groups today. Although they, too, had very

low rates of intermarriage, they never seem to have that high concentration of

white-collar  jobs  that  would  have  led  to  strong  selection  for  verbal  and

mathematical intelligence. In part, this was because there were many more

Jews in the Islamic world than in Christian Europe: With less persecution,

there were more Jews than there were white-collar jobs. Our picture also

explains why there’s no real sign of unusually high intelligence among the

Jews back in the days of the Roman Empire: The required events simply

hadn’t happened yet.

                                   CONCLUSION

 



Cultural  innovation  has  been  a  driving  force  behind  biological  change  in

humans  for  a  long  time—certainly  since  the  first  use  of  tools  some  2.5

million years ago. Natural selection acting on the hominid brain made those

early  innovations  possible,  and  the  innovations  themselves  led  to  further

physical and mental changes.

 

  Biological and cultural co-evolution was slow at first, at least by modern

standards, but gradually things sped up. The archaeological record shows that

our capacity for innovation continued to increase until, about 40,000 years

ago, we were primed for what has been called the “human revolution” or the

“creative explosion” of the Upper Paleolithic in Europe and northern Asia.

This  sudden  spurt  in  technology  and  art  occurred  shortly  after  modern

humans expanded out of Africa—and it too must have involved biological

changes, changes that we suspect were driven in part by genes stolen from

the  Neanderthals  and  other  archaic  humans,  the  previous  occupants  of

Eurasia. Behavioral modernity led to even more change: Men made better

tools and then, in turn, were reshaped by those tools over many generations.

  With the development of agriculture, both cultural and biological evolution

accelerated  even  further  because  that  way  of  life  made  new  demands  on

humans.  Before  agriculture  humans  had  always  been  foragers:  The  huge

population  increase  associated  with  agriculture  resulted  in  more  favorable

mutations as well as more new ideas. This rapid evolution of our species

following the spread of agriculture is indeed a 10,000 year explosion.

The explosion is ongoing: Human evolution didn’t stop when anatomically

modern humans appeared, or when they expanded out of Africa. It never

stopped—and  why  would  it?  Evolutionary  stasis  requires  a  static

environment,  whereas  behavioral  modernity  is  all  about  innovation  and

change. Stability is exactly what we have not had. This should be obvious,

but  instead  the  human  sciences  have  labored  under  the  strange  idea  that

evolution stopped 40,000 years ago.

All this means, has to mean, that biological change has been a key factor

driving history. It has certainly not been the only factor, and it has been

strangely intertwined with more traditional influences. Genetic changes likelactose tolerance have arisen and spread because of cultural innovations (such

as the development of agriculture) as well as the random occurrence of the

right mutations, and those genetic changes have in turn had their own cultural

consequences.  The  expansion  of  the  Indo-Europeans,  the  successful

European  settlement  of  the  Americas  and  Australia,  the  failure  of  the

“scramble for Africa,” the entry of the Ashkenazi Jews onto the intellectual

stage,  possibly  even  the  industrial  revolution  and  the  rise  of  science—all

appear  to  be  consequences  of  this  endless  dance  between  biological  and

cultural change.

If researchers in the human sciences continue to ignore the fact of ongoing

natural selection, they will have thrown away the key to many important

problems, turning puzzles into mysteries. Cortés, with 500 men, conquered

and  held  an  empire  of  millions.  Try  to  explain  this  without  invoking

biological differences in disease resistance caused by ongoing evolution—it

can’t be done.

  Thucydides in the fifth century BC said that human nature was unchanging

and thus predictable, and many scientists today believe that human nature

stopped changing tens of thousands of years ago. Historians seem to make the

same assumption. In so doing, they’re ignoring tremendous opportunities: not

just  in  decoding  the  past,  but  in  shaping  the  future  as  well.  Continuing

evolution  over  human  history  has  been  a  vast  natural  experiment,  an

experiment that promises big payoffs in understanding, and then fighting,

disease and mental illness. Limone sul Garda hid an important clue about

human disease. With a million villages in the world, there must be many

more such clues. Some of the results of history’s experiments may even aid

us  in  more  ambitious  efforts  aimed  at  increasing  human  life  spans  and

cognitive abilities.

It’s time for researchers in the human sciences to shrug off the chains of

dogmas like evolutionary stasis and “psychic unity.” There’s no time to lose

—and there’s a world to win.                                        NOTES

                                     chapter one


 


1 Sargon of Akkad, about 4,000 years ago, built one of the first empires in

what is now Iraq. Imhotep was an early Egyptian architect, engineer, and

physician.

 


2 “Behavioral modernity” is anthropological slang for the cultural creativity

thought to be characteristic of modern humans.

 


3 John Hawks, “Adaptive Evolution of Human Hearing and the Appearance

of Language,” 77th Annual Meeting of the American Association of Physical

Anthropologists, April 11, 2008, Columbus, Ohio.

 


4 Stephen J. Gould, “The Spice of Life,” Leader to Leader 15 (Winter 2000):

14-19.

 


5 Lyudmila N. Trut, “Early Canid Domestication: The Farm-Fox

Experiment,” American Scientist 161 (1999): 161.

 


6 Jack C. Schultz and Ted Floyd, “Desert Survivor,” Natural History 108, no.

2 (1999): 24-29.

 


7 John Tooby and Leda Cosmides, “On the Universality of Human Nature

and the Uniqueness of the Individual: The Role of Genetics and Adaptation,”

Journal of Personality 58, no. 1 (1990): 17-67.

 8 John Tooby and Leda Cosmides, “Evolutionary Psychology: A Primer,”

University of California Santa Barbara,

    http://www.psych.ucsb.edu/research/cep/primer.html (accessed October 1,

2008).

 


9 M. Clifton, “Dog Attack Deaths and Maimings,” 2008, from

          http://www.dogbitelaw.com/Dog%20Attacks%201982%20to%202006%20Clifton.pdf

 


10 Yali Xue et al., “Spread of an Inactive Form of Caspase-12 in Humans Is

Due to Recent Positive Selection,” American Journal of Human Genetics 78,

no. 4 (2006): 659-670.

 


11 George H. Perry et al., “Diet and the Evolution of Human Amylase Gene

Copy Number Variation,” Nature Genetics 39 (2007): 1256-1260.

 


12 Vincent Sarich is a professor of anthropology who played a key role in

estimating the date of the divergence between humans and chimpanzees,

Frank Miele is a senior editor at Skeptic magazine, and Chuck Lemme is a

longtime reader of Skeptic.

 


13 Chuck Lemme, “Race and Sexual Selection,” Skeptic,

  http://www.skeptic.com/eskeptic/05-03-22.html (accessed October 1, 2008).

 


14 Richard Lewontin, “The Apportionment of Human Diversity,”

Evolutionary Biology 6, no. 1 (1972): 381-398.

 


15 Mark Rieger, Introduction to Fruit Crops (New York: Food Products

Press, 2006).

 


16 Koh-ichiro Yoshiura et al., “A SNP in the ABCC11 Gene Is the

Determinant of Human Earwax Type,” Nature Genetics 38 (2006): 324-330. 


17 Laurent Keller and Kenneth G. Ross, “Selfish Genes: A Green Beard in

the Red Fire Ant,” Nature 394 (1998): 573; Michael J. B. Krieger and

Kenneth G. Ross, “Identification of a Major Gene Regulating Complex

Social Behavior,” Science 295, no. 5553 (2002): 328-332.

 


18 John Hawks et al., “Recent Acceleration of Human Adaptive Evolution,”

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, no. 52 (2007): 20753.

                                     chapter two


 


1 Roy C. Anderson, “The Ecological Relationships of Meningeal Worm and

Native Cervids in North America,” Journal of Wildlife Diseases 8, no. 4

(1972): 304-310.

 


2 Daniel M. Tompkins et al., “Parapoxvirus Causes a Deleterious Disease in

Red Squirrels Associated with UK Population Declines,” Proceedings of the

Royal Society, B: Biological Sciences 269, no. 1490 (2002): 529.

 


3 Richard Klein, The Human Career (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

1999), 524.

 


4 Richard Klein, The Dawn of Human Culture (New York: Wiley, 2002),

270.

 


5 Christopher S. Henshilwood et al., “Emergence of Modern Human

Behavior: Middle Stone Age Engravings from South Africa,” Science 295,

no. 5558 (2002): 1278-1280.

 


6 Carleton S. Coon, The Origin of Races (New York: Alfred A. Knopf,

1963).

 


7 Chris Stringer and Peter Andrews, “Genetic and Fossil Evidence for the

Origin of Modern Humans,” Science 239, no. 4845 (1988): 1263-1268.

 8 D. Curnoe et al., “Timing and Tempo of Primate Speciation,” Journal of

Evolutionary Biology 19, no. 1 (2006): 59-65.

 


9 Hilde Vervaecke and Linda Van Elsacker, “Hybrids between Common

Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and Pygmy Chimpanzees (Pan paniscus) in

Captivity,” Mammalia (Paris) 56, no. 4 (1992): 667-669.

 


10 Trenton W. Holliday, “Speciation by Distance and Temporal Overlap: A

New Approach to Understanding Neanderthal Evolution,” in Neanderthals

Revisited: New Approaches and Perspectives, edited by T. Harrison and K.

Harvati (New York: Sinauer, 2006).

 


11 J. Sweeney and T. Samansky, “Elements of Successful Facility Design:

Marine Mammals,” in Conservation of Endangered Species in Captivity: An

Interdisciplinary Approach, edited by E. F. Gibbons, B. Durrant, and J.

Demarest (New York: State University of New York Press, 1995).

 


12 On the supposed insignificance of Neanderthal admixture, see, for

example, Chris Stringer and Peter Andrews, The Complete World of Human

Evolution (London: Thames and Hudson, 2005), or Klein, The Dawn of

Human Culture.

 


13 Milford Wolpoff et al., “Modern Human Ancestry at the Peripheries: A

Test of the Replacement Theory,” Science 291, no. 5502 (2001): 293-297.

 


14 It’s conceivable that we already have: Martha Hamblin and Anna Di

Rienzo of the University of Chicago found an extremely unusual version of a

region near the Duffy gene in a few Italians, very different from that seen in

other humans. M. T. Hamblin and A. Di Rienzo, “Detection of the Signature

of Natural Selection in Humans: Evidence from the Duffy Blood Group

Locus,” American Journal of Human Genetics 66, no. 5 (2000): 1669-1679.

 15 Amos Zayed and Charles W. Whitfield, “A Genome-Wide Signature of

Positive Selection in Ancient and Recent Invasive Expansions of the Honey

Bee Apis mellifera,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105,

no. 9 (2008): 3421.

 


16 H. C. Stutz and L. K. Thomas, “Hybridization and Introgression in

Cowania and Purshia,” Evolution 18, no. 2 (1964): 183-195.

 


17 Brian Hare et al., “The Domestication of Social Cognition in Dogs,”

Science 298, no. 5598 (2002): 1634-1636.

 


18 Henry Harpending and Jay Sobus, “Sociopathy as an Adaptation,”

Ethology and Sociobiology 8, no. 3 (1987): 63-72.

 


19 Richard W. Bulliet, The Camel and the Wheel (Cambridge: Harvard

University Press, 1975).

 


20 David W. Frayer, “Evolution at the European Edge: Neanderthal and

Upper Paleolithic Relationships,” Préhistoire Européenne 2 (1993): 9-69;

David W. Frayer, “Perspectives on Neandertals as Ancestors,” in Conceptual

Issues in Modern Human Origins Research, edited by G. A. Clark and C. M.

Willermet (New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1998), 220-234.

 


21 Cidália Duarte et al., “The Early Upper Paleolithic Human Skeleton from

the Abrigo do Lagar Velho (Portugal) and Modern Human Emergence in

Iberia,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 96 (1999): 7604-

7609; Eric Trinkaus, “Early Modern Humans,” Annual Review of

Anthropology 34 (2005): 207-230.

 


22 D. Serre et al., “No Evidence of Neandertal mtDNA Contribution to Early

Modern Humans,” PLoS Biology 2, no. 3 (2004): 313-317; M. Currat and L.

Excoffier, “Modern Humans Did Not Admix with Neanderthals during TheirRange Expansion into Europe,” PLoS Biology 2, no. 12 (2004): e21; T. D.

Weaver and C. C. Roseman, “Ancient DNA, Late Neandertal Survival, and

Modern-Human-Neandertal Genetic Admixture,” Current Anthropology 46,

no. 4 (2005): 677-683.

 


23 Daniel Garrigan et al., “Deep Haplotype Divergence and Long-Range

Linkage Disequilibrium at Xp21.1 Provides Evidence That Humans Descend

from a Structured Ancestral Population,” Genetics 170 (2005a): 1849-1856;

Daniel Garrigan et al., “Evidence for Archaic Asian Ancestry on the Human

X Chromosome,” Molecular Biology and Evolution 22 (2005b): 189-192; J.

Hardy et al., “Evidence Suggesting That Homo neanderthalensis Contributed

the H2 MAPT Haplotype to Homo sapiens,” Biochemical Society

Transactions 33 (2005): 582-585; Vincent Plagnol and Jeffrey D. Wall,

“Possible Ancestral Structure in Human Populations,” PLoS Genetics 2

(2006): e105; P. D. Evans et al., “Microcephalin, a Gene Regulating Brain

Size, Continues to Evolve Adaptively in Humans,” Science 309, no. 5741

(2005): 1717-1720; P. D. Evans et al., “Evidence That the Adaptive Allele of

the Brain Size Gene Microcephalin Introgressed into Homo sapiens from an

Archaic Homo Lineage,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

103, no. 48 (2006): 18178.

 


24 Vincent Plagnol and Jeffrey D. Wall, “Possible Ancestral Structure in

Human Populations,” PLoS Genetics 2 (2006): e105.

 


25 Patrick D. Evans et al., “Evidence That the Adaptive Allele of the Brain

Size Gene Microcephalin Introgressed into Homo sapiens from an Archaic

Homo Lineage,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 103,

no. 48 (2006): 18178.

 


26 Graham K. Coop et al., “The Timing of Selection at the Human FOXP2

Gene,” Molecular Biology and Evolution 25, no. 7 (2008): 1257.

 


27 Johannes Krause et al., “The Derived FOXP2 Variant of Modern HumansWas Shared with Neandertals,” Current Biology 17, no. 21 (2007): 1908-

1912.

 


28 James O’Connell and James Allen, “Dating the Colonization of Sahul

(Pleistocene Australia—New Guinea): A Review of Recent Research,”

Journal of Archaeological Science 31, no. 6 (2004): 835-853.

                                     chapter three


 


1 John Hawks et al., “Recent Acceleration of Human Adaptive Evolution,”

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, no. 52 (2007): 20753.

 


2 Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies

(New York: W. W. Norton, 2005), 407.

 


3 Daniel Zohary and Maria Hopf, Domestication of Plants in the Old World:

The Origin and Spread of Cultivated Plants in West Asia, Europe, and the

Nile Valley (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001).

 


4 E. E. Thompson et al., “CYP3A Variation and the Evolution of Salt-

Sensitivity Variants,” American Journal of Human Genetics 75, no. 6 (2004):

1059-1069.

 


5 John Maynard Smith, Evolution and the Theory of Games (Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press, 1982).

 


6 L. Cordain et al., “Original Communication: The Paradoxical Nature of

Hunter-Gatherer Diets: Meat-Based, yet Non-Atherogenic,” European

Journal of Clinical Nutrition 56, no. 1 (2002): S42-S52.

 


7 Jared Diamond, “The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race,”

Discover 8, no. 5 (1987): 64-66.

 8 Mark Nathan Cohen and George J. Armelagos, Paleopathology at the

Origins of Agriculture (Academic Press, 1984); Clark Larsen,

Bioarchaeology: Interpreting Behavior from the Human Skeleton (New

York: Cambridge University Press, 1999).

 


9 Benjamin F. Voight et al., “A Map of Recent Positive Selection in the

Human Genome,” PLoS Biology 4, no. 3 (2006): e72; Eric T. Wang et al.,

“Global Landscape of Recent Inferred Darwinian Selection for Homo

sapiens,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103, no. 1

(2006): 135-140.

 


10 A. Helgason et al., “Refining the Impact of TCF7L2 Gene Variants on

Type 2 Diabetes and Adaptive Evolution,” Nature Genetics 39 (2007): 218-

225.

 


11 James Neel, “Diabetes Mellitus: A ‘Thrifty’ Genotype Rendered

Detrimental by ‘Progress’?” American Journal of Human Genetics 14 (1962):

353-362.

 


12 Lawrence H. Keeley, War before Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful

Savage (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996).

 


13 J. Burger et al., “Absence of the Lactase-Persistence-Associated Allele in

Early Neolithic Europeans,” Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences 104, no. 10 (2007): 3736.

 


14 M. Fulge et al., “Lactose Persistence in Prehistoric Individuals,” 8th

International Conference on Ancient DNA and Associated Biomolecules,

October 16-19, 2006, Lodz, Poland.

                                     chapter four


 


1 A. G. Maier et al., “Plasmodium falciparum Erythrocyte Invasion through

Glycophorin C and Selection for Gerbich Negativity in Hman Populations,”

Nature Medicine 9, no. 1 (2003) 87-92.

 


2 T. J. Vullaimy et al., “Diverse Point Mutations in the Human Glucose-6-

Phosphate Dehydrogenase Gene Cause Enzyme Deficiency and Mild or

Severe Hemolytic Anemia,” Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences 85, no. 14 (1988): 5171-5175; Bernadette Modell and Matthew

Darlison, “Global Epidemiology of Haemoglobin Disorders and Derived

Service Indicators,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 86, no. 6

(2008): 480-487.

 


3 Richard Carter and Kamini N. Mendis, “Evolutionary and Historical

Aspects of the Burden of Malaria,” Clinical Microbiology Reviews 15 (2002):

564-594; Matthew A. Saunders et al., “The Extent of Linkage Disequilibrium

Caused by Selection on G6PD in Humans,” Genetics 171, no. 3 (2005):

1219-1229; Jun Ohashi et al., “Extended Linkage Disequilibrium surrounding

the Hemoglobin E Variant due to Malarial Selection,” American Journal of

Human Genetics 74, no. 6 (2004): 1198-1208.

 


4 Meredith E. Protas et al., “Genetic Analysis of Cavefish Reveals Molecular

Convergence in the Evolution of Albinism,” Nature Genetics 38, no. 1

(2006): 107-111.

 


5 Gwynneth Stevens et al., “Oculocutaneous Albinism (OCA2) in Sub-

Saharan Africa: Distribution of the Common 2.7-kb P Gene Deletion

Mutation,” Human Genetics 99, no. 4 (1997): 523-527. 


6 Zanhua Yi et al., “A 122.5-Kilobase Deletion of the P Gene Underlies the

High Prevalence of Oculocutaneous Albinism Type 2 in the Navajo

Population,” American Journal of Human Genetics 72, no. 1 (2003): 62-72.

 


7 John R. Baker, Race (New York: Oxford University Press, 1974), 279.

 


8 Benjamin F. Voight et al., “A Map of Recent Positive Selection in the

Human Genome,” PLoS Biology 4, no. 3 (2006): e72.

 


9 W. P. Rock et al., “A Cephalometric Comparison of Skulls from the

Fourteenth, Sixteenth and Twentieth Centuries,” British Dental Journal 200

(2006): 33-37.

 


10 Scott H. Williamson et al., “Localizing Recent Adaptive Evolution in the

Human Genome,” PLoS Genetics 10 (2007).

 


11 Ibid.

 


12 John Hawks, “Adaptive Evolution of Human Hearing and the Appearance

of Language,” Seventy-Seventh Annual Meeting of the American

Association of Physical Anthropologists, April 11, 2008, Columbus, Ohio.

 


13 John Reader, Africa: A Biography of the Continent (New York: Knopf,

1998).

 


14 Gregory Clark, A Farewell to Alms (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University

Press, 2007).

 


15 J. Rousseau, The Social Contract (Baltimore: Penguin Classics, 1968). 


16 John Robert McNeill and William H. McNeill, The Human Web: A

Bird’s-Eye View of World History (New York: W. W. Norton, 2003).

 


17 Robert C. Allen, “Agriculture and the Origins of the State in Ancient

Egypt,” Explorations in Economic History 34, no. 2 (1997): 135-154.

 


18 Laoise T. Moore et al., “A Y-Chromosome Signature of Hegemony in

Gaelic Ireland,” American Journal of Human Genetic. 78, no. 2 (2006): 334-

338.

 


19 Rene Grousset, The Empire of the Steppes: A History of Central Asia

(New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1970).

 


20 Mark G. Thomas et al., “Evidence for an Apartheid-Like Social Structure

in Early Anglo-Saxon England,” Proceedings of the Royal Society B:

Biological Sciences 273, no. 1601 (2006): 2651-2657.

 


21 Robert Sallares et al., “The Spread of Malaria to Southern Europe in

Antiquity: New Approaches to Old Problems,” Medical History 48, no, 3

(2004):311-328.

 


22 The song “Is There for Honest Poverty,” by Robert Burns, is more

commonly known as “A Man’s A Man for a’ That,” and is famous for its

eloquent support of egalitarianism.

 


23 Jesse L. Byock, Viking Age Iceland (New York: Penguin, 2001).

 


24 Daniel G. MacArthur et al., “Loss of ACTN3 Gene Function Alters

Mouse Muscle Metabolism and Shows Evidence of Positive Selection inHumans,” Nature Genetics 39, no. 10 (2007): 1261.

 


25 William D. Hamilton, Narrow Roads of Gene Land: The Collected Papers

of W. D. Hamilton, vol. 1, Evolution of Social Behaviour (New York: Oxford

University Press, 1998).

 


26 Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies

(New York: W. W. Norton, 2005), 417.

 


27 Valerie Bockstette et al., “States and Markets: The Advantage of an Early

Start,” Journal of Economic Growth 7 (2002): 347-369; Douglas O. Hibbs

and Ola Olsson, “Geography, Biogeography, and Why Some Countries Are

Rich and Others Are Poor,” Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences 101 (2004): 3715-3720.

 


28 Kay R. Jamison, Touched with Fire: Manic-Depressive Illness and the

Artistic Temperament (New York: Free Press, 1993).

 


29 R. M. Nesse and George C. Williams, “Darwinian Medicine,” Life Science

Research 3 (1999): 1-17.

 


30 P. A. Hoodbhoy, “Science and the Islamic World—The Quest for

Rapprochement,” Physics Today 60, no. 8 (2007): 49-55.

                                     chapter five


 


1 Stephen L. Zegura et al., “High-Resolution SNPs and Microsatellite

Haplotypes Point to a Single, Recent Entry of Native American Y

Chromosomes into the Americas,” Molecular Biology and Evolution 21, no.

1 (2004): 164-175.

 


2 Martin Richards, “The Neolithic Invasion of Europe,” Annual Review of

Anthropology 32, no. 1 (2003): 135-162; Isabelle Dupanloup et al.,

“Estimating the Impact of Prehistoric Admixture on the Genome of

Europeans,” Molecular Biology and Evolution 21, no. 7 (2004): 1361-1372.

 


3 Veronica L. Martinez-Marignac et al., “Admixture in Mexico City:

Implications for Admixture Mapping of Type 2 Diabetes Genetic Risk

Factors,” Human Genetics 120, no. 6 (2007): 807-819.

 


4 Valter Gualandri et al., “AIMilano Apoprotein Identification of the

Complete Kindred and Evidence of a Dominant Genetic Transmission,”

American Journal of Human Genetics 37, no. 6 (1985): 1083.

 


5 Cesare R. Sirtori et al., “Cardiovascular Status of Carriers of the

Apolipoprotein A-IMilano Mutant,” Circulation 103, no. 15 (2001): 1949-

1954.

 


6 John K. Bielicki et al., “High Density Lipoprotein Particle Size Restriction

in Apolipoprotein A-I (Milano) Transgenic Mice,” Journal of Lipid Research

38, no. 11 (1997): 2314-2321.

 7 Alan G. Fix, Migration and Colonization in Human Microevolution (New

York: Cambridge University Press, 1999).

 


8 Georgi Hudjashov et al., “Revealing the Prehistoric Settlement of Australia

by Y-Chromosome and mtDNA Analysis,” Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences 104, no. 21 (2007): 8726.

 


9 Jared Diamond, The Third Chimpanzee: The Evolution and Future of the

Human Animal (New York: HarperCollins, 1992), 207.

 


10 Robert Sallares et al., “The Spread of Malaria to Southern Europe in

Antiquity: New Approaches to Old Problems,” Medical History 48, no. 3

(2004): 311-328.

 


11 Alessandro Achilli et al., “Mitochondrial DNA Variation of Modern

Tuscans Supports the Near Eastern Origin of Etruscans,” American Journal

of Human Genetics 80, no 4 (2007): 759-768.

 


12 Marco Pellecchia et al., “The Mystery of Etruscan Origins: Novel Clues

from Bos Taurus Mitochondrial DNA,” Proceedings of the Royal Society B:

Biological Science 274, no. 1614 (2007): 1175-1179.

 


13 Sadaf Firasat et al., “Y-chromosomal Evidence for a Limited Greek

Contribution to the Pathan Population of Pakistan,” European Journal of

Human Genetics 15, no. 1 (2007): 121-126.

 


14 Tatiana Zerjal et al., “The Genetic Legacy of the Mongols,” American

Journal of Human Genetics 72, no. 3 (2003): 717-721.

 


15 Dio Cassius, Roman History, vol. 9, Books 71-80, translated by Earnest

Cary and Herbert B. Foster, Loeb Classical Library, no. 177 (Cambridge:Harvard University Press, 1927).

 


16 Hans Eiberg et al., “Blue Eye Color in Humans May Be Caused by a

Perfectly Associated Founder Mutation in a Regulatory Element Located

within the HERC2 Gene Inhibiting OCA2 Expression,” Human Genetics 123,

no. 2 (2008): 177-187.

 


17 Edward Gibbon, A History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,

vol. 3 (Philadelphia: B. F. French, 1830), 95.

                                       chapter six


 


1 Lawrence H. Keeley, War before Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful

Savage (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996).

 


2 L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza et al., The History and Geography of Human Genes

(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1994).

 


3 Montgomery Slatkin and Christina A. Muirhead, “A Method for Estimating

the Intensity of Overdominant Selection from the Distribution of Allele

Frequencies,” Genetics 156, no. 4 (2000): 2119-2126.

 


4 Kristin N. Harper et al., “On the Origin of the Treponematoses: A

Phylogenetic Approach,” PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 2, no. 1: e148

  doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0000148.

 


5 Noble David Cook, Born to Die: Disease and New World Conquest, 1492-

1650 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).

 


6 William H. McNeill, Plagues and Peoples (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor

Press/Doubleday, 1976).

 


7 Alison P. Galvani and Montgomery Slatkin, “Evaluating Plague and

Smallpox as Historical Selective Pressures for the CCR5-delta32 HIV-

Resistance Allele,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100,

no. 25 (2003): 15276-15279.

 8 Analabha Basu et al., “Genome-Wide Distribution of Ancestry in Mexican

Americans,” Human Genetics, DOI 10.1007/s00439-008-0541-5.

 


9 Ana Magdalena Hurtado et al., “The Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases

among South American Indians: A Call for Guidelines for Ethical Research,”

Current Anthropology 42, no. 3 (2001): 425-432.

 


10 Richard Gordon, Great Medical Disasters (New York: Stein and Day,

1983), 41.

 


11 Henry Kamen, Empire: How Spain Became a World Power, 1492-1763

(New York: HarperCollins, 2003), 205.

 


12 Charles R. Darwin, The Voyage of the Beagle (New York: Bantam Books,

1958), 376.

 


13 Aristotle, History of Animals (New York: Kessinger, 2004), 226.

 


14 Alfred W. Crosby, Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of

Europe, 900-1900 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986), 139.

 


15 James P. Mallory and Douglas Q. Adams, The Oxford Introduction to

Proto Indo European and the Proto Indo European World (New York:

Oxford University Press, 2006); David Anthony, The Horse, the Wheel, and

Language: How Bronze-Age Riders from the Eurasian Steppes Shaped the

Modern World (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2007).

 


16 James P. Mallory, In Search of the Indo-Europeans: Language,

Archaeology and Myth (London: Thames and Hudson, 1989).

 17 Raymond D. Crotty, When Histories Collide: The Development and

Impact of Individualistic Capitalism (Walnut Creek, Calif.: AltaMira Press,

2001); Morton O. Cooper and W. J. Spillman, “Farmer’s Bulletin No. 877—

Human Food from an Acre of Staple Farm Products,” Farmers’ Bulletin of

the U.S. Department of Agriculture (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing

Office, 1919).

 


18 The line in the Iliad has been translated this way: “The Hippemolgi,

whose diet is mares’ milk . . .” Homer, translated by Stanley Lombardo, Iliad

(Indianapolis: Hackett, 1997), 239.

 


19 Herodotus, translated by Aubrey de Selincourt, The Histories (New York:

Penguin, 1972), 310-315.

 


20 J. Burger et al. “Absence of the Lactase-Persistence-Associated Allele in

Early Neolithic Europeans,” Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences 104, no. 10 (2007): 3736.

 


21 Sarah A. Tishkoff et al., “Convergent Adaptation of Human Lactase

Persistence in Africa and Europe,” Nature Genetics 39, no. 1 (2007): 31-40.

 


22 Bruce Lincoln, Priests, Warriors, and Cattle: A Study in the Ecology of

Religions (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981).

 


23 N. S. Enattah et al., “Independent Introduction of Two Lactase-Persistence

Alleles into Human Populations Reflects Different History of Adaptation to

Milk Culture,” American Journal of Human Genetics 82, no. 1 (2008): 57-72.

                                   chapter seven


 


1 Linda Gottfredson, “Logical Fallacies Used to Dismiss the Evidence on

Intelligence Testing,” in The True Measure of Educational and Psychological

Tests: Correcting Fallacies about the Science of Testing, edited by R. Phelps

(Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association, in press). Despite

widespread condemnation of standardized tests, the data are unambiguous

that they are the best available predictor of academic achievement and job

success. There is essentially no controversy about this within the cognitive

testing community.

 


2 Cyril Russell and Harry S. Lewis, The Jew in London (London: Harper

Collins, 1900).

 


3 Data from the Nobel Foundation, http://nobelprize.org/ (accessed October

1, 2008).

 


4 “Jewish Recipients of the ACM A.M. Turing Award,”

    http://www.jinfo.org/Computer_ACM_Turing.html (accessed October 1,

2008).

 


5 Richard S. Tedlow et al., “The American CEO in the Twentieth Century:

Demography and Career Path,” Harvard NOM Working Paper No. 03-21,

Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 03-097, February 2003,

available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=383280 or DOI:

  10.2139/ssrn.10.2139/ssrn.38328.

 


6 Data from Hillel International at    http://www.hillel.org/HillelApps/JLOC/Search.aspx (accessed October 1,

2008).

 


7 Margaret H. Williams, The Jews among the Greeks and Romans: A

Diasporan Sourcebook (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998).

 


8 Maristella Botticini and Zvi Eckstein, “From Farmers to Merchants: A

Human Capital Interpretation of Jewish Economic History,” 2002,

    http://www.cepr.org/pubs/dps/DP3718.asp.

 


9 Mel Konner, Unsettled: An Anthropology of the Jews (New York: Viking

Compass, 2003).

 


10 Williams, The Jews among the Greeks and Romans; Gregory of Tours,

The History of the Franks (Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1974).

 


11 Hayim Ben-Sasson, A History of the Jewish People (Cambridge: Harvard

University Press, 1976).

 


12 Bernard D. Weinryb, The Jews of Poland: A Social and Economic History

of the Jewish Community in Poland from 1100 to 1800 (Philadelphia: Jewish

Publication Society of America, 1973); Ben-Sasson, A History of the Jewish

People; Zvi Ankori, “Origins and History of Ashkenazi Jewry (8th to 18th

Century),” in Genetic Diseases among Ashkenazi Jews, edited by Richard M.

Goodman and Arno G. Motulsky (New York: Raven Press, 1979); Eli

Barnavi and Miriam Eliav-Feldon, A Historical Atlas of the Jewish People:

From the Time of the Patriarchs to the Present (New York: Knopf, 1992).

 


13 Botticini and Eckstein, “From Farmers to Merchants.”

 


14 Nachum Gross, Economic History of the Jews (New York: SchockenBooks, 1975), 147, 150.

 


15 Marcus Arkin, Aspects of Jewish Economic History (Philadelphia: Jewish

Publication Society of America, 1975); Ben-Sasson, A History of the Jewish

People.

 


16 Arkin, Aspects of Jewish Economic History, 58.

 


17 Ben-Sasson, A History of the Jewish People, 401.

 


18 Norman Roth, Medieval Jewish Civilization: An Encyclopedia. Routledge

Encyclopedias of the Middle Ages, vol. 7 (London: Routledge).

 


19 Weinryb, The Jews of Poland, 313.

 


20 Ibid.

 


21 Ibid., 115.

 


22 Ibid., 313.

 


23 Bernard Lewis, The Jews of Islam (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University

Press, 1984).

 


24 Jewish Encyclopedia, http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/. The Jewish

Encyclopedia was an encyclopedia originally published between 1901 and

1906 by Funk and Wagnalls. It contained over 15,000 articles in twelve

volumes on the history and the state of Judaism and the Jews as of 1901. It is

now a public domain resource.

 25 Eric Hobsbawm, “Benefits of Diaspora,” London Review of Books,

October 20, 2005, http://www.lrb.co.uk/v27/n20/hobs01_.html.

 


26 Raphael Patai and Jennifer Patai, The Myth of the Jewish Race (New

York: Scribner, 1975).

 


27 Tian et al., “Analysis and Application of European Genetic Substructure

Using 300K SNP Information,” PLoS Genetics 4, no. 1 (2008): e4. An SNP is

a single nucleotide polymorphism. If we take two human chromosomes from

a population and scan them side by side, there will be a single base pair

difference approximately every 1,000 positions, on average. A site on the

chromosome where two different bases are present in a population is called

an SNP.

 


28 Howard Gardner, Frames of Mind (New York: Basic Books, 1993);

Daniel Goleman, Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ

(New York: Bantam Books, 1995).

 


29 Arthur R. Jensen, Bias in Mental Testing (New York: Free Press, 1980).

 


30 Margaret E. Backman, “Patterns of Mental Abilities: Ethnic,

Socioeconomic, and Sex Differences,” American Educational Research

Journal 9 (1972): 1-12; Boris Levinson, “A Comparison of the Performance

of Monolingual and Bilingual Native-Born, Jewish Preschool Children of

Traditional Parentage on Four Intelligence Tests,” Journal of Clinical

Psychology 15 (1959): 74-76; Julius S. Romanoff, “Birth Order, Family Size,

and Sibling Spacing as Influences on Intelligence and Academic Abilities of

Jewish Adolescents,” Department of Psychology, Temple University, 1976.

 


31 Richard Lynn, “The Intelligence of American Jews,” Personality and

Individual Differences 26 (2004): 201-206.

 32 James F. Crow, “Unequal by Nature: A Geneticist’s Perspective on

Human Differences,” Daedalus, Winter 2002, 81-88.

 


33 Cyril Russell and Harry S. Lewis, The Jew in London (London: Harper

Collins, 1900).

 


34 A. Hughes, “Jew and Gentiles: Their Intellectual and Temperamental

Differences,” Eugenics Review 18 (July 1928): 1-6.

 


35 Leon Kamin, The Science and Politics of IQ (Potomac, Md.: Erlbaum,

1974); H. Goddard, “Mental Tests and the Immigrant,” Journal of

Delinquency 2 (1917): 243-277.

 


36 Daniel Seligman, A Question of Intelligence: The IQ Debate in America

(New York: Birch Lane Press, 1992).

 


37 Hanna David and Richard Lynn, “Intelligence Differences between

European and Oriental Jews in Israel,” Journal of Biosocial Science 39, no. 3

(2007): 465-473.

 


38 Yinon Cohen et al., “Ethnicity and Mixed Ethnicity: Educational Gaps

among Israeli-Born Jews,” Ethnic and Racial Studies 30, no. 5 (2007): 896-

917.

 


39 Gregory Cochran et al., “Natural History of Ashkenazi Intelligence,”

Journal of Biosocial Science 38, no. 5 (2005): 659-693; A. B. Olshen et al.,

“Analysis of Genetic Variation in Ashkenazi Jews by High Density SNP

Genotyping,” BMC Genetics 9, no. 1 (2008): 14.

 


40 Dana S. Mosher et al., “A Mutation in the Myostatin Gene Increases

Muscle Mass and Enhances Racing Performance in Heterozygote Dogs,”PLoS Genetics 3, no. 5 (2007): e79.

 


41 Steven U. Walkley, “Neurobiology and Cellular Pathogenesis of

Glycolipid Storage Diseases,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal

Society London B 358 (2003): 893-904; Steven U. Walkley et al.,

“Gangliosides as Modulators of Dendritogenesis in Normal and Storage

Disease-Affected Pyramidal Neurons,” Cerebral Cortex 10 (2000): 1028-

1037.

 


42 Cochran et al., “Natural History of Ashkenazi Intelligence.”

 


43 Roswell Eldridge, “Edward Flatau, Wladyslaw Sterling, Torsion Spasm in

Jewish Children, and the Early History of Human Genetics,” Advances in

Neurology 14 (1976): 105-114.

 


44 Roswell Eldridge, “Torsion Dystonias: Genetic and Clinical Studies,”

Neurology 11 (1970): 1-78; Eldridge, “Edward Flatau, Wladyslaw Sterling,

Torsion Spasm.”

 


45 Maria I. New and R. C. Wilson, “Steroid Disorders in Children:

Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia and Apparent Mineralocorticoid Excess,”

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 96 (1999):

12790-12797.

 


46 At the beginning of the nineteenth century in Europe the old relationship

between wealth and number of offspring began to reverse, and it remains

reversed today in industrial societies. This accompanied a reduction in death

rates and, somewhat later, birth rates among all wealth classes, called the

“demographic transition.”

 


47 Linda S. Gottfredson, “Why g Matters: The Complexity of Everyday

Life,” Intelligence 24 (1997): 79-132.                                     GLOSSARY

 



Adaptive: An adjective that is widely used in evolutionary biology but that is

nowhere precisely defined. In general, a trait is called adaptive if it increases

the fitness of its bearers: Thus, white skin may be adaptive in cold, northern

climates  where  there  is  limited  opportunity  for  exposure  to  sunlight  and

hence vitamin D synthesis.

 


Akkadian Empire: A polity that was prominent in Iraq two thousand years

before the Common Era. The empire had a system of roads and a regular

postal service, and there was intense use of clay seals as postage stamps.

 


Alans:  Horse  nomads,  a  subgroup  of  Sarmatians,  who  accompanied  the

Vandals in their invasion of the Roman Empire and later wanderings in later

Roman times and during the dark ages. See also Sarmatians; Vandals.

 


Allele: An alternate form of a gene; also, a particular sequence of nucleotides

occupying a given position on a chromosome. The position on a chromosome

is called a locus (pl. loci). Different sequences that occur at the same locus in

the population are called allelic to each other or simply alleles. Thus, A, B,

and O are alleles at the ABO blood-group locus.

 


Amino  acid:  The  basic  building  blocks  of  proteins.  There  are  twenty

standard amino acids—twenty-one if you count selenocysteine.

 


Anatomically modern humans (AMH): Creatures who looked much like

people today, who appeared in northeastern Africa up to 200,000 years ago.

From  then  until  about  45,000  years  ago,  there  are  occasional  traces  of

innovation in the archaeological record—beads, ochre, or an occasional new

high-quality tool, but little happens until about 45,000 years ago when our

human  ancestors  left  Africa  to  colonize  Europe  and  Asia  north  of  theHimalayas, in one branch, and Australia, parts of Indonesia, and near Pacific

islands  in  another  branch.  Some  would  say  that  the  200,000-year-old

Africans were the first anatomically modern humans; others would say that

the colonizers of 45,000 years ago were.

 


Archaic  humans:  Precursors  of  anatomically  modern  humans  in  Africa,

Europe, and Asia, including the Neanderthals of Europe. Homo erectus is the

name usually given to the human ancestor of 1.8 million years ago until about

300,000 years ago. After that, H. erectus began to exhibit several important

changes: The first prepared-core toolmaking traditions appeared, along with

hearths for fire, and the brain became larger, until it was essentially the same

size as or slightly larger than that of humans today. It is these apparently

larger-brained versions of Homo erectus that are called “archaic humans.”

 


Assyrian Empire: A Bronze Age empire centered in northern Mesopotamia,

north of Babylon. The Assyrians spoke a Semitic language.

 


Atlatl: A spear-throwing device with a handle on one end along with a spur

or cup that the spear rests against. An atlatl can cast a dart more than 100

yards. The Australian version is known as a woomera.

 


Aurignacian: The earliest of several cultural traditions in Europe associated

with  the  anatomically  modern  human  invaders  from  Africa.  Aurignacian

culture had early cave art, sculpture, and fine stone and bone tools.

 


Autosome: A chromosome other than the sex chromosomes. Twenty-two of

the twenty-three pairs of chromosomes in human DNA are autosomal; two

copies  of  each  autosomal  chromosome  are  found  in  both  sexes.  The

chromosomes of the other pair, which can be either type X or Y, are called

sex chromosomes.

 


Axon: A long fiber or projection of a nerve cell that carries nerve impulses

away from the cell body. 


Behavioral  modernity:  The  set  of  practices  and  cultural  elaborations

characterizing modern humans, as opposed to archaic humans. There is an

ongoing effort in some disciplines to draw a line between archaic and modern

humans, but different theorists place that line at different points in the history

of our species. Some would draw it several hundred thousand years ago in

Africa when creatures who look like us appeared on the scene; others would

draw the line around 45,000 years ago, when a lot of art, decoration, clothing,

sculpture, and new technology appeared rather suddenly, especially among

populations that left Africa.

 


Berbers: Aboriginal inhabitants of Africa north of the Sahara. The Berbers

look much more like Europeans than sub-Saharan Africans do.

 


Blade: A stone tool made from a flake that is more than twice as long as it is

wide.  The  toolkit  of  the  anatomically  modern  invaders  of  Europe  about

40,000 years ago had many more blades than the Neanderthals’ toolkit did.

 


Bottleneck: A severe restriction in population size that leads to a reduction in

genetic  diversity.  The  effect  of  a  bottleneck  depends  on  the  size  of  the

population when it was small and the length of time that it was small. In

general,  in  human  history  a  reduction  to  a  total  population  size  in  the

hundreds would leave a genetic trace; a reduction to a population size in the

thousands would not be a significant bottleneck unless it persisted for tens of

thousands of years.

 


Carbon-14 dating: A method of dating paleontological and archaeological

specimens  by  measuring  the  ratio  of  stable  to  unstable  carbon  isotopes

present  in  the  specimen.  Carbon  in  the  atmosphere  contains  an  unstable

isotope that breaks down at a constant rate and is generated by solar activity.

When a living organism dies, there is no longer carbon exchange with the

atmosphere, and the fraction of the unstable isotope decreases with time. By

measuring the ratio of stable to unstable carbon, one can estimate the time ofdeath. The method is considered accurate for events from several centuries to

about 45,000 years in the past. See also Isotope.

 


Carrying capacity: The maximum population that can be sustained over the

long run. With humans, this depends upon which skills and tools are known.

The same piece of land would have a lower carrying capacity for foragers

than for farmers.

 


Centromere: A central region in the chromosome involved in cell division.

It consists of largely repetitive DNA and has few genes.

 


Châtelperronian: A stone-tool tradition found in Europe after the invasion

of anatomically modern humans from Africa. It shows some similarities to

technologies of the Neanderthals and has been associated with Neanderthal

remains.  Many  believe  that  it  represents  a  Neanderthal  imitation  of  the

technology of the invaders.

 


Chromosome: A very long DNA molecule, along with associated protective

proteins. Humans have forty-six chromosomes in twenty-three pairs, one of

each  pair  from  the  mother,  one  from  the  father.  The  last  pair,  the  sex

chromosomes,  would  be  a  pair  of  two  X’s  in  females  or  an  X

andaYchromosome in males.

 


Codon:  A  sequence  of  three  nucleotides.  These  three-base  sequences

designate particular amino acids (most of them—sixty out of sixty-four) or

initiation or cessation of protein assembly.

 


Dendrite:  Short,  highly  branched  extensions  of  a  neuron.  Dendrites  form

synaptic contacts with other neurons.

 


Diploid: Organisms whose cells carry two copies of the genetic blueprint,

ordinarily  one  from  the  mother  and  one  from  the  father.  Diploidy  isassociated with sexual reproduction.

 


DNA:  Deoxyribonucleic  acid,  a  nucleic  acid  molecule  that  contains  the

genetic recipe used in the growth and function of living organisms.

 


Dominant: The phenotypic effect of an allele at a locus when there is only a

single copy. For example, people with blood group A have either two A

alleles, or else an A and an O; in the latter case, A is called dominant to O.

 


Eemian interglacial: The interglacial era before the current one (Holocene).

It began about 131,000 years ago, and temperatures had returned by 114,000

years ago. At its peak, temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere were 1-2°C

warmer than today.

 


Etruscans:  An  ancient  people  of  Italy,  concentrated  in  the  area  north  of

Rome  now  known  as  Tuscany.  They  had,  at  minimum,  an  important

influence on the development of Rome, and they may have founded the city.

They spoke an undeciphered non-Indo-European language, and historical and

genetic evidence suggests that they originated in Anatolia.

 


Exponential growth: Growth that is proportional to the amount present, like

compound  interest.  Interest  that  is  continuously  compounded  yields  an

exponential growth of money. Under exponential growth, the doubling time

is constant. So, for example, it takes the same amount of time to go from 100

to 200 as it takes to go from 1,000 to 2,000.

 


Fitness: The rate of reproduction of an entity. The fitness of an individual is

the genetic contribution of that individual to the next generation. The fitness

of a gene, or a chunk of DNA, is the rate of reproduction of that gene.

 


Fixation: The state in which all copies of a given gene in a population are

identical. 


Gaucher’s disease: A lysosomal storage disease that is unusually common

(100 times the norm) in Ashkenazi Jews. Homozygotes experience an illness

of varying severity, mostly due to the accumulation of the fatty substance

glucosylceramide in tissues.

 


Gene:  A  string  of  nucleic  acids  that  does  something  biologically  useful.

Often the useful product is messenger RNA that codes for a protein, but some

genes produce structural RNA or regulate expression of other genes.

 


Genotype:  An  individual’s  genetic  pattern,  as  opposed  to  his  phenotype,

which is his visible characteristic. For example, someone with the phenotype

of blood group A could have either the AA or the AO genotype.

 


Group selection: Selection favoring well-adapted groups rather than well-

adapted  individuals.  The  classic  formulation  is  this:  Group  A  is  full  of

altruists, and group B is full of selfish individuals. Group A grows faster, but

since the groups belong to the same species, selfish individuals from group B

always infiltrate group A and take advantage of the altruism there. In the end,

selfish  individuals  predominate.  There  is  a  broad  consensus  that  group

selection is not an important force in evolution. This means that evolution

does not lead to individuals who are altruistic or who do things “for the good

of the species.”

 


Haploid: An organism that carries a single copy of the genetic code, that is,

its blueprint. Most complex animals and plants are instead diploid. See also

Diploid.

 


Haplotype:  A  set  of  single  nucleotide  polymorphisms  (SNPs)  near  each

other on a chromosome that are statistically associated. See also SNP.

 


HapMap:  A  genetic  dataset  that  records  the  common  single-nucleotidevariants in a number of individuals drawn from Europe, sub-Saharan Africa,

and East Asia.

 


Heritability: The proportion of variation of a trait that is caused by genetic

variation. Note that this is not fixed for any trait, since it depends on the

amount  of  genetic  variation  and  the  diversity  of  environmental  or  other

effects. Skin color is more heritable in New York than it is in Stockholm

because the genetic variation is greater in New York.

 


Heterozygote: An individual with two different alleles of a given gene at a

locus.

 


Holocene: The interglacial period we are currently in. It started about 11,500

years ago.

 


Homo erectus: A human ancestor that left Africa over 1.5 million years ago

to occupy much of the temperate and tropical Old World. Below the neck

they  resembled  extremely  rugged  modern  humans.  Their  brains  were

approximately two-thirds the size of ours and their skulls were thick and

heavy, with prominent bony architecture around the eyes and heavy jaws and

teeth.

 


Homo  heidelbergensis:  An  early  European  version  of Homo  erectus.

Whether or not to give the European forms this separate name is a matter of

taste and convenience.

 


Homo neanderthalensis: See Neanderthal.

 


Homo  sapiens:  The  proper  name  of  our  species,  anatomically  modern

humans.

 Homozygote: An individual with two identical copies of a given gene at a

locus.

 


Indo-European: A family of related languages. Most European languages

are Indo-European, as are Persian and the languages of northern India. The

Indo-European range once extended into western China. There are several

plausible  theories  of  Indo-European  origins,  the  favorite  being  that  the

original  Indo-European  speakers  (called  Proto-Indo-Europeans)  were

mounted agro-pastoralist invaders from the steppes of the Ukraine.

 


Indus civilization: An ancient civilization that flourished in Pakistan and

western India from 2600 to 1900 BC. Cuneiform records and archaeological

finds indicate extensive maritime trade between this civilization and ancient

Mesopotamia.

 


Introgression:  The  movement  of  a  gene  or  genes  from  one  species  to

another.

 


Isotope: One of several forms of an element that differ in weight. Isotopes

have the same number of protons but differing numbers of neutrons. See also

Carbon-14 dating.

 


Lactase: The digestive enzyme that breaks down lactose. People who lack

lactase  often  suffer  gastrointestinal  discomfort  or  worse  when  they  drink

fresh milk.

 


Lactose: A sugar found in milk.

 


Linkage  disequilibrium:  Statistical  association  in  a  population  between

nearby genetic variants, ordinarily SNPs. Chromosomes break and recombine

over time, so that diversity along a chromosome becomes randomized in a

population. Ordinarily, for example, the pattern of SNPs at a chromosomallocation predicts little about the pattern 100,000 base positions away. Various

evolutionary  forces,  however,  can  lead  to  a  correlation  over  large

chromosomal distances, and this is called linkage disequilibrium.

 


Locus: A particular place on a chromosome. Since humans are diploids, we

have two copies of the genetic material at every locus.

 


Loss of function: Impairment in the functioning of a gene due to a mutation.

A mutation of a gene that breaks it or impairs its function is called a loss-of-

function mutation. A familiar example is any of several genes that cause light

skin color in Europeans. These are essentially broken African genes. We see

many loss-of-function mutations in genetics because it is easy to break a

gene.

 


Malthusian trap: A situation in which diminishing returns prevent gains in

average welfare in a population because any improvements in technology or

production are offset by population increase.

 


Mitochondrial  DNA:  Genetic  material  in  organelles  in  the  cell  called

mitochondria. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is transmitted in the cytoplasm

outside the nucleus; hence it is only transmitted through females. Since any

individual has only one inherited copy of mtDNA, the mtDNA system is

called a haploid (as opposed to diploid) system. See also Diploid; Haploid.

 


Mousterian: The culture and tool tradition associated with Neanderthals in

Europe and near Asia. It is characterized by sophisticated flake tools made

from prepared cores, but it also retains earlier technologies.

 


Mutation: A change in genetic material. Mutation is the ultimate source of

all genetic diversity.

 


Natural  selection:  The  process  by  which  the  frequency  of  alleles  in  apopulation  is  changed  by  factors  other  than  sampling  error.  Usually  this

means that changes in the frequency of an allele are driven by its effects on

individual fitness.

 


Neanderthal: Archaic humans who occupied western Eurasia from several

hundred thousand years ago to 35,000 years ago when they went extinct,

presumably  in  competition  with  anatomically  modern  humans. Neolithic:

Literally “New Stone Age”; the period beginning with the advent of farming

and ending when metal tools became widely used. In the Middle East, it

began about 9000 BC and ended about 4500 BC. See also Paleolithic.

 


Neuron: A nerve cell.

 


Nucleotide: Chemical compounds that are the structural units of DNA and

RNA. They’re made up of a unit called a base that is linked to a sugar and

one or more phosphate groups. The four bases found in DNA are adenine,

cytosine, guanine, and thymine. A chromosome is made of millions of linked

nucleotides.

 


Paleolithic: Literally, “Old Stone Age”; the period beginning over 2 million

years  ago  and  represented  by  the  earliest  stone-tool  traditions  from  the

Oldowan  tradition  and  including  the  Upper  Paleolithic  tools  made  by

anatomically modern humans as recently as 10,000 years ago in Europe. The

period  ended  with  the  advent  of  farming  in  around  9000  BC. See  also

Neolithic.

 


Parsis:  The  Zoroastrian  community  in  India,  descended  (in  part)  from

Persians who left Iran after the Arab conquest.

 


Pathans: The largest ethnic group in Afghanistan and the second-largest in

Pakistan. Pathans are Muslims, speak an east Iranian language, and follow an

elaborate honor code known as Pashtunwali. They are also called Afghans

and Pushtuns. 


Pleistocene: A geological epoch that began about 1.8 million years ago and,

conventionally, ended with the end of the last Ice Age about 12,000 years

ago.

 


Positive selection: Advantage that occurs when natural selection favors a

particular allele, which then increases in frequency.

 


Primates: The order of mammals that includes prosimians, Old and New

World monkeys, apes, and humans.

 


Protein: One or several chains of amino acids that have undergone complex

folding.

 


Proto-Indo-European: See Indo-European.

 


Pyramidal neuron: A neuron with a long axon and many dendrites located

in  the  hippocampus  and  cerebral  cortex.  Pyramidal  neurons  constitute

approximately 80 percent of cortical neurons.

 


Recessive: An allele that causes a detectable phenotypic characteristic only

when an organism has two copies. Many recessive alleles are null alleles—

they  do  nothing.  For  example,  blood  group  O  of  the  ABO  locus  is  the

absence of a gene product. See also Dominant.

 


Recombination:  The  process  of  chromosomes  breaking,  exchanging

segments, and re-forming. Also called “crossing-over.” We inherit one of

each pair of chromosomes from each parent. These parental chromosomes

break and re-form so that we transmit chromosomes that are composed of

some of each parental chromosome.

 Sarmatians: Horse nomads who lived in southern European Russia and the

eastern Balkans in late antiquity, the successors of the Scythians. They spoke

an Iranian language related to the language of the Scythians. See also Alans;

Scythians; Vandals.

 


Scythians:  Horse  nomads  who  dominated  southern  Russia  during  early

classical times and spoke an Iranian language. They were closely related to

the Sarmatians, their successors.

 


Selective sweep: The process by which a new variant favored by selection

increases in frequency.

 


SNP: Single nucleotide polymorphism, a DNA sequence variant in which a

single nucleotide differs from others in a collection of chromosomes.

 


Spanish Fly: Cantharides, a poisonous compound secreted by some beetles.

If ingested, it irritates the urinary tract and causes swelling of the genitalia. It

was often used as an aphrodisiac (on Louis XIV, for example) or as a poison.

Today cantharides is illegal in the United States except in animal husbandry.

 


Sphingolipids:  A  class  of  lipids  that  are  found  in  cell  membranes  and

common  in  nerve  tissue.  They  play  a  role  in  cell  recognition,  membrane

structure, and signal transmission.

 


Tay-Sachs disease: A lysosomal storage disease that is unusually common

(100  times  the  norm)  in  Ashkenazi  Jews.  Homozygotes  undergo  aberrant

sprouting of dendrites from pyramidal neurons and die in infancy.

 


Vandals: An East Germanic tribe that invaded the Roman Empire in the

fourth century. They passed through France, occupied southern Spain for a

time, and later built a robber kingdom centered in North Africa. See also

Alans; Sarmatians. 


X chromosome: One of the two sex-determining chromosomes in mammals.

Females have two copies of the X chromosome, whereas males have an X

and a Y chromosome. See also Y chromosome.

 


Yanomamo:  An  Amerindian  tribe  of  the  Amazon  basin  that  subsists  by

gardening and hunting. They are famous for high levels of violence and local

raiding and warfare; males who have killed others have higher fitness than

nonkillers.

 


Y chromosome: One of the two sex-determining chromosomes in mammals.

Males have one X and one Y chromosome. The Y chromosome triggers male

development. Except for mutation, it is passed on unchanged from father to

son. See also X chromosome.

                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY

 



Achilli,  Alessandro,  Anna  Olivieri,  Maria  Pala,  Ene  Metspalu,  Simona

Fornarino, Vincenza Battaglia, Matteo Accetturo et al. “Mitochondrial DNA

Variation  of  Modern  Tuscans  Supports  the  Near  Eastern  Origin  of

Etruscans.” American Journal of Human Genetics 80, no 4 (2007): 759-768.

 


Allen, Robert C. “Agriculture and the Origins of the State in Ancient Egypt.”

Explorations in Economic History 34, no. 2 (1997): 135-154.

 


Anderson, Roy C. “The Ecological Relationships of Meningeal Worm and

Native  Cervids  in  North  America.” Journal of Wildlife Diseases  8,  no.  4

(1972): 304-310.

 


Ankori,  Zvi.  “Origins  and  History  of  Ashkenazi  Jewry  (8th  to  18th

Century).” In Richard M. Goodman and Arno G. Motulsky, eds., Genetic

Diseases among Ashkenazi Jews. New York: Raven Press, 1979.

 


Anthony, David. The  Horse,  the  Wheel,  and  Language:  How  Bronze-Age

Riders from the Eurasian Steppes Shaped the Modern World. Princeton, N.J.:

Princeton University Press, 2007.

 


Arkin, Marcus. Aspects of Jewish Economic History. Philadelphia: Jewish

Publication Society of America, 1975.

 


Backman, Margaret E. “Patterns of Mental Abilities: Ethnic, Socioeconomic,

and Sex Differences.” American Educational Research Journal 9 (1972): 1-

12.

 Baker, John R. Race. New York: Oxford University Press, 1974.

 


Barkow, Jerome H., Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby. The Adapted Mind:

Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. New York: Oxford

University Press, 1992.

 


Barnavi,  Eli,  and  Miriam  Eliav-Feldon. A  Historical  Atlas  of  the  Jewish

People: From the Time of the Patriarchs to the Present. New York: Knopf,

1992.

 


Basu, Analabha, Hua Tang, Xiaofeng Zhu, C. Charles Gu, Craig Hanis, Eric

Boerwinkle,  and  Neil  Risch.  “Genome-Wide  Distribution  of  Ancestry  in

Mexican Americans.” Human Genetics, DOI 10.1007/s00439-008-0541-5.

 


Ben-Sasson, Hayim. A History of the Jewish People. Cambridge: Harvard

University Press, 1976.

 


Bielicki, John K., Trudy M. Forte, Mark R. McCall, Lori J. Stoltzfus, Giulia

Chiesa, Cesare R. Sirtori, Guido Franceschini, and Edward M. Rubin. “High

Density Lipoprotein Particle Size Restriction in Apolipoprotein A-I (Milano)

Transgenic Mice.” Journal of Lipid Research 38, no. 11 (1997): 2314-2321.

 


Bockstette,  Valerie,  Areendam  Chanda,  and  Louis  Putterman.  “States  and

Markets: The Advantage of an Early Start.” Journal of Economic Growth 7

(2002): 347-369.

 


Botticini,  Maristella.,  and  Zvi  Eckstein.  “From  Farmers  to  Merchants:  A

Human  Capital  Interpretation  of  Jewish  Economic  History,”  2002,

    http://www.cepr.org/pubs/dps/DP3718.asp.

 


Bulliet,  Richard  W. The  Camel  and  the  Wheel.  Cambridge:  HarvardUniversity Press, 1975.

 


Burger,  J.,  M.  Kirchner,  B.  Bramanti,  W.  Haak,  and  M.  G.  Thomas.

“Absence  of  the  Lactase-Persistence-Associated  Allele  in  Early  Neolithic

Europeans.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, no. 10

(2007): 3736.

 


Byock, Jesse L. Viking Age Iceland. New York: Penguin, 2001.

 


Carter,  Richard,  and  Kamini  N.  Mendis.  “Evolutionary  and  Historical

Aspects of the Burden of Malaria.” Clinical Microbiology Reviews 15 (2002):

564-594.

 


Cavalli-Sforza, L. Luca, Paolo Menozzi, and Alberto Piazza. The History and

Geography  of  Human  Genes.  Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton  University  Press,

1994.

 


Clark, Gregory. A Farewell to Alms. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University

Press, 2007.

 


Cochran, Gregory, Jason Hardy, and Henry Harpending. “Natural History of

Ashkenazi Intelligence.” Journal of Biosocial Science 38, no. 5 (2005): 659-

693.

 


Cohen,  Mark  Nathan,  and  George  J.  Armelagos. Paleopathology  at  the

Origins of Agriculture. Academic Press, 1984.

 


Cohen, Yinon, Yitchak Haberfeld, and Tali Kristal. “Ethnicity and Mixed

Ethnicity: Educational Gaps among Israeli-Born Jews.” Ethnic and Racial

Studies 30, no. 5 (2007): 896-917.

 Cook, Noble David. Born to Die: Disease and New World Conquest, 1492-

1650. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

 


Coon, Carleton S. The Origin of Races. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1963.

 


Coop,  Graham  K.,  Kevin  Bullaughey,  Francesca  Luca,  and  Molly

Przeworski.  “The  Timing  of  Selection  at  the  Human  FOXP2  Gene.”

Molecular Biology and Evolution 25, no. 7 (2008): 1257.

 


Cooper,  Morton  O.,  and  W.  J.  Spillman.  “Farmer’s  Bulletin  No.  877—

Human Food from an Acre of Staple Farm Products.” In Farmers’ Bulletin of

the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing

Office, 1919.

 


Cordain,  L.,  S.  B.  Eaton,  J.  Brand  Miller,  N.  Mann,  K.  Hill.  “Original

Communication:  The  Paradoxical  Nature  of  Hunter-Gatherer  Diets:  Meat-

Based, Yet Non-Atherogenic.” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 56,

no. 1 (2002): S42-S52.

 


Crosby,  Alfred  W. Ecological  Imperialism:  The  Biological  Expansion  of

Europe, 900-1900. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986.

 


Crotty, Raymond D. When Histories Collide: The Development and Impact

of Individualistic Capitalism. Walnut Creek, Calif.: AltaMira Press, 2001.

 


Crow, James F. “Unequal by Nature: A Geneticist’s Perspective on Human

Differences.” Daedalus, Winter 2002, 81-88.

 


Curnoe, D., A. Thorne, and J. A. Coate. “Timing and Tempo of Primate

Speciation.” Journal of Evolutionary Biology 19, no. 1 (2006): 59-65.

 Currat,  M.,  and  L.  Excoffier.  “Modern  Humans  Did  Not  Admix  with

Neanderthals during Their Range Expansion into Europe.” PLoS Biology 2,

no. 12 (2004).

 


Darwin, Charles R. The Voyage of the Beagle. New York: Bantam Books,

1958.

 


David,  Hanna,  and  Richard  Lynn.  “Intelligence  Differences  between

European and Oriental Jews in Israel.” Journal of Biosocial Science 39, no. 3

(2007): 465-473.

 


Diamond, Jared. Guns,  Germs,  and  Steel:  The  Fates  of  Human  Societies.

New York: W. W. Norton, 2005.

 


———. The Third Chimpanzee: The Evolution and Future of the Human

Animal. New York: HarperCollins, 1992.

 


———. “The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race.” Discover 8,

no. 5 (1987): 64-66.

 


Duarte, Cidália, João Maurício, Paul B. Pettitt, Pedro Souto, Erik Trinkaus,

Hans van der Plicht, and João Zilhão. “The Early Upper Paleolithic Human

Skeleton from the Abrigo do Lagar Velho (Portugal) and Modern Human

Emergence in Iberia.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 96

(1999): 7604-7609.

 


Dupanloup,  Isabelle,  Giorgio  Bertorelle,  Lounès  Chikhi,  and  Guido

Barbujani. “Estimating the Impact of Prehistoric Admixture on the Genome

of Europeans.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 21, no. 7 (2004): 1361-

1372.

 Eiberg, Hans, Jesper Troelsen, Mette Nielsen, Annemette Mikkelsen, Jonas

Mengel-From,  Klaus  W.  Kjaer,  and  Lars  Hansen.  “Blue  Eye  Color  in

Humans May Be Caused by a Perfectly Associated Founder Mutation in a

Regulatory  Element  Located  within  the  HERC2  Gene  Inhibiting  OCA2

Expression.” Human Genetics 123, no. 2 (2008): 177-187.

 


Eldridge, Roswell. “Edward Flatau, Wladyslaw Sterling, Torsion Spasm in

Jewish Children, and the Early History of Human Genetics.” Advances in

Neurology 14 (1976): 105-114.

 


———. “Torsion Dystonias: Genetic and Clinical Studies.” Neurology 11

(1970): 1-78.

 


Enattah, N. S., T. G. Jensen, M. Nielsen, R. Lewinski, M. Kuokkanen, H.

Rasinpera,  H.  El-Shanti  et  al.  “Independent  Introduction  of  Two  Lactase-

Persistence  Alleles  into  Human  Populations  Reflects  Different  History  of

Adaptation to Milk Culture.” American Journal of Human Genetics 82, no. 1

(2008): 57-72.

 


Evans,  P.  D.,  S.  L.  Gilbert,  N.  Mekel-Bobrov,  E.  J.  Vallender,  J.  R.

Anderson, L. M. Vaez-Asizi, S. A. Tishkoff, R. R. Hudson, and B. T. Lahn.

“Microcephalin,  a  Gene  Regulating  Brain  Size,  Continues  to  Evolve

Adaptively in Humans.” Science 309, no. 5741 (2005): 1717-1720.

 


Evans, P. D., N. Mekel-Bobrov, E. J. Vallender, R.R. Hudson, and B. T.

Lahn.  “Evidence  That  the  Adaptive  Allele  of  the  Brain  Size  Gene

Microcephalin  Introgressed  into Homo  sapiens  from  an  Archaic  Homo

lineage.” Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  103,  no.  48

(2006), DOI link.

 


Firasat,  Sadaf,  Shagufta  Khaliq,  Aisha  Mohyuddin,  Myrto  Papaioannou,

Chris Tyler-Smith, Peter A. Underhill, and Qasim Ayub. “Y-chromosomal

Evidence  for  a  Limited  Greek  Contribution  to  the  Pathan  Population  ofPakistan.” European Journal of Human Genetics 15, no. 1 (2007): 121-126.

 


Fix,  Alan  G. Migration  and  Colonization  in  Human  Microevolution.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

 


Frayer, David W. “Evolution at the European Edge: Neanderthal and Upper

Paleolithic Relationships.” Préhistoire Européenne 2 (1993): 9-69.

 


———. “Perspectives on Neandertals as Ancestors.” In G. A. Clark and C.

M. Willermet, eds., Conceptual Issues in Modern Human Origins Research.

New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1998.

 


Fulge, M., R. Renneberg, S. Hummel, and B. Herrmann. “Lactose Persistence

in Prehistoric Individuals.” Eighth International Conference on Ancient DNA

and Associated Biomolecules, October 16-19, 2006, Lodz, Poland.

 


Galvani,  Alison  P.,  and  Montgomery  Slatkin.  “Evaluating  Plague  and

Smallpox  as  Historical  Selective  Pressures  for  the  CCR5-delta32  HIV-

Resistance Allele.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100,

no. 25 (2003): 15276-15279.

 


Garrigan, Daniel, Zahra Mobasher, Sarah B. Kingan, Jason A. Wilder, and

Michael F. Hammer. “Deep Haplotype Divergence and Long-Range Linkage

Disequilibrium at Xp21.1 Provides Evidence That Humans Descend from a

Structured Ancestral Population.” Genetics 170 (2005): 1849-1856.

 


Garrigan,  Daniel,  Zahra  Mobasher,  Tesa  Severson,  Jason  A.  Wilder,  and

Michael F. Hammer. “Evidence for Archaic Asian Ancestry on the Human X

Chromosome.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 22 (2005): 189-192, DOI

link.

 Gibbon, Edward. A History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,

vol. 3. Philadelphia: B. F. French, 1830.

 


Goddard, H. “Mental Tests and the Immigrant.” Journal of Delinquency 2

(1917): 243-277.

 


Gordon, Richard. Great Medical Disasters. New York: Stein and Day, 1983.

 


Gottfredson,  Linda.  “Logical  Fallacies  Used  to  Dismiss  the  Evidence  on

Intelligence Testing.” In R. Phelps, ed., The True Measure of Educational

and Psychological Tests: Correcting Fallacies about the Science of Testing.

Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association, in press.

 


———. “Why g Matters: The Complexity of Everyday Life.” Intelligence 24

(1997): 79-132.

 


Gould, Stephen J. “The Spice of Life.” Leader to Leader 15 (2000): 19-28.

 


Gregory of Tours. The History of the Franks. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin,

1974.

 


Gross, Nachum. Economic History of the Jews. New York: Schocken Books,

1975.

 


Grousset, Rene. The Empire of the Steppes: A History of Central Asia. New

Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1970.

 


Gualandri,  Valter,  Guido  Franceschini,  Cesare  R.  Sirtori,  Gemma

Gianfranceschi,  Giovan  Battista  Orsini,  Antonio  Cerrone,  and  Alessandro

Menotti. “AIMilano Apoprotein Identification of the Complete Kindred andEvidence of a Dominant Genetic Transmission.” American Journal of Human

Genetics 37, no. 6 (1985).

 


Hamblin, Martha T., and Anna Di Rienzo. “Detection of the Signature of

Natural Selection in Humans: Evidence from the Duffy Blood Group Locus.”

American Journal of Human Genetics 66, no. 5 (2000): 1669-1679.

 


Hamblin, Martha T., Emma E. Thompson, and Anna Di Rienzo. “Complex

Signatures of Natural Selection at the Duffy Blood Group Locus.” American

Journal of Human Genetics 70 (2002): 369-383.

 


Hamilton, William D. Narrow Roads of Gene Land: The Collected Papers of

W. D. Hamilton. Vol. 1, Evolution of Social Behaviour. New York, Oxford

University Press, 1998.

 


Hardy, J., A. Pittman, A. Myers, K. Gwinn-Hardy, H. C. Fung, R. de Silva,

M.  Hutton,  and  J.  Duckworth.  “Evidence  Suggesting  That Homo

neanderthalensis Contributed the H2 MAPT Haplotype to Homo sapiens.”

Biochemical Society Transactions 33 (2005): 582-585.

 


Hare, Brian, Michelle Brown, Christina Williamson, and Michael Tomasello.

“The Domestication of Social Cognition in Dogs.” Science 298 (2002): 1634-

1636.

 


Harpending, Henry, and Jay Sobus. “Sociopathy as an Adaptation.” Ethology

and Sociobiology 8, no. 3 (1987): 63-72.

 


Harper, Kristin N., Paolo S. Ocampo, Bret M. Steiner, Robert W. George,

Michael S. Silverman, Shelly Bolotin, Allan Pillay, Nigel J. Saunders, and

George J. Armelagos. “On the Origin of the Treponematoses: A Phylogenetic

Approach.” PLoS  Neglected  Tropical  Diseases  2,  no.  1:  e148

  doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0000148. 


Hawks, John. “Adaptive Evolution of Human Hearing and the Appearance of

Language.” Seventy-Seventh Annual Meeting of the American Association

of Physical Anthropologists, April 11, 2008, Columbus, Ohio.

 


Hawks, John, and Gregory Cochran. “Dynamics of Adaptive Introgression

from Archaic to Modern Humans.” PaleoAnthropology (2006): 101-115.

 


Hawks, John, Eric T. Wang, Gregory M. Cochran, Henry C. Harpending, and

Robert  K.  Moyzis.  “Recent  Acceleration  of  Human  Adaptive  Evolution.”

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, no. 52 (2007): 20753.

 


Hawks,  John,  and  M.  H.  Wolpoff.  “The  Accretion  Model  of  Neandertal

Evolution.” Evolution 55 (2001): 1474-1485.

 


Helgason,  A.,  S.  Pálsson,  G.  Thorleifsson,  S.  F.  Grant,  V.  Emilsson,  S.

Gunnarsdottir, A. Adeyemo et al. “Refining the Impact of TCF7L2 Gene

Variants on Type 2 Diabetes and Adaptive Evolution.” Nature Genetics 39

(2007): 218-225.

 


Henshilwood,  Christopher  S.,  Francesco  d’Errico,  Royden  Yates,  Zenobia

Jacobs,  Chantal  Tribolo,  Geoff  A.  T.  Duller,  Norbert  Mercier  et  al.

“Emergence  of  Modern  Human  Behavior:  Middle  Stone  Age  Engravings

from South Africa.” Science 295, no. 5558 (2002): 1278-1280.

 


Hibbs, Douglas O., and Ola Olsson. “Geography, Biogeography, and Why

Some Countries Are Rich and Others Are Poor.” Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences 101 (2004): 3715-3720.

 


Holliday, Trenton W. “Speciation by Distance and Temporal Overlap: A New

Approach to Understanding Neanderthal Evolution.” In T. Harrison and K.Harvati,  eds., Neanderthals  Revisited:  New  Approaches  and  Perspectives.

New York: Sinauer, 2006.

 


Hoodbhoy,  P.  A.  “Science  and  the  Islamic  World—The  Quest  for

Rapprochement.” Physics Today 60, no. 8 (2007): 49-55.

 


Hudjashov, Georgi, Toomas Kivisild, Peter A. Underhill, Phillip Endicott,

Juan J. Sanchez, Alice A. Lin, Peidong Shen et al. “Revealing the Prehistoric

Settlement  of  Australia  by  Y-Chromosome  and  mtDNA  Analysis.”

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, no. 21 (2007).

 


Hughes,  A.  “Jews  and  Gentiles:  Their  Intellectual  and  Temperamental

Differences.” Eugenics Review 18 ( July 1928): 1-6.

 


Hundert, G. D. The Jews in a Polish Private Town: The Case of Opatów in

the Eighteenth Century. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992.

 


Hurtado,  Ana  Magdalena,  Kim  Hill,  Hillard  Kaplan,  and  Jane  Lancaster.

“The Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases among South American Indians: A

Call for Guidelines for Ethical Research.” Current Anthropology 42, no. 3

(2001): 425-432.

 


Jamison,  Kay  R. Touched  with  Fire:  Manic-Depressive  Illness  and  the

Artistic Temperament. New York: Free Press, 1993.

 


Jensen, Arthur R. Bias in Mental Testing. New York: Free Press, 1980.

 


Kamen, Henry. Empire:  How  Spain  Became  a  World  Power,  1492-1763.

New York: HarperCollins, 2003.

 Kamin, Leon. The Science and Politics of IQ. Potomac, Md.: Erlbaum, 1974.

 


Keeley,  Lawrence  H. War  before  Civilization:  The  Myth  of  the  Peaceful

Savage. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.

 


Keller, Laurent, and Kenneth G. Ross. “Selfish Genes: A Green Beard in the

Red Fire Ant.” Nature 394 (1998): 573.

 


Klein, Richard. The Dawn of Human Culture. New York: Wiley, 2002.

 


———. The Human Career. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.

 


Konner, Mel. Unsettled: An Anthropology of the Jews. New York: Viking

Compass, 2003.

 


Krause, Johannes, Carles Lalueza-Fox, Ludovic Orlando, Wolfgang Enard,

Richard  E.  Green,  Hernán  A.  Burbano,  Jean-Jacques  Hublin  et  al.  “The

Derived FOXP2 Variant of Modern Humans Was Shared with Neandertals.”

Current Biology 17, no. 21 (2007): 1908-1912.

 


Krieger, Michael J. B., and Kenneth G. Ross. “Identification of a Major Gene

Regulating Complex Social Behavior.” Science 295, no. 5553 (2002): 328-

332.

 


Larsen,  Clark. Bioarchaeology:  Interpreting  Behavior  from  the  Human

Skeleton. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

 


Levinson,  Boris.  “A  Comparison  of  the  Performance  of  Monolingual  and

Bilingual Native-Born, Jewish Preschool Children of Traditional Parentage

on Four Intelligence Tests.” Journal of Clinical Psychology 15 (1959): 74-76. 


Lewis,  Bernard. The  Jews  of  Islam.  Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton  University

Press, 1984.

 


Lewontin, Richard. “The Apportionment of Human Diversity.” Evolutionary

Biology 6, no. 1 (1972): 381-398.

 


Lincoln, Bruce. Priests,  Warriors,  and  Cattle:  A  Study  in  the  Ecology  of

Religions. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981.

 


Lynn,  Richard.  “The  Intelligence  of  American  Jews.” Personality  and

Individual Differences 26 (2004): 201-206.

 


MacArthur, Daniel G., Jane T. Seto, Joanna M. Raftery, Kate G. Quinlan,

Gavin A. Huttley, Jeff W. Hook, Frances A. Lemckert et al. “Loss of ACTN3

Gene Function Alters Mouse Muscle Metabolism and Shows Evidence of

Positive Selection in Humans.” Nature Genetics 39, no. 10 (2007).

 


Maier, A. G., M. T. Duraisingh, J. C. Reeder, S. S. Patel, J. W. Kazura, P. A.

Zimmerman,  and  A.  F.  Cowman.  “Plasmodium  falciparum  Erythrocyte

Invasion  through  Glycophorin  C  and  Selection  for  Gerbich  Negativity  in

Human Populations.” Nature Medicine 9, no. 1 (2003) 87-92.

 


Mallory, James P. In Search of the Indo-Europeans: Language, Archaeology

and Myth. London: Thames and Hudson, 1989.

 


Mallory,  James  P.,  and  Douglas  Q.  Adams. The  Oxford  Introduction  to

Proto-Indo-European  and  the  Proto-Indo-European  World.  New  York:

Oxford University Press, 2006.

 Martinez-Marignac, Veronica L., Adan Valladares, Emily Cameron, Andrea

Chan,  Arjuna  Perera,  Rachel  Globus-Goldberg,  Niels  Wacher  et  al.

“Admixture in Mexico City: Implications for Admixture Mapping of Type 2

Diabetes Genetic Risk Factors.” Human Genetics 120, no. 6 (2007): 807-819.

 


Mayr,  E. Animal  Species  and  Evolution.  Cambridge:  Belknap  Press  of

Harvard University Press, 1963.

 


McNeill, John Robert, and William H. McNeill. The Human Web: A Bird’s-

Eye View of World History. New York: W. W. Norton, 2003.

 


McNeill,  William  H. Plagues  and  Peoples.  Garden  City,  N.Y.:  Anchor

Press/Doubleday, 1976.

 


Modell,  Bernadette,  and  Matthew  Darlison.  “Global  Epidemiology  of

Haemoglobin  Disorders  and  Derived  Service  Indicators.” Bulletin  of  the

World Health Organization 86, no. 6 (2008): 480-487.

 


Moore,  Laoise  T.,  Brian  McEvoy,  Eleanor  Cape,  Katharine  Simms,  and

Daniel  G.  Bradley.  “A  Y-Chromosome  Signature  of  Hegemony  in  Gaelic

Ireland.” American Journal of Human Genetics. 78, no. 2 (2006): 334-338.

 


Mosher, Dana S., Pascale Quignon, Carlos D. Bustamante, Nathan B. Sutter,

Cathryn S. Mellersh, Heidi G. Parker, Elaine A. Ostrander et al. “A Mutation

in  the  Myostatin  Gene  Increases  Muscle  Mass  and  Enhances  Racing

Performance in Heterozygote Dogs.” PLoS Genetics 3, no. 5 (2007): e79.

 


Neel, James. “Diabetes Mellitus: A ‘Thrifty’ Genotype Rendered Detrimental

by ‘Progress’?” American Journal of Human Genetics 14 (1962): 353-362.

 


Nesse, R. M., and George C. Williams. “Darwinian Medicine.” Life ScienceResearch 3 (1999): 1-17.

 


New, Maria I., and R. C. Wilson. “Steroid Disorders in Children: Congenital

Adrenal Hyperplasia and Apparent Mineralocorticoid Excess.” Proceedings

of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 96 (1999): 12790-12797.

 


O’Connell,  James,  and  James  Allen.  “Dating  the  Colonization  of  Sahul

(Pleistocene  Australia—New  Guinea):  A  Review  of  Recent  Research.”

Journal of Archaeological Science 31, no. 6 (2004): 835-853.

 


Ohashi,  Jun,  Izumi  Naka,  Jintana  Patarapotikul,  Hathairad  Hananantachai,

Gary Brittenham, Sornchai Looareesuwan, Andrew G. Clark, and Katsushi

Tokunaga. “Extended Linkage Disequilibrium surrounding the Hemoglobin

E Variant due to Malarial Selection.” American Journal of Human Genetics

74, no. 6 (2004): 1198-1208.

 


Olshen, Adam B., Bert Gold, Kirk E. Lohmueller, Jeffrey P. Struewing, Jaya

Satagopan, Stefan A. Stefanaov, Eliazar Eskin et al. “Analysis of Genetic

Variation  in  Ashkenazi  Jews  by  High  Density  SNP  Genotyping.” BMC

Genetics 9, no. 1 (2008): 14.

 


Patai, Raphael, and Jennifer Patai. The Myth of the Jewish Race. New York:

Scribner, 1975.

 


Pellecchia,  Marco,  Riccardo  Negrini,  Licia  Colli,  Massimiliano  Patrini,

Elisabetta  Milanesi,  Alessandro  Achilli,  Giorgio  Bertorelle  et  al.  “The

Mystery of Etruscan Origins: Novel Clues from Bos Taurus Mitochondrial

DNA.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Science 274, no. 1614

(2007): 1175-1179.

 


Perry,  George  H.,  Nathaniel  J.  Dominy,  Katrina  G.  Claw,  Arthur  S.  Lee,

Heike Fiegler, Richard Redon, John Werner et al. “Diet and the Evolution ofHuman Amylase Gene Copy Number Variation.” Nature Genetics 39 (2007):

1256-1260.

 


Plagnol,  Vincent,  and  Jeffrey  D.  Wall.  “Possible  Ancestral  Structure  in

Human Populations.” PLoS Genetics 2 (2006): e105, DOI link.

 


Protas,  Meredith  E.,  Candace  Hersey,  Dawn  Kochanek,  Yi  Zhou,  Horst

Wilkens,  William  R.  Jeffery,  Leonard  I.  Zon,  Richard  Borowsky,  and

Clifford  J.  Tabin.  “Genetic  Analysis  of  Cavefish  Reveals  Molecular

Convergence  in  the  Evolution  of  Albinism.” Nature  Genetics  38,  no.  1

(2006): 107-111.

 


Reader, John. Africa: A Biography of the Continent. New York: Knopf, 1998.

 


Richards,  Martin.  “The  Neolithic  Invasion  of  Europe.” Annual  Review  of

Anthropology 32, no. 1 (2003): 135-162.

 


Rieger, Mark. Introduction to Fruit Crops. New York: Food Products Press,

2006.

 


Rock, W. P., A. M. Sabieha, et al. “A Cephalometric Comparison of Skulls

from  the  Fourteenth,  Sixteenth  and  Twentieth  Centuries.” British  Dental

Journal 200 (2006): 33-37.

 


Romanoff,  Julius  S.  “Birth  Order,  Family  Size,  and  Sibling  Spacing  as

Influences on Intelligence and Academic Abilities of Jewish Adolescents.”

Department of Psychology, Temple University, 1976.

 


Russell,  Cyril,  and  Harry  S.  Lewis. The  Jew  in  London.  London:  Harper

Collins, 1900.

 Sallares, Robert, Abigail Bouwman, and Cecilia Anderung. “The Spread of

Malaria to Southern Europe in Antiquity: New Approaches to Old Problems.”

Medical History 48, no. 3 (2004): 311-328.

 


Saunders,  Matthew  A.,  Montgomery  Slatkin,  Chad  Garner,  Michael  F.

Hammer, and Michael W. Nachman. “The Extent of Linkage Disequilibrium

Caused  by  Selection  on  G6PD  in  Humans.” Genetics  171,  no.  3  (2005):

1219-1229.

 


Schultz, Jack C., and Ted Floyd. “Desert Survivor.” Natural History 108, no.

2 (1999): 24-29.

 


Schwartz, Andreas, Elizabeth Rapaport, Koret Hirschberg, and Anthony H.

Futerman.  “A  Regulatory  Role  for  Sphingolipids  in  Neuronal  Growth:

Inhibition of Sphingolipid Synthesis and Degradation Have Opposite Effects

on Axonal Branching.” Journal of Biological Chemistry 270, no. 18 (1995):

10990-10998.

 


Seligman, Daniel. A Question of Intelligence: The IQ Debate in America.

New York: Birch Lane Press, 1992.

 


Serre,  D.,  A.  Langaney,  M.  Chech,  M.  Teschler-Nicola,  M.  Paunovic,  P.

Mennecier,  M.  Hofreiter,  G.  Possnert,  and  S.  Paabo.  “No  Evidence  of

Neandertal mtDNA Contribution to Early Modern Humans.” PLoS Biology 2,

no. 3 (2004): 313-317.

 


Sirtori,  Cesare  R.,  Laura  Calabresi,  Guido  Franceschini,  Damiano

Baldassarre,  Mauro  Amato,  Jan  Johansson,  Massimo  Salvetti  et  al.

“Cardiovascular Status of Carriers of the Apolipoprotein A-IMilano Mutant.”

Circulation 103, no. 15 (2001): 1949-1954.

 


Slatkin, Montgomery, and Christina A. Muirhead. “A Method for Estimatingthe  Intensity  of  Overdominant  Selection  from  the  Distribution  of  Allele

Frequencies.” Genetics 156, no. 4 (2000): 2119-2126.

 


Smith,  John  Maynard. Evolution  and  the  Theory  of  Games.  Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press, 1982.

 


Stevens, Gwynneth, Michèle Ramsay, and Trefor Jenkins. “Oculocutaneous

Albinism (OCA2) in Sub-Saharan Africa: Distribution of the Common 2.7-kb

P Gene Deletion Mutation.” Human Genetics 99, no. 4 (1997): 523-527.

 


Stringer,  Chris,  and  Peter  Andrews. The  Complete  World  of  Human

Evolution. London: Thames and Hudson, 2005.

 


———. “Genetic and Fossil Evidence for the Origin of Modern Humans.”

Science 239, no. 4845 (1988): 1263-1268.

 


Stutz, H. C., and L. K. Thomas. “Hybridization and Introgression in Cowania

and Purshia.” Evolution 18, no. 2 (1964): 183-195.

 


Sweeney,  J.,  and  T.  Samansky.  “Elements  of  Successful  Facility  Design:

Marine  Mammals.”  In  E.  F.  Gibbons,  B.  Durrant,  and  J.  Demarest,  eds.,

Conservation  of  Endangered  Species  in  Captivity:  An  Interdisciplinary

Approach. New York: State University of New York Press, 1995.

 


Tedlow,  Richard  S.,  Courtney  Purrington,  and  Kim  Eric  Bettcher.  “The

American CEO in the Twentieth Century: Demography and Career Path.”

Harvard NOM Working Paper No. 03-21, Harvard Business School Working

Paper  No.  03-097.  February  2003.  Available  at  SSRN:

  http://ssrn.com/abstract=383280 or DOI: 10.2139 /ssrn.10.2139/ssrn.38328.

 


Templeton, A. R. “Haplotype Trees and Modern Human Origins.” Yearbookof Physical Anthropology 48 (2005): 33-59, DOI link.

 


Thomas, Mark G., Michael P. H. Stumpf, and Heinrich Härke. “Evidence for

an  Apartheid-Like  Social  Structure  in  Early  Anglo-Saxon  England.”

Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  B:  Biological  Sciences  273,  no.  1601

(2006): 2651-2657.

 


Thompson, E. E., H. Kuttab-Boulos, D. Witonsky, L. Yang, B. A. Roe, and

A.  Di  Rienzo.  “CYP3A  Variation  and  the  Evolution  of  Salt-Sensitivity

Variants.” American  Journal  of  Human  Genetics  75,  no.  6  (2004):  1059-

1069.

 


Tian,  Chao,  Robert  M.  Plenge,  Michael  Ransom,  Annette  Lee,  Pablo

Villoslada, Carlo Selmi, Lars Klareskog et al. “Analysis and Application of

European  Genetic  Substructure  Using  300K  SNP  Information.” PLoS

Genetics 4, no. 1 (2008): e4.

 


Tishkoff, Sarah A., Floyd A. Reed, Alessia Ranciaro, Benjamin F. Voight,

Courtney C. Babbitt, Jesse S. Silverman, Kweli Powell et al. “Convergent

Adaptation  of  Human  Lactase  Persistence  in  Africa  and  Europe.” Nature

Genetics 39, no. 1 (2007): 31-40.

 


Tompkins, Daniel M., Anthony W. Sainsbury, Peter Nettleton, D. Buxton,

and J. Gurnell. “Parapoxvirus Causes a Deleterious Disease in Red Squirrels

Associated with UK Population Declines.” Proceedings of the Royal Society,

B: Biological Sciences 269, no. 1490 (2002).

 


Tooby, John, and Leda Cosmides. “On the Universality of Human Nature and

the Uniqueness of the Individual: The Role of Genetics and Adaptation.”

Journal of Personality 58, no. 1 (1990): 17-67.

 


Trinkaus, Eric. “Early Modern Humans.” Annual Review of Anthropology 34(2005): 207-230.

 


Trut, Lyudmila N. “Early Canid Domestication: The Farm-Fox Experiment.”

American Scientist 161 (1999): 161.

 


Vervaecke,  Hilde,  and  Linda  Van  Elsacker.  “Hybrids  between  Common

Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and Pygmy Chimpanzees (Pan paniscus) in

Captivity.” Mammalia (Paris) 56, no. 4 (1992): 667-669.

 


Voight,  Benjamin  F.,  Sridhar  Kudaravalli,  Xiaoquan  Wen,  Jonathan  K.

Pritchard.  “A  Map  of  Recent  Positive  Selection  in  the  Human  Genome.”

PLoS Biology 4, no. 3 (2006): e72.

 


Vullaimy, T. J., M. D’Urso, G. Battistuzzi, M. Estrada, N. S. Foulkes, G.

Martini, V. Calabro et al. “Diverse Point Mutations in the Human Glucose-6-

Phosphate  Dehydrogenase  Gene  Cause  Enzyme  Deficiency  and  Mild  or

Severe  Hemolytic  Anemia.” Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of

Sciences 85, no. 14 (1988): 5171-5175.

 


Walkley, Steven U. “Neurobiology and Cellular Pathogenesis of Glycolipid

Storage Diseases.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society London B

358 (2003): 893-904.

 


Walkley, Steven U., Mark Zervas, and Samson Wiseman. “Gangliosides as

Modulators  of  Dendritogenesis  in  Normal  and  Storage  Disease-Affected

Pyramidal Neurons.” Cerebral Cortex 10 (2000): 1028-1037.

 


Wang, Eric T., Greg Kodama, Pierre Baldi, and Robert K. Moyzis. “Global

Landscape  of  Recent  Inferred  Darwinian  Selection  for Homo  sapiens.”

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103, no. 1 (2006): 135-140.

 Weaver,  T.  D.,  and  C.  C.  Roseman.  “Ancient  DNA,  Late  Neandertal

Survival,  and  Modern-Human-Neandertal  Genetic  Admixture.” Current

Anthropology 46, no. 4 (2005): 677-683.

 


Weinryb, Bernard D. The Jews of Poland: A Social and Economic History of

the Jewish Community in Poland from 1100 to 1800. Philadelphia: Jewish

Publication Society of America, 1973.

 


Williams,  Margaret  H. The  Jews  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans:  A

Diasporan Sourcebook. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998.

 


Williamson, Scott H., Melissa J. Hubisz, Andrew G. Clark, Bret A. Payseur,

Carlos D. Bustamante, and Rasmus Nielsen. “Localizing Recent Adaptive

Evolution in the Human Genome.” PLoS Genetics 10 (2007).

 


Wolpoff, Milford, John Hawks, David Frayer, and Keith Hunley. “Modern

Human  Ancestry  at  the  Peripheries:  A  Test  of  the  Replacement  Theory.”

Science 291, no. 5502 (2001): 293-297.

 


Xue, Yali, Allan Daly, Bryndis Yngvadottir, Mengning Liu, Graham Coop,

Yuseob Kim, Pardis Sabeti et al. “Spread of an Inactive Form of Caspase-12

in Humans Is Due to Recent Positive Selection.” American Journal of Human

Genetics 78, no. 4 (2006): 659-670.

 


Yi,  Zanhua,  Nanibaa  Garrison,  Orit  Cohen-Barak,  Tatiana  M.  Karafet,

Richard A. King, Robert P. Erickson, Michael F. Hammer, and Murray H.

Brilliant.  “A  122.5-Kilobase  Deletion  of  the  P  Gene  Underlies  the  High

Prevalence of Oculocutaneous Albinism Type 2 in the Navajo Population.”

American Journal of Human Genetics 72, no. 1 (2003): 62-72.

 


Yoshiura,  Koh-ichiro,  Akira  Kinoshita,  Takafumi  Ishida,  Aya  Ninokata,

Toshihisa Ishikawa, Tadashi Kaname, Makoto Bannai et al. “A SNP in theABCC11 Gene Is the Determinant of Human Earwax Type.” Nature Genetics

38 (2006): 324-330.

 


Zayed,  Amos,  and  Charles  W.  Whitfield.  “A  Genome-Wide  Signature  of

Positive Selection in Ancient and Recent Invasive Expansions of the Honey

Bee Apis mellifera.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105,

no. 9 (2008).

 


Zegura, Stephen L., Tatiana M. Karafet, Lev A. Zhivotovsky, and Michael F.

Hammer. “High-Resolution SNPs and Microsatellite Haplotypes Point to a

Single,  Recent  Entry  of  Native  American  Y  Chromosomes  into  the

Americas.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 21, no. 1 (2004): 164-175.

 


Zerjal, Tatiana, Yali Xue, Giorgio Bertorelle, R. Spencer Wells, Weidong

Bao, Suling Zhu, Raheel Qamar et al. “The Genetic Legacy of the Mongols.”

American Journal of Human Genetics 72, no. 3 (2003): 717-721.

 


Zietkiewicz, E., V. Yotova, D. Gehl, T. Wambach, I. Arrieta, M. Batzer, D.

E. Cole et al. “Haplotypes in the Dystrophin DNA Segment Point to a Mosaic

Origin of Modern Human Diversity.” American Journal of Human Genetics

73 (2003): 994-1015.

 


Zohary, Daniel, and Maria Hopf. Domestication of Plants in the Old World:

The Origin and Spread of Cultivated Plants in West Asia, Europe, and the

Nile Valley. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.

                                       CREDITS

 



xiii [Timeline] Henry Harpending, University of Utah

 


6 [Wolf] U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior

 


6 [Two dogs] Deanne Fitzmaurice

 


8 [Teosinte and corn] National Science Foundation

 


35 [Lascaux] Larry Dale Gordon, Getty Images

 


38 [Venus of Dolni Vestonice] Petr Novák, Wikipedia, Creative Commons

Attribution ShareAlike 2.5

 


38  [Venus  of  Willendorf]  Matthias  Kabel,  Wikipedia,  Creative  Commons

CC-BY 2.5

 


38 [Blombos ochre] Christopher Henshilwood, National Science Foundation

 


39 [Lion Man of Hohlenstein] John Hawks, University of Wisconsin

 


47 [AIDS retrovirus] Los Alamos National Laboratories

 


49 [Zebu cow] U.S. Department of Agriculture

 49  [Texas  longhorn]  Larry  D.  Moore,  Wikipedia,  Creative  Commons

Attribution ShareAlike 2.5

 


110  [Man  with  the  Hoe]  The  J.  Paul  Getty  Museum,  Los  Angeles.  Jean-

François  Millet,  Man  with  a  Hoe,  1862,  black  chalk  and  white  chalk

heightening on buff paper, 28.1 × 34.9 cm (11 × 13¾ in.).

 


133 [Limone sul Garda] Corbis

 


150 [Tuareg] Florence Devouard, Wikipedia, Creative Commons Attribution

ShareAlike 1.0

 


151 [Afghan girl] Steve McCurry, Magnum Photos

 


192 [Two bell curves] Henry Harpending, University of Utah

 


205 [European genetic substructure analysis] Chao Tian, Robert M. Plenge,

Michael  Ransom,  Annette  Lee,  Pablo  Villoslada,  Carlo  Selmi,  Lars

Klareskog  et  al.,  “Analysis  and  Application  of  European  Genetic

Substructure Using 300K SNP Information,” PLOS Genetics 4, no. 1 (2008):

e4. Creative Commons Attribution 2.5 Generic.

 


218 [Whippets] Dana S. Mosher, Pascale Quignon, Carlos D. Bustamante,

Nathan B. Sutter, Cathryn S. Mellersh, Heidi G. Parker, Elaine A. Ostrander

et  al.,  “A  Mutation  in  the  Myostatin  Gene  Increases  Muscle  Mass  and

Enhances Racing Performance in Heterozygote Dogs,” PLOS Genetics 3, no.

5 (2007): e79. Creative Commons Attribution 2.5 Generic.

 


221 [drawing of neurons showing axon growth] Andreas Schwarz, Elizabeth

Rapaport, Koret Hirschberg, and Anthony H. Futerman, “A Regulatory Role

for Sphingolipids in Neuronal Growth: Inhibition of Sphingolipid Synthesisand Degradation Have Opposite Effects on Axonal Branching,” Journal of

Biological Chemistry 270, no. 18 (1995): 10990-10998.

                                         INDEX

  

Achondroplasia

 Adaptive traits

 Adret, Rabbi Solomon ben Abraham

 Afghan girl(photo)

 Africa

 fossilization and

 lactose tolerance

 out-of-Africa expansion

 slavery

 See also specific groups of people; Sub-Saharan Africa

 African/Africanized bees

 Agobard of Lyons

 Agriculture transition

 beginnings/spread

 changes overview

 cultural change

 demic expansion

 difficulties with (overview)

 domestication of animals

 domestication of plants (fig.)

 driving genes/alleles

 evolutionary response overview

 farmer/hunter-gatherer personality traits

 food production/nutrition

 game animals decline

 genetic response

 gratification deferral

 Holocene developments

 Ice Age end

 infectious disease

 innovations with intelligence

 Malthusian trap

 Man with the Hoe (Millet) (fig.)

 mutations and

 nonproductive elites

 overview

 population growth

 property

 selective pressures

 selective sweeps

 taming/domesticating people

 work difficulty

 Agriculture transition/diet changes

 alcohol

 carbohydrates/disease

 cultural change

 diabetes

 genetic adaptation differences

 genetic adaptations

 health problems

 height changes

 hunter-gatherer diet vs.

 milk

 pathology in bones

 protein

 vitamin D

 vitamin-deficiency diseases

 See also Lactase; Lactose

 AIDS/HIV(fig.)

 Akkadian Empire

 Al-Rashid, Haroun

 Alans

 Albinism

 Alcohol adaptations to

 agriculture transition

 alleles reducing risk

 FAS

 health advantages

 pregnant women

 Alcoholism

 alleles reducing risk

 diabetes

 Alexander the Great

 Alleles

 adaptive variants

 advantageous alleles

 blood types

 definition/description

 dominant allele

 driving genes/alleles

 neutral alleles effects

 probabilities in becoming common

 recessive allele

 Almonds, wild vs. domesticated

 Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency

 Alzheimer’s disease

 A. M. Turing Awards (American Mathematical Society)

 Amerindians

 adaptations to high altitude

 agriculture/adaptations

 Altiplano of South America

 disease resistance weakness

 domestic animals

 FAS

 genetic history

 HLA system

 killing of animal species Mexicans and

 OCA2 gene

 origins

 parasitic worm infections/immune system

 selection for weaker immune systems

 social/technical developments

 Western diets

 See also Columbian explosion

 Amino acids

 Amygdalin

 Anatomically modern humans (AMH). See also Modern humans

 Anatomy

 Australian Aborigines

 brow ridges

 modern humans

 Neanderthals

 See also Brain development; Skeletal record; Teeth

 Andaman Islands

 Arawak people

 Archaic humans. See also Neanderthals

 Aristotle

 Arithmetic, invention of

 Art

 Upper Paleolithic innovations (photo)

 See also specific types

 Arthur mythos

 Ashkenazi Jews

 conversions/admixture

 definition

 enslavement of

 famine/malnutrition and

 finance

 as genetically distinct group (fig.)

 history to 1800 influence of

 intermarriage prohibitions

 Jewish Diaspora

 Muslim world and

 occupational patterns

 origins

 overview

 persecution

 Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth

 population growth

 population size

 Rabbinical Judaism

 religious bans

 standard of living/effects

 Talmud

 Torah

 trade

 visuospatial abilities

 Ashkenazi Jews/genetic diseases

 bottleneck hypothesis

 concentration in few metabolic pathways

 congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)

 DNA repair disorders

 familial dysautonomia

 Gaucher’s disease (fig.)

 hereditary breast cancer

 intelligence and (fig.)

 natural selection

 natural selection mechanism

 Niemann-Pick disease

 overview

 sphingolipid storage disorders

 summary lists

 Tay-Sachs disease torsion dystonia

 Ashkenazi Jews/intelligence

 in early history

 emergence of intellectual differences

 Enlightenment values

 genetic diseases and (fig.)

 as genetically distinct group (fig.)

 Goddard’s study

 IQ scores

 legal equality

 literacy

 natural selection

 natural selection mechanism

 overview

 prominence of

 religious bans

 science

 vs. non-Ashkenazi Jews

 vs. non-Jews

 Asian honey bees

 Assyrian Empire

 Assyrian forced relocations

 Atherosclerosis

 Atlatl darts

 Atlatls

 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

 Aurignacian culture

 Austin, Thomas

 Australia

 gene flow barriers

 rabbits

 Australian Aborigines

 anatomy/brow ridges

 diabetes gene flow barriers

 as hunter-gatherers

 infectious diseases

 Western diets

 Autoimmune disorders

 Autosome

 Axons

 Aztecs

  

Balanced behavioral polymorphisms

 Balanced polymorphisms

 definition/description

 hawk-dove game

 Bantu

 Bar-Kochba revolt (AD 132-135)

 Barbarians and Roman Empire

 Barros, João de

 Basset hounds

 Becker’s muscular dystrophy

 Bees. See Honey bees

 Behavioral modernity

 definition/description

 driving genes/alleles

 Upper Paleolithic

 Belisarius

 Bell curves

 with different means(fig.)

 normal distribution

 Belloc, Hilaire

 Belyaev, Dmitri

 Ben-Sasson, H.

 Bene Israel of India

 Berbers(photo)

 “Big bang”. See also Upper Paleolithic innovations

 Birth control

 Blade definition/description

 Blombos Cave, South Africa ochre(photo)

 Blue eyes (photo)(photo)

 Bogues, Muggsy

 Bonobos evolution Border collies

 Bottleneck

 Amish communities

 Ashkenazi Jews/genetic diseases

 definition/description

 Pingelap example

 Polynesians

 Bow and arrow

 Brain development

 changes overview

 domesticating people

 fitness

 human population differences

 microcephalin (MCPH1) gene

 muscle development trade-offs

 Breeding experiments

 overview

 trait plateau

 trait selection

 Bronze Age

 Brow ridges

 Bubonic plague

 Burton, Sir Richard Francis

 Bushmen

 Bantu expansion

 description

 government

 marital distance

 personality traits

 tools/weapons

 way of life

  

Canavan disease

 Cannibalism

 Carbon-14 dating

 Caribbean Islands

 Carolingian kings

 Carrying capacity

 climatic changes

 definition/description

 expansion

 hunter-gatherers

 peace/violence

 Carthage, Tunisia

 Cave paintings(photo)

 Centromeres

 Charlemagne

 Charles II

 Châtelperronian tradition

 Cheaters in society

 Chicken pox

 critical community size

 shingles

 Chihuahuas(photo)

 Chimpanzees

 Cholesterol mutation example

 Chromosomes

 Clark, Gregory

 Codon

 Colonization

 attempts in Africa

 colonizers

 gene flow Columbian explosion

 Amerindian vs. European numbers

 biological differences

 disease killing adults/effects

 disease resistance differences

 disease resistance of Amerindians

 diseases introduced (summary)

 European cultural advantages

 European iron/steel

 oppression of Amerindians

 reduction in Amerindian populations

 smallpox

 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)

 Connexin-26 deafness

 Convergent evolution

 “Cootie” theory

 Copernicus

 Cortés, Hernán

 Cosmides, Leda

 Cows(photo). See  also  Lactase;  Lactose;  Taurine  cattle;  Texas  longhorn;

Zebu cattle

 Crafoord Prize

 Creativity and fitness

 Creosote bush/specialized insects

 Cro-Magnons

 Crusade, First (1096)

 “Cultural explosion”. See also Upper Paleolithic innovations

 Culture

 genetic change vs.

 natural selection and

 See also Upper Paleolithic innovations

 Cyrus the Great

 Cystic fibrosis

  

Dagobert, King

 Darius the Great

 Darwin, Charles

 Davis, Sammy, Jr.

 De revolutionibus (Copernicus)

 De Soto, Hernando

 Deer/moose and parasites

 Dendrites

 Dengue fever

 Diabetes

 agriculture adaptation

 alcoholism

 autoimmune disorders

 gene variants regulating

 high-carbohydrate diet

 physical activity effects

 Polynesians

 population size/protective mutations

 Diamond, Jared

 Dio, Cassius

 Diphtheria

 Diploid organisms

 Diseases

 carbohydrates and

 cities

 European medicine (1600s)

 Malthusian trap

 recessive genetic diseases/resistance

 vitamin D deficiency

 vitamin-deficiency diseases

 See also Ashkenazi Jews/genetic diseases; specific diseases Diseases, infectious

 agriculture transition

 colonization attempts in Africa

 “cootie” theory

 critical community size

 differentiating populations

 farm animals

 farmers vs. hunter-gatherers

 as gene flow barrier

 isolated populations

 Malthusian trap

 Old World vs. New World

 population contact

 population density

 recessive genetic disease and

 rodents

 trade effects

 See also Columbian explosion; specific diseases

 DNA

 definition/description

 functional percentage

 retroviruses

 viruses

 DNA repair disorders

 Dogs/domestication

 behavioral changes

 breed differences

 diversity(photo)

 neoteny

 “reading” people

 time of changes

 wolves and(photo)

 See also specific breeds

 Dolni Vestonice Domesticating people

 Domestication of animals

 cows

 horses

 physical changes

 time period

 See also Dogs/domestication

 Domestication of plants

 almonds

 Bantu

 corn/maize(fig.)

 time period

 Dominant allele. See under Alleles

 Dowries

 Driving genes/alleles

 centromeres and

 fixation

 overview

 problems with

 rate/sweeps of

 Duchenne muscular dystrophy

 Duffy mutation

 Duke of Wellington

 Dumézil, George

 Dwarfism

 Dystrophin

 Dystrophin complex

  

Earwax, dry

 Eemian interglacial

 definition/description

 limits during

 time of

 Egg production

 Egyptian trade

 Einstein, Albert

 Eldridge, Roswell

 Elephant size changes

 Elites

 agriculture transition

 curbing growth of

 definition

 disease and

 examples

 government

 immunity to famine

 reproductive advantage

 silphium use

 taming/domesticating people

 Elopi tribespeople

 “Emotional intelligence”

 Endogamous groups

 Ashkenazi Jews example

 definition/description

 Essay on the Principle of Population, An (Malthus)

 Etruscans

 as colonizers

 definition/description

 language origins

 European medicine (1600s)

 Evans, P. D.

 Evolution of humans, recent

 “as shallow”

 changes as on, off, selective

 correlations between genetic differences

 haplotype evidence

 rate

 significance of appearance differences

 stasis beliefs

 See also specific events

 Expansions

 admixture

 biological advantages/inequalities

 cultural advantages

 demic expansion

 examples

 out of Africa

 overview

 Proto-Indo-Europeans

 replacement

 See  also  Columbian  explosion;  Modern  humans  displacement  of

Neanderthals

 Exponential growth

 definition/description

 examples

 Eye color

 blue eyes (photo)(photo)

 OCA2 allele

 rate of change

 variety

  

Familial dysautonomia

 Familial Mediterranean fever

 Famine

 cannibalism

 hunter-gatherers and

 Malthusian trap

 northern Europe (1315-1317)

 Farewell to Alms, A (Clark)

 FAS. See Fetal alcohol syndrome

 Fayu tribespeople

 Fertile Crescent, Southwest Asia

 Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS)

 Feynman, Richard

 Fields Medal

 First Crusade (1096)

 Fishes in caves

 albinism

 eyesight loss

 Fitness

 brain development and

 creativity and

 definition/description

 individual fitness vs. group fitness

 Fixation

 definition/description

 driving genes/alleles

 probabilities of

 Forced relocations

 examples

 gene flow

 Fox domestication Freudian theory

  

G6PD variants and malaria defenses

 Game-theory analysis

 Gardner, Howard

 Gateway mutations

 Gaucher’s disease

 Ashkenazi Jews (fig.)

 definition/description

 Gell-Mann, Murray

 Gene definition/description

 Gene flow

 barriers to

 blue eyes (photo)(photo)

 colonization

 deserts’ effects

 effect of oceans

 forced relocations

 historical patterns

 military movements

 Roman Empire fall and

 Sarmatians

 slavery

 time and

 trade

 See also Selective sweeps

 Genetic history studies

 advantageous alleles

 mitochondrial DNA use

 overview

 See also Y chromosome

 Genetic isolation/Ashkenazi Jews

 intermarriage prohibition persecution

 Genghis Khan

 Genotype

 Gibbon, Edward

 Gimbutas, Marija

 Giovaneli, Rosa

 Goddard, Henry

 Goleman, Daniel

 Gould, Stephen Jay

 evolution speed

 human evolution

 IQ testing

 Government

 aggressiveness trait and

 development

 elites

 hunter-gatherers and

 standard of living and

 taming/domesticating people

 Great Danes(photo)

 Great Revolt (AD 65-73)

 Greeks

 as colonizers

 kingdoms in Afghanistan/Pakistan

 Pathans and

 Green Revolution

 Grotte des Fées (Fairy Grotto)

 Group fitness vs. individual fitness

 Group selection

 Gunpowder invention/effects

 Guns, Germs, and Steel (Diamond)

  

Hair color

 Haldane, J. B. S.

 Hamilton, William

 Hanno the Navigator

 Haploid organisms

 Haplotype

 definition/description

 length meaning

 recombination

 HapMap

 definition/description

 lactose tolerance

 skin color

 Haroun al-Rashid

 Hawk-dove game

 Hazara

 HDL cholesterol

 Head Start

 Height, normal distribution

 Helicobacter pylori

 Hemochromatosis

 Heritability

 Herodotus

 Heterozygote

 Heterozygote advantage

 definition/description

 malaria defenses

 whippets/myostatin mutation (photo)

 High altitude adaptations

 Himalayas and gene flow

 Hittites/Hittite Empire HIV/AIDS(fig.)

 HLA system

 Amerindians

 functions

 variability

 Hobsbawm, Eric

 Holocene

 agriculture developments

 definition/description

 human/domesticated animal changes

 Homo erectus

 Homo heidelbergensis

 Homo neanderthalensis. See also Neanderthals

 Homo sapiens. See also Modern humans

 Homozygote

 Honey bees

 climate adaptation

 introgression

 origins/expansions

 Hoodbhoy, Pervez

 Human genome

 Human personality variations

 farmers vs. hunter-gatherers

 genetic basis

 See also Social patterns, modern

 Human population differences

 as genetic differences (overview)

 genetics of skeletal change

 as “superficial”

 See also specific differences

 “Human revolution”. See also Upper Paleolithic innovations

 Hunter-gatherers

 diet

 famine and high paternal investment

 infectious diseases

 marital distance

 personality traits

 property and

 violence/population size

 See also specific groups

  

Ice Age

 Iliad

 Imhotep

 Incan Empire

 Individual fitness vs. group fitness

 Indo-Aryans

 Indo-Europeans

 definition/description

 languages

 See also Proto-Indo-Europeans

 Indus civilization

 definition/description

 Indo-Aryans

 studying

 trade

 Infant mortality

 Inner ear

 Intelligence

 environment and

 as heritable

 types of

 See also Ashkenazi Jews/intelligence; IQ

 Interest rates

 Interfertility

 Introgression

 cows(photo)

 definition/description

 examples

 honeybees

 invisible vs. visible effects

 modern human/Neanderthal matings plants

 wild populations

 IQ

 Ashkenazi Jews

 measurements/measuring

 as performance predictor

 See also Intelligence

 Islamic world

 Jews and

 lack of science

 Isotope

  

Jacobi, Carl

 Jamestown settlement

 Javelins

 Jewish communities

 Ashkenazi Jews comparison

 in the Islamic world

 overview

 See also Ashkenazi Jews

 Jewish Diaspora

 Jewish quotas

 Jones, Sir William

 Justinian, Emperor

  

Kalonymus family

 Kamin, Leon

 Kerr, Warwick

 Klein, Richard

 Knives

 Kronecker, Leopold

 Kurds

 Kurgan burials

 Kurgan hypothesis

  

Lactase

 continuing production

 definition/description

 stopping production

 Lactose

 Lactose tolerance

 Africa

 Arabian peninsula expansion

 description

 increase/evidence

 Proto-Indo-European expansion

 sweep

 Language capabilities

 FOXP2 gene

 information transmission across generations

 limits without

 modern humans

 new genes affecting

 Lascaux cave painting(photo)

 Lemme, Chuck

 Leprosy

 Lewontin, Richard

 Limone sul Garda villagers (photo)

 Linkage disequilibrium

 definition/description

 modern human/Neanderthal matings

 skin color change

 Lion Man of Hohlenstein (photo)

 Livingston, David, and wife

 Locus

 Loss of function definition/description Lost Dutchman Mine, location

 Lymphatic filariasis

  

Maimonides

 Malaria

 falciparum type

 locations

 sub-Saharan Africa colonization attempts

 Malaria defenses

 alleles becoming common

 alpha-thalassemia

 beta-thalassemia

 concentration in few metabolic pathways

 Duchenne muscular dystrophy

 G6PD variants

 Greeks/Phoenicians and

 Hemoglobin E

 hemoglobin molecule

 heterozygote advantage

 overview

 as recent

 sickle cell

 side effects

 strategy differences

 Malthus, Thomas

 Malthusian societies

 Malthusian trap

 agriculture transition

 definition/description

 disease

 famine/malnutrition

 overview

 war

 Man with the Hoe (Millet) (fig.) Mandan Indians

 Manhattan Project

 Manic-depression

 Maxwell, James Clerk

 Mayr, Ernst

 Measles

 agriculture/pre-agriculture

 Columbian explosion

 critical community size

 Medicine (Europe 1600s)

 Meiosis

 Melanin. See also Skin color change

 Merovingian monarchs

 Mesopotamian trade

 Mexicans

 OCA2 gene

 paternal/maternal ancestry

 Microcephalin (MCPH1) gene

 Miele, Frank

 Milk. See also Lactase; Lactose

 Miscarriage rates in humans

 Mitochondrial DNA

 Africanized bees

 Amerindian genetic history

 definition/description

 European bees

 modern human/Neanderthal matings

 Mitosis

 Mizrahi Jews

 Moctezuma II

 Modern human/Neanderthal matings

 adaptations to climate

 adaptations to European conditions

 advantageous alleles agriculture solutions

 alternative strategies development

 bestiality

 controversy

 disease resistance

 genetic evidence

 how/where

 interfertility

 introgression

 linkage disequilibrium

 natural selection

 neutral alleles

 new alleles

 origin models

 skeletal evidence

 Upper Paleolithic innovations and

 Modern humans

 in Africa

 arrival in Europe

 description/anatomy

 diet

 hearing changes

 language capabilities

 population growth

 tools/weapons

 See also Châtelperronian tradition; Upper Paleolithic innovations

 Modern humans’ displacement of Neanderthals

 alliances

 biological advantages theory

 body build

 “cootie” theory

 diet

 intelligence

 interaction/evidence language capabilities

 racism criticism and

 time scale of

 tools/weapons

 trade

 Mongol expansion

 Moose/deer and parasites

 Mousterian industry

 area of

 definition/description

 knives

 MtDNA. See Mitochondrial DNA

 Multiple sclerosis

 Muscle

 bursts of strength vs. endurance

 trade-offs with brain development

 whippets/myostatin mutation (photo)

 Mutations

 agriculture transition

 cholesterol example

 definition/description

 driving genes/alleles

 gateway mutations

 Limone sul Garda villagers

 loss-of-function mutations

 negative vs. positive effects

 ongoing sweeping alleles functions

 rate/population size

 time to spread

 See also specific examples

 Myth of the Jewish Race, The (Raphael/Jennifer Patai)

  

Napoleon

 Narrow Roads of Gene Land (Hamilton)

 Natural selection

 Ashkenazi Jews

 camel/transportation analogy

 culture and

 definition/description

 differentiating human populations

 environmental stability

 genetic isolation

 inferior choices

 mechanism with Ashkenazi Jews/genetic diseases

 as short-sighted

 solution diversity

 See also specific examples

 Navajo

 diabetes

 OCA2 gene

 Nazis

 Neanderthals

 brain development

 burials

 definition/description

 description/anatomy

 last of

 locations

 views on

 way of life

 See  also  Châtelperronian  tradition;  Modern  human/Neanderthal  matings;

Modern humans displacement of Neanderthals; Mousterian industry

 Necho, Pharaoh Neel, James

 Neolithic period

 Neoteny

 Neumann, John von

 Neuron

 Neurotransmitters

 New Guinea highlanders

 Newton, Isaac

 Niall of the Nine Hostages

 Niemann-Pick disease

 Nobel science prizes

 “Noche Triste”

 Normal distribution (bell curve)

 Nucleotide

  

Oak trees in England

 Occipital bun

 Old Stone Age. See also Paleolithic period; Upper Paleolithic innovations

 Onchocerciasis (river blindness)

  

Paleolithic period. See also Upper Paleolithic innovations

 Parasites

 Park, Mungo

 Park, Thomas

 Parsis

 Patai, Raphael, and Jennifer

 Pathans

 definition/description

 Greeks and

 Pequot War (1636)

 Perelman, Grigori

 Phase transitions

 Phoenicians

 Pilgrims

 Pirates

 Pit bull terriers

 Pizarro, Francisco

 Placenta

 Plagnol, V.

 Plants. See Agriculture transition; Domestication of plants

 Pleistocene epoch

 Poetry

 poets’ fitness

 Proto-Indo-Europeans

 Poincaré conjecture

 Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth

 Ashkenazi Jews

 science/technology

 Polynesians

 diabetes

 infectious diseases Pomaroli, Giovanni

 Population size control

 birth control

 silphium

 Population size/growth

 agriculture transition

 birth control

 elites’ reproductive advantage

 genetic innovations

 innovations

 Malthusian trap

 mutations

 statistics

 Positive selection

 Primates

 Property

 agriculture transition

 hunter-gatherers

 Protein

 agriculture transition/diet changes

 definition/description

 Proto-Indo-European expansion

 dairying advantages

 domestication of horse/mounted warriors

 homeland (Urheimat) location controversy

 Kurgan hypothesis

 lactose tolerance mutation

 mobility advantage

 Renfrew’s model

 Proto-Indo-Europeans

 epic poetry

 as grain farmers

 metallurgy

 religion social classes

 social system

 as stock raisers

 as warriors

 See also Indo-European

 Puritans

 Pygmies

 Pyramidal neuron

  

Rabbinical Judaism

 Rabbits in Australia

 Recessive allele. See under Alleles

 Recombination

 definition/description

 microcephalin gene

 Renfrew, Colin

 Rheumatoid arthritis

 Rig Veda

 Rinderpest

 River blindness (onchocerciasis)

 RNA

 RNA viruses(fig.)

 Roman Empire fall

 Rousseau, Jean-Jacques

  

Sahara Desert

 Salt conservation gene

 Sargon II

 Sargon of Akkad

 Sarich, Vince

 Sarmatians

 beliefs/legends

 definition/description

 gene flow

 language

 Scythians and

 Schistosomiasis

 Schwinger, Julian

 Science

 beginnings

 connectivity effects

 factors important to

 genetics and

 locations without

 protoscience

 Western Europe vs. Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth

 Sculpture(photo)

 Scythians

 definition/description

 Persian Empire invasion

 Sarmatians and

 social system

 way of life

 Selective sweeps

 agriculture

 ApoA-I protein variant example definition/description

 driving genes/alleles

 formula for spread/application

 isolated populations and

 ongoing sweeps

 process beginning

 sweeping alleles categories/functions

 time to become common

 village-to-village contact

 “well mixed” populations

 Sennacherib

 Sephardic Jews

 Sepsis risk

 Serotonin

 Shingles

 Silphium

 Skeletal record

 brow ridges

 change overview

 milk drinking effects

 modern human/Neanderthal matings

 See also Anatomy; Brain development; Teeth

 Skeptics Society

 Skin color and vitamin D

 Skin color change

 albinism

 drivers in Europe vs. Asia

 linkage disequilibrium

 OCA2 allele

 rapidity of

 as recent

 skin cancer

 and Vitamin D/diet

 Slash-and-burn agriculture Slavery

 Africa

 Ashkenazi Jews

 gene flow

 “tameness” and

 Sleeping sickness

 Smallpox

 Amerindian fatality rate

 Columbian explosion

 European defenses against

 European fatality rate

 Mandan Indians

 SNPs definition/description

 “Social intelligence”

 Social patterns, modern

 advantageous alleles

 age of transition to agriculture effects

 cheaters

 culture vs. genetic change

 distribution of personality traits

 high-trust society

 mix of personality types

 outliers

 overview

 personality traits of farmers/hunter-gatherers

 phase transitions

 populations with slow modernization

 science/technology adaptation

 studying

 thresholds

 trade

 Spanish explorers

 Spanish fly

 definition/description European doctors use of

 Sperm production

 description

 driving genes/alleles

 SPAG6 sperm motility gene

 Sphingolipids

 definition/description

 storage disorders

 Squanto

 Squirrels and viral disease

 Stomach cancer

 Stomach ulcers

 Stoza

 Sub-Saharan Africa

 African advantages

 agriculture/adaptations

 Dutch colonization

 European advantages

 expansion into

 FAS

 gene flow

 lack of science

 OCA2 albinism

 technology comparison

 Suebians

 Sumerians

 Sungir

 Surui people

 Sweeps. See Selective sweeps

 Syncytin

 Syphilis

  

Taino people

 Talmud

 Taurine cattle(photo)

 Tay-Sachs disease

 Taylor, Elizabeth

 Teeth

 changes with domestication

 evolutionary changes

 high-carbohydrate diet effects

 iron deficiency effects

 retromolar space changes

 Teosinte(fig.)

 Texas longhorn(photo)

 Third Chimpanzee, The (Diamond)

 “Thrifty genotype” hypothesis

 Thucydides

 Tibetans and high altitude

 Tiglath Pileser III

 Titus’ destruction of the Temple

 Tolstoy, Leo

 Tooby, John

 Tools/weapons

 Aurignacian culture

 bone/ivory use

 Bushmen

 Châtelperronian tradition

 iron tools of Bantu

 modern humans

 Mousterian industry

 Paleolithic age

 projectile weapons regional style beginnings

 sewing needles

 trade for materials

 Upper Paleolithic innovations

 See also specific tools/weapons

 Torah

 Torsion dystonia

 Trade

 Ashkenazi Jews

 farmer personality traits and

 gene flow

 infectious diseases

 middlemen/agriculture

 modern humans’ displacement of Neanderthals

 modern social patterns

 overview

 tools’ materials

 Upper Paleolithic

 Triglycerides

 Tuaregs(photo)

 Tuberculosis

 Tungiasis

 Turks’ expansion

 Tutsis

 Typhus

  

Upper Paleolithic innovations

 art(photo)

 burials

 cave paintings (photo)

 description

 fire uses

 food preservation

 genetic change

 hunting

 overview

 pottery

 protective structures/dwellings

 rate

 sculpture(photo)

 social system

 tools/weapons

 Upper Paleolithic innovations

 trade

 See also Modern human/Neanderthal matings

  

Vandals

 blue eyes

 definition/description

 Roman Empire and

 Venus of Dolni Vestonice (photo)

 Venus of Willendorf (photo)

 Viruses

 retroviruses(fig.)

 squirrels and

 Visigoths

 Vitamin D

 agriculture transition/diet changes

 deficiency problems

 skin color

 ultraviolet radiation

 Vitamin-deficiency diseases

  

Wall, J. D.

 Wars

 biological superiority

 “flower wars” of Aztecs

 Malthusian trap

 Weapons. See also Tools/weapons

 Weinryb, Bernard D.

 West Indies

 Western Europe honey bees

 Wheat

 Wheel invention/use

 Whippets/myostatin mutation (photo)

 Whitfield, Charles

 Whooping cough

 Witten, Edward

 Wolves(photo)

 behavior

 deer/moose and

 dogs and

 Writing invention

  

X chromosome

  

Y chromosome

 Amerindian genetic history

 definition/description

 elites reproductive advantage evidence

 modern human/Neanderthal matings

 Yanomamo

 definition/description

 tuberculosis

 Yellow fever

  

Zayed, Amos

 Zebu cattle(photo)

                   Copyright © 2009 by Gregory Cochran and Henry Harpending

 

 
                    Paperback edition first published in 2010 by Basic Books

 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written
    permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For
      information, address Basic Books, 387 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016-8810.

 
Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the United
States by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more information, please contact the
    Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200,
              Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810-4145, ext. 5000, or e-mail
                                  special.markets@perseusbooks.com.

 

 
                      Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

 
                                    Cochran, Gregory.
The 10,000 year explosion : how civilization accelerated human evolution / Gregory Cochran and
                                    Henry Harpending.
                                          p. cm.
                        Includes bibliographical references and index.
                                eISBN : 978-0-786-72750-6
  1. Human evolution. 2. Genetics. I. Harpending, Henry. II. Title. III. Title: Ten thousand year
  explosion. [DNLM: 1. Evolution. 2. Hominidae. 3. Civilization. 4. Genome—genetics. GN 281.4
                                        C663z 2009]
                                    GN281.4.C632 2009
                                        599.93’8—dc22
                                        2008036672

 