ytE=
YyP.
GEORG
(O

CONTRIBUTIONS
TO THE
FOUNDING

OF THE

L 0T

TRANSFINITE NUMBERS

 
DOVER BOOKS ON


MATHEMATICS








HANDBOOK  OF  MATHEMATICAL  FUNCTIONS,  Milton  Abramowitz

and Irene A. Stegun. (61272-4)

TENSOR ANALYSIS ON MANIFOLDS, Richard L. Bishop and Samuel I.

Goldberg. (64039-6)

TABLES OF INDEFINITE INTEGRALS, G. Petit Bois. (60225-7)

VECTOR  AND  TENSOR  ANALYSIS  WITH  APPLICATIONS,  A.  I.

  Borisenko and I. E. Tarapov. (63833-2)

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  CALCULUS  AND  ITS  CONCEPTUAL

  DEVELOPMENT, Carl B. Boyer. (60509-4)

THE  QUALITATIVE  THEORY  OF  ORDINARY  DIFFERENTIAL

  EQUATIONS: AN INTRODUCTION, Fred Brauer and John A. Nohel.

  (65846-5)

ALGORITHMS  FOR  MINIMIZATION  WITHOUT  DERIVATIVES,

Richard P. Brent. (41998-3)

PRINCIPLES OF STATISTICS, M. G. Bulmer. (63760-3)

THE THEORY OF SPINORS, Élie Cartan. (64070-1)

ADVANCED NUMBER THEORY, Harvey Cohn. (64023-X)

STATISTICS  MANUAL,  Edwin  L.  Crow,  Francis  Davis,  and  Margaret  Maxfield. (60599-X)

FOURIER SERIES AND ORTHOGONAL FUNCTIONS, Harry F. Davis.

  (65973-9)

COMPUTABILITY AND UNSOLVABILITY, Martin Davis. (61471-9)

ASYMPTOTIC METHODS IN ANALYSIS, N. G. de Bruijn. (64221-6)

PROBLEMS IN GROUP THEORY, John D. Dixon. (61574-X)

THE  MATHEMATICS  OF  GAMES  OF  STRATEGY,  Melvin  Dresher.

(64216-X)

APPLIED PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS, Paul DuChateau and

David Zachmann. (41976-2)

ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSIONS, A. Erdélyi. (60318-0)

COMPLEX VARIABLES: HARMONIC AND ANALYTIC FUNCTIONS,

Francis J. Flanigan. (61388-7)

ON  FORMALLY  UNDECIDABLE  PROPOSITIONS  OF  PRINCIPIA

  MATHEMATICA AND RELATED SYSTEMS, Kurt Gödel. (66980-7)

A HISTORY OF GREEK MATHEMATICS, Sir Thomas Heath. (24073-8,

24074-6) Two-volume set

PROBABILITY: ELEMENTS OF THE MATHEMATICAL THEORY, C.

R. Heathcote. (41149-4)

INTRODUCTION TO NUMERICAL ANALYSIS, Francis B. Hildebrand.

  (65363-3)

METHODS  OF  APPLIED  MATHEMATICS,  Francis  B.  Hildebrand.

  (67002-3)

TOPOLOGY, John G. Hocking and Gail S. Young. (65676-4)

MATHEMATICS AND LOGIC, Mark Kac and Stanislaw M. Ulam. (67085-

6)

MATHEMATICAL FOUNDATIONS OF INFORMATION THEORY, A. I.

  Khinchin. (60434-9)

ARITHMETIC REFRESHER, A. Albert Klaf. (21241-6)

CALCULUS REFRESHER, A. Albert Klaf. (20370-0)PROBLEM BOOK IN THE THEORY OF FUNCTIONS, Konrad Knopp.

  (41451-5)

INTRODUCTORY REAL ANALYSIS, A. N. Kolmogorov and S. V. Fomin.

  (61226-0)

SPECIAL  FUNCTIONS  AND  THEIR  APPLICATIONS,  N.  N.  Lebedev.

  (60624-4)

CHANCE, LUCK AND STATISTICS, Horace C. Levinson. (41997-5)

TENSORS,  DIFFERENTIAL  FORMS,  AND  VARIATIONAL

  PRINCIPLES, David Lovelock and Hanno Rund. (65840-6)

SURVEY  OF  MATRIX  THEORY  AND  MATRIX  INEQUALITIES,

Marvin Marcus and Henryk Minc. (67102-X)

ABSTRACT ALGEBRA AND SOLUTION BY RADICALS, John E. and

Margaret W Maxfield. (67121-6)

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS OF ALGEBRA, Bruce E. Meserve. (61470-

0)

FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS  OF  GEOMETRY,  Bruce  E.  Meserve.

  (63415-9)

FIFTY  CHALLENGING  PROBLEMS  IN  PROBABILITY  WITH

  SOLUTIONS, Frederick Mosteller. (65355-2)

NUMBER THEORY AND ITS HISTORY, Oystein Ore. (65620-9)

MATRICES AND TRANSFORMATIONS, Anthony J. Pettofrezzo. (63634-

8)

PROBABILITY THEORY: A CONCISE COURSE, Y. A. Rozanov. (63544-

9)

ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AND STABILITY THEORY:

AN INTRODUCTION, David A. Sánchez. (63828-6)

LINEAR ALGEBRA, Georgi E. Shilov. (63518-X)

ESSENTIAL CALCULUS WITH APPLICATIONS, Richard A. Silverman.

  (66097-4)

A CONCISE HISTORY OF MATHEMATICS, Dirk J. Struik. (60255-9)

PROBLEMS  IN  PROBABILITY  THEORY,  MATHEMATICAL  STATISTICS  AND  THEORY  OF  RANDOM  FUNCTIONS,  A.  A.

  Sveshnikov. (63717-4)

TENSOR CALCULUS, J. L. Synge and A. Schild. (63612-7)

CALCULUS  OF  VARIATIONS  WITH  APPLICATIONS  TO  PHYSICS

AND ENGINEERING, Robert Weinstock. (63069-2)

INTRODUCTION  TO  VECTOR  AND  TENSOR  ANALYSIS,  Robert  C.

Wrede. (61879-X)

DISTRIBUTION  THEORY  AND  TRANSFORM  ANALYSIS,  A.  H.

Zemanian. (65479-6)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Paperbound unless otherwise indicated. Available at your book dealer, online

at www.doverpublications.com,  or  by  writing  to  Dept.  23,  Dover

Publications, Inc., 31 East 2nd Street, Mineola, NY 11501. For current price

information or for free catalogs (please indicate field of interest), write to

Dover Publications or log on to www.doverpublications.com and see every

Dover book in print. Each year Dover publishes over 500 books on fine art,

music,  crafts  and  needlework,  antiques,  languages,  literature,  children’s

books, chess, cookery, nature, anthropology, science, mathematics, and other

areas.

                                                            Manufactured in the US.A.  Contributions to the Founding of the


        Theory of Transfinite Numbers







                                  Georg CantorThis Dover edition, first published in 1955, is an unabridged and unaltered

republication of the English translation originally published in 1915 by the

Open Court Publishing Company.

9780486155043

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: A54-8940

 

Manufactured in the United States of America 

Dover Publications, Inc. 

31 East 2nd Street, Mineola, N.Y 11501PREFACE








THIS volume contains a translation of the two very important memoirs of

Georg Cantor on transfinite numbers which appeared in the Mathematische
                                1
Annalen for 1895 and 1897 under the title: “Beiträge zur Begründung der

transfiniten  Mengenlehre.”  It  seems  to  me  that,  since  these  memoirs  are

chiefly occupied with the investigation of the various transfinite cardinal and

ordinal  numbers  and  not  with  investigations  belonging  to  what  is  usually

described  as  “the  theory  of  aggregates”  or  “the  theory  of  sets ”

(Mengenlehre, théorie des ensembles), —the elements of the sets being real

or complex numbers which are imaged as geometrical “ points ” in space of

one or more dimensions,—the title given to them in this translation is more

suitable.

  These memoirs are the final and logically purified statement of many of the

most important results of the long series of memoirs begun by Cantor in

1870.  It  is,  I  think,  necessary,  if  we  are  to  appreciate  the  full  import  of

Cantor’s work on transfinite numbers, to have thought through and to bear in

mind Cantor’s earlier researches on the theory of point-aggregates. It was in

these researches that the need for the transfinite numbers first showed itself,

and it is only by the study of these researches that the majority of us can

annihilate  the  feeling  of  arbitrariness  and  even  insecurity  about  the

introduction  of  these  numbers.  Furthermore,  it  is  also  necessary  to  trace

backwards,  especially  through  Weierstrass,  the  course  of  those  researches

which led to Cantor’s work. I have, then, prefixed an Introduction tracing the

growth of parts of the theory of functions during the nineteenth century, anddealing, in some detail, with the fundamental work of Weierstrass and others,

and  with  the  work  of  Cantor  from  1870  to  1895.  Some  notes  at  the  end

contain  a  short  account  of  the  developments  of  the  theory  of  transfinite

numbers  since  1897.  In  these  notes  and  in  the  Introduction  I  have  been

greatly helped by the information that Professor Cantor gave me in the course

of a long correspondence on the theory of aggregates which we carried on

many years ago.

The philosophical revolution brought about by Cantor’s work was even

greater,  perhaps,  than  the  mathematical  one.  With  few  exceptions,

mathematicians joyfully accepted, built upon, scrutinized, and perfected the

foundations  of  Cantor’s  undying  theory  ;  but  very  many  philosophers

combated it. This seems to have been because very few understood it. I hope

that  this  book  may  help  to  make  the  subject  better  known  to  both

philosophers and mathematicians.

The  three  men  whose  influence  on  modern  pure  mathematics—and

indirectly  modern  logic  and  the  philosophy  which  abuts  on  it—is  most

marked are Karl Weierstrass, Richard Dedekind, and Georg Cantor. A great

part of Dedekind’s work has developed along a direction parallel to the work

of Cantor, and it is instructive to compare with Cantor’s work Dedekind’s

Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen and Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen ?,

of which excellent English translations have been issued by the publishers of
                  2
the present book.

                                    3
  There is a French translation  of these memoirs of Cantor’s, but there is no

English translation of them. For kind permission to make the translation, I am

indebted to Messrs B. G. Teubner of Leipzig and Berlin, the publishers of the

Mathematische Annalen.

                                                            PHILIP E. B. JOURDAIN.Table of Contents










    DOVER BOOKS ON MATHEMATICS

    Title Page

    Copyright Page

    PREFACE

      CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY  OF

    TRANSFINITE NUMBERS - INTRODUCTION

      CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY  OF

    TRANSFINITE NUMBERS - (FIRST ARTICLE)

      CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  FOUNDING  OF  THE  THEORY  OF

    TRANSFINITE NUMBERS - (SECOND ARTICLE)

    NOTES

    INDEXCONTRIBUTIONS TO THE


FOUNDING OF THE THEORY OF


TRANSFINITE NUMBERS









INTRODUCTION


I

IF it is safe to trace back to any single man the origin of those conceptions

with which pure mathematical analysis has been chiefly occupied during the

nineteenth century and up to the present time, we must, I think, trace it back

to Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier (1768–1830). Fourier was first and foremost

a physicist, and he expressed very definitely his view that mathematics only

justifies itself by the help it gives towards the solution of physical problems,

and yet the light that was thrown on the general conception of a function and

its “ continuity,” of the “ convergence ” of infinite series, and of an integral,

first began to shine as a result of Fourier’s original and bold treatment of the

problems of the conduction of heat. This it was that gave the impetus to the

formation and development of the theories of functions. The broad-minded

physicist  will  approve  of  this  refining  development  of  the  mathematical

methods  which  arise  from  physical  conceptions  when  he  reflects  that

mathematics is a wonderfully powerful and economically contrived means of

dealing logically and conveniently with an immense complex of data, and

that we cannot be sure of the logical soundness of our methods and results

until we make everything about them quite definite. The pure mathematicianknows that pure mathematics has an end in itself which is more allied with

philosophy. But we have not to justify pure mathematics here : we have only

to point out its origin in physical conceptions. But we have also pointed out

that  physics  can  justify  even  the  most  modern  developments  of  pure

mathematics.


II

  During  the  nineteenth  century,  the  two  great  branches  of  the  theory  of

functions developed and gradually separated. The rigorous foundation of the

results of Fourier on trigonometrical series, which was given by Dirichlet,

brought forward as subjects of investigation the general conception of a (one-

valued) function of a real variable and the (in particular, trigonometrical)

development of functions. On the other hand, Cauchy was gradually led to

recognize  the  importance  of  what  was  subsequently  seen  to  be  the  more

special conception of function of a complex variable ; and, to a great extent

independently  of  Cauchy,  Weierstrass  built  up  his  theory  of  analytic

functions of complex variables.

  These  tendencies  of  both  Cauchy  and  Dirichlet  combined  to  influence

Riemann ; his work on the theory of functions of a complex variable carried

on and greatly developed the work of Cauchy, while the intention of his “

Habilitationsschrift ” of 1854 was to generalize as far as possible Dirichlet’s

partial solution of the problem of the development of a function of a real

variable in a trigonometrical series.

Both these sides of Riemann’s activity left a deep impression on Hankel. In

a memoir of 1870, Hankel attempted to exhibit the theory of functions of a

real variable as leading, of necessity, to the restrictions and extensions from

which we start in Riemann’s theory of functions of a complex variable ; and

yet  Hankel’s  researches  entitle  him  to  be  called  the  founder  of  the

independent theory of functions of a real variable. At about the same time,

Heine  initiated,  under  the  direct  influence  of  Riemann’s  “

Habilitationsschrift,” a new series of investigations on trigonometrical series.

  Finally,  soon  after  this,  we  find  Georg  Cantor  both  studying  Hankel’s

memoir  and  applying  to  theorems  on  the  uniqueness  of  trigonometrical

developments  those  conceptions  of  his  on  irrational  numbers  and  the  “

derivatives  ”  of  point-aggregates  or  number-aggregates  which  developed

from  the  rigorous  treatment  of  such  fundamental  questions  given  byWeierstrass at Berlin in the introduction to his lectures on analytic functions.

The theory of point-aggregates soon became an independent theory of great

importance,  and  finally,  in  1882,  Cantor’s  “  transfinite  numbers  ”  were

defined independently of the aggregates in connexion with which they first

appeared in mathematics.


III

                        4
The investigations  of the eighteenth century on the problem of vibrating

cords led to a controversy for the following reasons. D’Alembert maintained

that the arbitrary functions in his general integral of the partial differential

equation to which this problem led were restricted to have certain properties

which assimilate them to the analytically representable functions then known,

and which would prevent their course being completely arbitrary at every

point. Euler, on the other hand, argued for the admission of certain of these “

arbitrary ” functions into analysis. Then Daniel Bernoulli produced a solution

in  the  form  of  an  infinite  trigonometrical  series,  and  claimed,  on  certain

physical grounds, that this solution was as general as d’Alembert’s. As Euler
                                                    5
pointed out, this was so only if any arbitrary  function φ(x) were developable

in a series of the form











$(%)

Za, sin

vmx
That  this  was,  indeed,  the  case,  even  when φ(x)  is  not  necessarily

developable in a power-series, was first shown by Fourier, who was led to

study the same mathematical problem as the above one by his researches, the

first of which were communicated to the French Academy in 1807, on the

conduction  of  heat.  To  Fourier  is  due  also  the  determination  of  the

coefficients in trigonometric series,¢@)=1%by+ by cosx+bycos 22+ . ..
+a, sin x+a, sin 2x+ . . .,
in the form













+m
b,= :—rf¢(a) cos vada,
This determination was probably independent of Euler’s prior determination

and  Lagrange’s  analogous  determination  of  the  coefficients  of  a finite

trigonometrical  series.  Fourier  also  gave  a  geometrical  proof  of  the

convergence of his series, which, though not formally exact, contained the

germ of Dirichlet’s proof.

To  Peter  Gustav  Lejeune-Dirichlet  (1805–1859)  is  due  the  first  exact
                                  6
treatment of Fourier’s series.  He expressed the sum of the first n terms of

the series by a definite integral, and proved that the limit, when n increases

indefinitely, of this integral is the function which is to be represented by the

trigonometrical series, provided that the function satisfies certain conditions.

These conditions were somewhat lightened by Lipschitz in 1864.

  Thus,  Fourier’s  work  led  to  the  contemplation  and  exact  treatment  of

certain functions which were totally different in behaviour from algebraic

functions. These last functions were, before him, tacitly considered to be the

type of all functions that can occur in analysis. Henceforth it was part of the

business of analysis to investigate such non-algebraoid functions.

In the first few decades of the nineteenth century there grew up a theory of

more special functions of an imaginary or complex variable. This theory wasknown, in part at least, to Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855), but he did not

publish his results, and so the theory is due to Augustin Louis Cauchy (1789–
      7
1857).  Cauchy was less far-sighted and penetrating than Gauss, the theory

developed slowly, and only gradually were Cauchy’s prejudices against “

imaginaries ” overcome. Through the years from 1814 to 1846 we can trace,

first, the strong influence on Cauchy’s conceptions of Fourier’s ideas, then

the quickly increasing unsusceptibility to the ideas of others, coupled with the

extraordinarily  prolific  nature  of  this  narrow-minded  genius.  Cauchy

appeared to take pride in the production of memoirs at each weekly meeting

of the French Academy, and it was partly, perhaps, due to this circumstance

that his works are of very unequal importance. Besides that, he did not seem

to  perceive  even  approximately  the  immense  importance  of  the  theory  of

functions of a complex variable which he did so much to create. This task

remained for Puiseux, Briot and Bouquet, and others, and was advanced in

the  most  striking  manner  by  Georg  Friedrich  Bernhard  Riemann  (1826–

1866).

  Riemann may have owed to his teacher Dirichlet his bent both towards the

theory  of  potential—which  was  the  chief  instrument  in  his  classical

development (1851) of the theory of functions of a complex variable—and

that  of  trigonometrical  series.  By  a  memoir  on  the  representability  of  a

function  by  a  trigonometrical  series,  which  was  read  in  1854  but  only

published after his death, he not only laid the foundations for all modern

investigations into the theory of these series, but inspired Hermann Hankel

(1839–1873) to the method of researches from which we can date the theory

of  functions  of  a  real  variable  as  an  independent  science.  The  motive  of

Hankel’s  research  was  provided  by  reflexion  on  the  foundations  of

Riemann’s theory of functions of a complex variable. It was Hankel’s object

to show how the needs of mathematics compel us to go beyond the most

general  conception  of  a  function,  which  was  implicitly  formulated  by

Dirichlet,  to  introduce  the  complex  variable,  and  finally  to  reach  that

conception from which Riemann started in his inaugural dissertation. For this

purpose  Hankel  began  his  “  Untersuchungen  über  die  unendlich  oft

oscillirenden und unstetigen Functionen ; ein Beitrag zur Feststellung des

Begriffes der Function überhaupt ” of 1870 by a thorough examination of the

various possibilities contained in Dirichlet’s conception.

  Riemann,  in  his  memoir  of  1854,  started  from  the  general  problem  ofwhich  Dirichlet  had  only  solved  a  particular  case  :  If  a  function  is

developable in a trigonometrical series, what results about the variation of the

value of the function (that is to say, what is the most general way in which it

can become discontinuous and have maxima and minima) when the argument

varies continuously ? The argument is a real variable, for Fourier’s series, as

Fourier had already noticed, may converge for real x’s alone. This question

was not completely answered, and, perhaps in consequence of this, the work

was not published in Riemann’s lifetime ; but fortunately that part of it which

concerns us more particularly, and which seems to fill, and more than fill, the

place  of  Dirichlet’s  contemplated  revision  of  the  principles  of  the

infinitesimal calculus, has the finality obtained by the giving of the necessary

and sufficient conditions for the integrability of a function f(x), which was a

necessary preliminary to Riemann’s investigation. Thus, Riemann was led to

give the process of integration a far wider meaning than that contemplated by

Cauchy or even Dirichlet, and Riemann constructed an integrable function

which becomes discontinuous an infinity of times between any two limits, as

close  together  as  wished,  of  the  independent  variable,  in  the  following

manner :—If, where x is a real variable, (x) denotes the (positive or negative)

excess of x over the nearest integer, or zero if x is midway between two

integers, (x) is a one-valued function of x with discontinuities at the points 

 
      , where n is an integer (positive, negative, or zero), and with  and 

 
for upper and lower limits respectively. Further, (vx), where is an integer, is

discontinuous at the points  or . Consequently, the series











w=n+}%
 
S@)

00

()
                      2
where the factor I/ν is added to ensure convergence for all values of x, may

be supposed to be discontinuous for all values of x of the form x = p/2n,

where p is an odd integer, relatively prime to n. It was this method that was,

in a certain respect, generalized by Hankel in 1870. In Riemann’s example

appeared an analytical expression—and therefore a “ function ” in Euler’ssense—which, on account of its manifold singularities, allowed of no such

general  properties  as  Riemann’s  “  functions  of  a  complex  variable,”  and

Hankel gave a method, whose principles were suggested by this example, of

forming analytical expressions with singularities at every rational point. He

was thus led to state, with some reserve, that every “ function ” in Dirichlet’s

sense is also a “ function ” in Euler’s sense.

The greatest influence on Georg Cantor seems, however, not to have been

that exercised by Riemann, Hankel, and their successors—though the work of

these men is closely connected with some parts of Cantor’s work,—but by

Weierstrass, a contemporary of Riemann’s, who attacked many of the same

problems in the theory of analytic functions of complex variables by very

different and more rigorous methods.


IV

Karl Weierstrass (1815–1897) has explained, in his address delivered on

the occasion of his entry into the Berlin Academy in 1857, that, from the time

(the winter of 1839–1840) when, under his teacher Gudermann, he made his

first acquaintance with the theory of elliptic functions, he was powerfully

attracted by this branch of analysis. “ Now, Abel, who was accustomed to

take the highest standpoint in any part of mathematics, established a theorem

which comprises all those transcendents which arise from the integration of

algebraic differentials, and has the same signification for these as Euler’s

integral has for elliptic functions . . . ; and Jacobi succeeded in demonstrating

the existence of periodic functions of many arguments, whose fundamental

properties are established in Abel’s theorem, and by means of which the true

meaning  and  real  essence  of  this  theorem  could  be  judged.  Actually  to

represent, and to investigate the properties of these magnitudes of a totally

new kind, of which analysis has as yet no example, I regarded as one of the

principal problems of mathematics, and, as soon as I clearly recognized the

meaning and significance of this problem, resolved to devote myself to it. Of

course it would have been foolish even to think of the solution of such a

problem without having prepared myself by a thorough study of the means

and by busying myself with less difficult problems. ”

  With the ends stated here of Weierstrass’s work we are now concerned

only incidentally : it is the means—the “ thorough study ” of which he spoke

—which has had a decisive influence on our subject in common with the

theory of functions. We will, then, pass over his early work—which was onlypublished in 1894—on the theory of analytic functions, his later work on the

same  subject,  and  his  theory  of  the  Abelian  functions,  and  examine  his

immensely important work on the foundations of arithmetic, to which he was

led by the needs of a rigorous theory of analytic functions.

We  have  spoken  as  if  the  ultimate  aim  of  Weierstrass’s  work  was  the

investigation of Abelian functions. But another and more philosophical view

was expressed in his introduction to a course of lectures delivered in the
                                                                      8
summer of 1886 and preserved by Gosta Mittag-Leffler  : “ In order to

penetrate into mathematical science it is indispensable that we should occupy

ourselves with individual problems which show us its extent and constitution.

But the final object which we must always keep in sight is the attainment of a

sound judgment on the foundations of science.”

In 1859, Weierstrass began his lectures on the theory of analytic functions

at the University of Berlin. The importance of this, from our present point of

view, lies in the fact that he was naturally obliged to pay special attention to

the  systematic  treatment  of  the  theory,  and  consequently,  to  scrutinize  its

foundations.

In  the  first  place,  one  of  the  characteristics  of  Weierstrass’s  theory  of

functions is the abolition of the method of complex integration of Cauchy and

Gauss which was used by Riemann ; and, in a letter to H. A. Schwarz of

October 3, 1875, Weierstrass stated his belief that, in a systematic foundation,

it is better to dispense with integration, as follows :—

“ . . . The more I meditate upon the principles of the theory of functions,—

and I do this incessantly, —the firmer becomes my conviction that this theory

must be built up on the foundation of algebraic truths, and therefore that it is

not the right way to proceed conversely and make use of the transcendental

(to express myself briefly) for the establishment of simple and fundamental

algebraic  theorems  ;  however  attractive  may  be,  for  example,  the

considerations by which Riemann discovered so many of the most important

properties of algebraic functions, That to the discoverer, quâ discoverer every

route is permissible, is, of course, self-evident ; I am only thinking of the

systematic establishment of the theory.”

In the second place, and what is far more important than the question of

integration,  the  systematic  treatment, ab  initio,  of  the  theory  of  analytic

functions  led  Weierstrass  to  profound  investigations  in  the  principles  ofarithmetic,  and  the  great  result  of  these  investigations—his  theory  of

irrational numbers—has a significance for all mathematics which can hardly

be overrated, and our present subject may truly be said to be almost wholly

due to this theory and its development by Cantor.

In the theory of analytic functions we often have to use the theorem that, if

we are given an infinity of points of the complex plane in any bounded region

of this plane, there is at least one point of the domain such that there is an

infinity of the given points in each and every neighbourhood round it and

including it. Mathematicians used to express this by some such rather obscure

phrase  as  :  “  There  is  a  point  near  which  some  of  the  given  points  are

infinitely near to one another.” If we apply, for the proof of this, the method

which seems naturally to suggest itself, and which consists in successively

halving the region or one part of the region which contains an infinity of
      9
points, we arrive at what is required,—namely, the conclusion that there is a

point such that there is another point in any neighbourhood of it, that is to

say, that there is a so-called “point of condensation, ”—when, and only when,

we have proved that every infinite “ sum ” such that the sum of any finite

number of its terms does not exceed some given finite number defines a

(rational or irrational) number. The geometrical analogue of this proposition

may  possibly  be  claimed  to  be  evident;  but  if  our  ideal  in  the  theory  of

functions—which had, even in Weierstrass’s time, been regarded for long as

a justified, and even as a partly attained, ideal—is to found this theory on the
                                  10
conception of number alone,  this proposition leads to the considerations

out of which a theory of irrational numbers such as Weierstrass’s is built. The

theorem on the existence of at least one point of condensation was proved by

Weierstsass  by  the  method  of  successive  subdivisions,  and  was  specially

emphasized by him.

  Weierstrass,  in  the  introduction  to  his  lectures  on  analytic  functions,

emphasized  that,  when  we  have  admitted  the  notion  of  whole  number,

arithmetic needs no further postulate, but can be built up in a purely logical

fashion,  and  also  that  the  notion  of  a  one-to-one  correspondence  is

fundamental in counting. But it is in his purely arithmetical introduction of

irrational  numbers  that  his  great  divergence  from  precedent  comes.  This

appears from a consideration of the history of incommensurables.

The  ancient  Greeks  discovered  the  existence  of  incommensurable

geometrical  magnitudes,  and  therefore  grew  to  regard  arithmetic  andgeometry as sciences of which the analogy had not a logical basis. This view

was also probably due, in part at least, to an attentive consideration of the

famous  arguments  of  Zeno.  Analytical  geometry  practically  identified

geometry with arithmetic (or rather with arithmetica universalis), and, before

Weierstrass,  the  introduction  of  irrational  “number”  was,  explicitly  or

implicitly, geometrical. The view that number has a geometrical basis was

taken  by  Newton  and  most  of  his  successors.  To  come  to  the  nineteenth

century, Cauchy explicitly adopted the same view. At the beginning of his

Cours  d’analyse  of  1821,  he  defined  a  “limit”  as  follows:  “When  the

successive values attributed to a variable approach a fixed value indefinitely

so as to end by differing from it as little as is wished, this fixed value is called

the ‘limit’ of all the others ” ; and remarked that “ thus an irrational number is

the limit of the various fractions which furnish more and more approximate

values of it.” If we consider—as, however, Cauchy does not appear to have

done, although many others have—the latter statement as a definition, so that

an “irrational” number is defined to be the limit of certain sums of rational

numbers,  we  presuppose  that  these  sums have  a  limit.  In  another  place

Cauchy remarked, after defining a series u, u, u, . . . to be convergent if the
                                                012

sum s = u + u + u + . . . + u, for values of n always increasing,
      n012n−1

approaches indefinitely a certain limit s, that, “by the above principles, in

order that the series u, u, u, . . . may be convergent, it is necessary and
                          012

sufficient that increasing values of n make the sum s converge indefinitely
                                                                n

towards a fixed limit s; in other words, it is necessary and sufficient that, for

infinitely great values of n, the sums s, s, s, . . . differ from the limit s,
                                            nn+1n+2

and consequently from one another, by infinitely small quantities.” Hence it

is necessary and sufficient that the different sums u + u + . . . + u, for
                                                              nn+1n+m

different m’s,  end,  when n  increases,  by  obtaining  numerical  values

constantly differing from one another by less than any assigned number.

If we know that the sums s have a limit s, we can at once prove the
                                    n

necessity of this condition ; but its sufficiency (that is to say, if, for any

assigned positive rational ∈, an integer n can always be found such thatSn—Satx| <6
where r is any integer, then a limit s exists) requires a previous definition of

the system of real numbers, of which the supposed limit is to be one. For it is

evidently  a  vicious  circle  to  define  a  real  number  as  the  limit  of  a

“convergent”  series,  as  the  above  definition  of  what  we  mean  by  a

“convergent ” series—a series which has a limit—involves (unless we limit

ourselves to rational limits) a previous definition of what we mean by a “ real
          11
number.”

It seems, perhaps, evident to “intuition” that, if we lay off lengths s, s, .
                                                                                  nn+1

.  .  ,  for  which  the  above  condition  is  fulfilled,  on  a  straight  line,  that  a

(commensurable  or  incommensurable)  “limiting”  length s  exists;  and,  on

these grounds, we seem to be justified in designating Cauchy’s theory of real

number  as  geometrical.  But  such  a  geometrical  theory  is  not  logically

convincing, and Weierstrass showed that it is unnecessary, by defining real

numbers in a manner which did not depend on a process of “ going to the

limit.”

To  repeat  the  point  briefly,  we  have  the  following  logical  error  in  all
                            12
would-be  arithmetical   pre-Weierstrassian  introductions  of  irrational

numbers : we start with the conception of the system of rational numbers, we

define the “sum” (a limit of a sequence of rational numbers) of an infinite

series of rational numbers, and then raise ourselves to the conception of the

system  of  real  numbers  which  are  got  by  such  means.  The  error  lies  in

overlooking  the  fact  that  the  “sum  ”  (b)  of  the  infinite  series  of  rational

numbers can only be defined when we have already defined the real numbers,
                                                        13
of which b is one. “ I believe,” said Cantor, à propos of Weierstrass’s

theory,  “that  this  logical  error,  which  was  first  avoided  by  Weierstrass,

escaped notice almost universally in earlier times, and was not noticed on the

ground that it is one of the rare cases in which actual errors can lead to none

of the more important mistakes in calculation.”

  Thus, we must bear in mind that an arithmetical theory of irrationals has to

define  irrational  numbers  not  as  “limits”  (whose  existence  is  not  always

beyond question) of certain infinite processes, but in a manner prior to any

possible discussion of the question in what cases these processes define limits

at all.

  With Weierstrass, a number was said to be “determined” if we know of

what elements it is composed and how many times each element occurs in it.Considering numbers formed with the principal unit and an infinity of its

aliquot  parts,  Weierstrass  called  any  aggregate  whose  elements  and  the
                                                                      14
number  (finite)  of  times  each  element  occurs  in  it   are  known  a

(determined) “ numerical quantity ” (Zahlengrösse). An aggregate consisting

of  a  finite  number  of  elements  was  regarded  as  equal  to  the  sum  of  its

elements, and two aggregates of a finite number of elements were regarded as

equal when the respective sums of their elements are equal.

A rational number r was said to be contained in a numerical quantity a

when we can separate from a a partial aggregate equal to r. A numerical

quantity a was said to be “finite” if we could assign a rational number R such

that every rational number contained in a is smaller than R. Two numerical

quantities a, b were said to be “equal,” when every rational number contained

in a is contained in b, and vice versa. When a and b are not equal, there is at

least  one  rational  number  which  is  either  contained  in a  without  being

contained in b, or vice versa : in the first case, a was said to be “greater than ”

b; in the second, a was said to be “less than ” b.

  Weierstrass called the numerical quantity c defined by (i.e. identical with)

the aggregate whose elements are those which appear in a or b, each of these

elements being taken a number of times equal to the number of times in

which it occurs in a increased by the number of times in which it occurs in b,

the “sum”  of a  and b.  The  “product”  of a  and b  was  defined  to  be  the

numerical quantity defined by the aggregate whose elements are obtained by

forming in all possible manners the product of each element of a and each

element of b. In the same way was defined the product of any finite number

of numerical quantities.

The “sum” of an infinite number of numerical quantities a, b, . . . was then

defined to be the aggregate (s) whose elements occur in one (at least) of a, b,

. . ., each of these elements e being taken a number of times (n) equal to the

number of times that it occurs in a, increased by the number of times that it

occurs in b, and so on. In order that s be finite and determined, it is necessary

that each of the elements which occurs in it occurs a finite number of times,

and it is necessary and sufficient that we can assign a number N such that the

sum of any finite number of the quantities a, b, . . . is less than N.

  Such  is  the  principal  point  of  Weierstrass’s  theory  of  real  numbers.  It

should be noticed that, with Weierstrass, the new numbers were aggregates of

the numbers previously defined ; and that this view, which appears from timeto time in the better textbooks, has the important advantage which was first

sufficiently emphasized by Russell. This advantage is that the existence of

limits can be proved in such a theory. That is to say, it can be proved by

actual construction that there is a number which is the limit of a certain series

fulfilling the condition of “finiteness” or “convergency.” When real numbers

are  introduced  either  without  proper  definitions,  or  as  “creations  of  our
                                              15
minds,” or, what is far worse, as “signs,” this existence cannot be proved.

If we consider an infinite aggregate of real numbers, or comparing these

numbers for the sake of picturesqueness with the points of a straight line, an

infinite “point-aggregate,” we have the theorem : There is, in this domain, at

least one point such that there is an infinity of points of the aggregate in any,

arbitrarily small, neighbourhood of it. Weierstrass’s proof was, as we have

mentioned, by the process, named after Bolzano and him, of successively

halving any one of the intervals which contains an infinity of points. This

process defines a certain numerical magnitude, the “point of condensation ”

(Häufungsstelle)  in  question.  An  analogous  theorem  holds  for  the  two-

dimensional region of complex numbers.

Of real numerical magnitudes x, all of which are less than some finite

number,  there  is  an  “upper  limit,”  which  is  defined  as  :  A  numerical

magnitude G which is not surpassed in magnitude by any x and is such that

either certain x’s are equal to G or certain x’s lie within the arbitrarily small

interval (G, . . ., G–δ), the end G being excluded. Analogously for the “ lower

limit ” g.

It must be noticed that, if we have a finite aggregate of x’s, one of these is

the upper limit, and, if the aggregate is infinite, one of them may be the upper

limit.  In  this  case  it  need  not  also,  but  of  course  may,  be  a  point  of

condensation. If none of them is the upper limit, this limit (whose existence is

proved  similarly  to  the  existence  of  a  point  of  condensation,  but  is,  in

addition, unique) is a point of condensation. Thus, in the above explanation

of the term “ upper limit,” we can replace the words “either certain x’s” to

“being excluded ” by “certain x’s lie in the arbitrary small interval (G, . . .,

G–δ), the end G being included.”

The theory of the upper and lower limit of a (general or “Dirichlet’s”) real

one-valued function of a real variable was also developed and emphasized by

Weierstrass, and especially the theorem : If G is the upper limit of those
                    16
values of y = f(x) which belong to the values of x lying inside the intervalfrom a to b, there is, in this interval, at least one point x = X such that the

upper  limit  of  the y’s  which  belong  to  the x’s  in  an  arbitrarily  small

neighbourhood of X is G ; and analogously for the lower limit.

If the y-value corresponding to x = X is G, the upper limit is called the

“maximum” of the y’s and, if y = f(x) is a continuous function of x, the upper

limit is a maximum ; in other words, a continuous function attains its upper

and lower limits. That a continuous function also takes at least once every

value  between  these  limits  was  proved  by  Bolzano  (1817)  and  Cauchy

(1821), but the Weierstrassian theory of real numbers first made these proofs
        17
rigorous.

It is of the utmost importance to realize that, whereas until Weierstrass’s

time  such  subjects  as  the  theory  of  points  of  condensation  of  an  infinite

aggregate and the theory of irrational numbers, on which the founding of the

theory of functions depends, were hardly ever investigated, and never with

such  important  results,  Weierstrass  carried  research  into  the  principles  of

arithmetic farther than it had been carried before. But we must also realize

that there were questions, such as the nature of whole number itself, to which

he made no valuable contributions. These questions, though logically the first

in arithmetic, were, of course, historically the last to be dealt with. Before this

could happen, arithmetic had to receive a development, by means of Cantor’s

discovery  of  transfinite  numbers,  into  a  theory  of cardinal  and ordinal

numbers, both finite and transfinite, and logic had to be sharpened, as it was

by Dedekind, Frege, Peano and Russell—to a great extent owing to the needs

which this theory made evident.


V

Georg Ferdinand Ludwig Philipp Cantor was born at St Petersburg on 3rd

March 1845, and lived there until 1856 ; from 1856 to 1863 he lived in South

Germany (Wiesbaden, Frankfurt a. M., and Darmstadt); and, from autumn

1863 to Easter 1869, in Berlin. He became Privatdocent at Halle a. S. in
                                                                                          18
1869,  extraordinary  Professor  in  1872,  and  ordinary  Professor  in  1879.

When a student at Berlin, Cantor came under the influence of Weierstrass’s

teaching, and one of his first papers on mathematics was partly occupied with

a theory of irrational numbers, in which a sequence of numbers satisfying

Cauchy’s  condition  of  convergence  was  used  instead  of  Weierstrass’s

complex  of  an  infinity  of  elements  satisfying  a  condition  which,  thoughequivalent  to  the  above  condition,  is  less  convenient  for  purposes  of

calculation.

This  theory  was  exposed  in  the  course  of  Cantor’s  researches  on

trigonometrical  series.  One  of  the  problems  of  the  modern  theory  of

trigonometrical series was to establish the uniqueness of a trigonometrical

development. Cantor’s investigations related to the proof of this uniqueness

for  the  most  general  trigonometrical  series,  that  is  to  say,  those

trigonometrical  series  whose  coefficients  are  not  necessarily  supposed  to

have the (Fourier’s) integral form.

In a paper of 1870, Cantor proved the theorem that, if



                        a, a, . . ., a, . . . and b, b, . . ., b, . . .
                          12v12v



are two infinite series such that the limit of



                                    a sin x + b cos vx,
                                    vvv



for every value of x which lies in a given interval (a<x<b) of the domain of

real magnitudes, is zero with increasing v, both a and b converge, with
                                                            vv

increasing v, to zero. This theorem leads to a criterion for the convergence of

a trigonometrical series









36y +a,sinx+ b cosx+ ... +a,sinpx+b,cosvxr+ . . .,
that  Riemann  proved  under  the  supposition  of  the  integral  form  for  the

coefficients.  In  a  paper  immediately  following  this  one,  Cantor  used  this

theorem to prove that there is only one representation of f(x) in the form of a

trigonometrical series convergent for every value of x, except, possibly, a

finite number of x’s ; if the sums of two trigonometrical series differ for afinite number of x’s, the forms of the series coincide.

In  1871,  Cantor  gave  a  simpler  proof  of  the  uniqueness  of  the

representation, and extended this theorem to : If we have, for every value of

x, a convergent representation of the value o by a trigonometrical series, the

coefficients of this representation are zero. In the same year, he also gave a

simpler proof of his first theorem that, if lim (a sin x + b cos x) = 0 for
                                                        vvvv

a<x<b, then both lim a and lim b are zero.
                          vv

In November 1871, Cantor further extended his theorem by proving that

the convergence or equality of the sums of trigonometrical series may be

renounced  for  certain infinite  aggregates  of  x’s  in  the  interval  0  .  .  .  2π

without the theorem ceasing to hold. To describe the structure that such an

aggregate may have in this case, Cantor began with “some explanations, or

rather some simple indications, intended to put in a full light the different

manners in which numerical magnitudes, in number finite or infinite, can

behave,” in order to make the exposition of the theorem in question as short

as possible.

The system A of rational numbers (including o) serves as basis for arriving

at a more extended notion of numerical magnitude. The first generalization

with which we meet is when we have an infinite sequence



                                          (1)









Byy Agy 5 o w5 By i & s
of rational numbers, given by some law, and such that, if we take the positive

rational number ∊ as small as we wish, there is an integer n such that
                                                                    1



                                          (2)Qpim— Ay | <e (”?”l)’
                                        19
whatever the positive integer m is. This property Cantor expressed by the

words, “the series (1) has a determined limit b,” and remarked particularly

that these words, at that point, only served to enunciate the above property of

the series, and, just as we connect (i) with a special sign b, we must also

attach different signs b′, b″,  .  .  .,  to  different  series  of  the  same  species.

However,  because  of  the  fact  that  the  “limit”  may  be  supposed  to  be

previously defined as : the number (if such there be) b such that | b − a |
                                                                                        v

becomes infinitely small as v increases, it appears better to avoid the word

and say, with Heine, in his exposition of Cantor’s theory, the series (a) is a
                                                                                    v

”number-series,“ or, as Cantor afterwards expressed it, (a) is a “fundamental
                                                                  v

series.”

Let a second series



                                          (1′)









a,, a,, .

R
have a determined limit b′, we find that (1) and (1′) have always one of the

three relations, which exclude one another: (a) a − a′ becomes infinitely
                                                          nn

small as n increases ; (b) from a certain n on, it remains always greater than ∊,

where ε is positive and rational ; (c) from a certain n on, it remains always

less than − ∊. In these cases we say, respectively,



                                b=b′,  b>b′,  or  b<b′.  Similarly, we find that (i) has only one of the three relations with a rational

number a : (a) a − a becomes infinitely small as n increases ; (b) from a
                  n

certain n on, it remains always greater than ∊ ; (c) from a certain n on, it

remains less than–∊. We express this by



                              b = a,  b > a,  or  b < a,



respectively. Then we can prove that b − a becomes infinitely small as n
                                                    n

increases, which, consequently, justifies the name given to b of “limit of the

series (1).”

  Denoting the totality of the numerical magnitudes b by B, we can extend

the elementary operations with the rational numbers to the systems A and B

united. Thus the formulæ



                          b ± b′ = b″,  bb′ = b″,  b/b′ = b″



express that the relations











r )
’ _a u
lim (2,44,
1

o,

a",)
’ ——

(ana n

lim

o
" )=
’ g
(aﬂ/a’l

lim
hold  respectively.  We  have  similar  definitions  when  one  or  two  of  the

numbers belong to A.

The system A has given rise to B ; by the same process B and A united

give rise to a third system C. Let the series



                                          (3)be composed of numbers from A and B (not all from A), and such that | b
                                                                                        n+m

− b |becomes infinitely small as n increases, whatever m is (this condition is
  n

determined  by  the  preceding  definitions),  then  (3)  is  said  to  have  “a

determined  limit c.”  The  definitions  of  equality,  inequality,  and  the

elementary operations with the members of C, or with them and those of B

and A, are analogous to the above definitions. Now, whilst B and A are such

that we can equate each a to a b, but not inversely, we can equate each b to a

c,  and  inversely.  “Although  thus  B  and  C  can,  in  a  certain  measure,  be

regarded as identical, it is essential in the theory here exposed, according to

which  the  numerical  magnitude,  not  having  in  general  any  objectivity  at
    20
first, only appears as element of theorems which have a certain objectivity

(for example, of the theory that the numerical magnitude serves as limit for

the corresponding series), to maintain the abstract distinction between B and

C, and also that the equivalence of b and b′ does not mean their identity, but

only expresses a determined relation between the series to which they refer.“

  After considering further systems C, D, . . ., L of numerical magnitudes

which arise successively, as B did from A and C from A and B, Cantor dealt

with the relations of the numerical magnitudes with the metrical geometry of

the straight line. If the distance from a fixed point O on a straight line has a

rational  ratio  with  the  unit  of  measure,  it  is  expressed  by  a  numerical

magnitude  of  the  system  A  ;  otherwise,  if  the  point  is  known  by  a

construction, we can always imagine a series such as (i) and having with the

distance  in  question  a  relation  such  that  the  points  of  the  straight  line  to

which the distances a, a, . . ., a, . . . refer approach, ad infinitum, as v
                        12v

increases,  the  point  to  be  determined.  We  express  this  by  saying  :  The

distance from the point to be determined to the point O is equal to b, where b

is  the  numerical  magnitude  corresponding  to  the  series  (1).  We  can  then

prove that the conditions of equivalence, majority, and minority of known

distances agree with those of the numerical magnitudes which represent these

distances.

It  now  follows  without  difficulty  that  the  numerical  magnitudes  of  thesystems C, D, . . ., are also capable of determining the known distances. But,

to  complete  the  connexion  we  observe  between  the  systems  of  numerical

magnitudes and the geometry of the straight line, an axiom, must still be

added, which runs : To each numerical magnitude belongs also, reciprocally,

a  determined  point  of  the  straight  line  whose  co-ordinate  is  equal  to  this
                          21
numerical magnitude.  This theorem is called an axiom, for in its nature it

cannot  be  demonstrated  generally.  It  also  serves  to  give  to  the  numerical

magnitudes  a  certain  objectivity,  of  which,  however,  they  are  completely

independent.

We consider, now, the relations which present themselves when we are

given a finite or infinite system of numerical magnitudes, or “points,” as we

may call them by what precedes, with greater convenience.

If we are given a system (P) of points in a finite interval, and understand

by  the  word  “limit-point”  (Grenzpunkt)  a  point  of  the  straight  line  (not

necessarily of P) such that in any interval within which this point is contained

there is an infinity of points of P, we can prove Weierstrass’s theorem that, if

P is infinite, it has at least one limit-point. Every point of P which is not a

limit-point of P was called by Cantor an “isolated” point.

  Every point, then, of the straight line either is or is not a limit-point of P ;

and we have thus defined, at the same time as P, the system of its limit-

points, which may be called the “first derived system” (erste Ableitung) P′. If

P′ is not composed of a finite number of points, we can deduce, by the same

process, a second derived system P″ from P; and, by v analogous operations,
                                              (v)
we arrive at the notion of a vth system P derived from P. If, for example, P

is  composed  of  all  the  points  of  a  line  whose  abscissæ  are  rational  and

comprised between o and 1 (including these limits or not), P′ is composed of

all the points of the interval (o . . . 1), including these limits ; and P′, P″, . . .

do not differ from P. If P is composed of the points whose abscissæ are

respectively



                                  1, 1/2, 1/3, . . ., 1/v . . .,



P′ is composed of the single point o, and derivation does not give rise to any

other point. It may happen—and this case alone interests us here—that, after                (v)
v operations, P is composed of a finite number of points, and consequently

derivation does not give rise to any other system. In this case the primitive P

is said to be of the “vth species (Art),” and thus P′, P″, . . . are of the (v − 1)th,

(v − 2)th, . . . species respectively.

The extended trigonometrical theorem is now : If the equation











O0=1}bp+a,sinx+ob,cosx+ ... +a,sinpx
+6,cosvr+ . ..
is satisfied for all values of x except those which correspond to the points of a

system P of the th species, where v is an integer as great as is pleased, in the
                  v

interval (o . . .2π), then



                                    b = o,  c=b=o.
                                      0vv



  Further  information  as  to  the  continuation  of  these  researches  into

derivatives  of  point-aggregates  was  given  in  the  series  of  papers  which

Cantor  began  in  1879  under  the  title  “  Ueber  unendliche,  lineare

Punktmannichfaltigkeiten.” Although these papers were written subsequently

to  Cantor’s  discovery  (1873)  of  the  conceptions  of  “  enumerability  ”

(Abzählbarkeit) and “power” (Mächatigkeit), and these conceptions formed

the  basis  of  a  classification  of  aggregates  which,  together  with  the

classification by properties of the derivatives to be described directly, was
                                                                                    22
dealt  with  in  these  papers,  yet,  since,  by  Cantor’s  own  indications, the

discovery even of derivatives of definitely infinite order was made in 1871,

we shall now extract from these papers the parts concerning derivatives.

A point-aggregate P is said to be of the “first kind” (Gattung) and th
                                                                                        v
              (v)
“species” if P consists of merely a finite aggregate of points ; it is said to be

of the “second kind” if the series                                                  (v)
                                    P′, P″, . . . P, . . .



is infinite. All the points of P″, P″′, . . . are always points of P′, while a point

of P′ is not necessarily a point of P.

                                                    23
  Some or all of the points of a continuous  interval (α . . . β), the extreme

points being considered as belonging to the interval, may be points of P ; if

none are, P is said to be quite outside (α . . . β). If P is (wholly or in part)

contained in (α . . . β), a remarkable case may present itself : every interval (γ

. . . δ) in it, however small, may contain points of P. Then P is said to be

“everywhere dense” in the interval (α . . . β). For example, (i) the point-

aggregate whose elements are all the points of (α . . . β), (2) that of all the

points  whose  abscissæ  are  rational,  and  (3)  that  of  all  the  points  whose
                                                                m
abscissæ are rational numbers of the form ±(2n + 1)/2, where m and n are

integers, are everywhere dense in (α . . . β). It results from this that, if a point-

aggregate is not everywhere dense in (α . . . β), there must exist an interval (γ

. . . δ) comprised in (α . . . β) and in which there is no point of P. Further, if P

is everywhere dense in (α . . . β), not only is the same true for P′, but P′

consists of all the points of (a . . . β). We might take this property of P′ as the

definition of the expression: “P is everywhere dense in (α . . . β).”

  Such a P is necessarily of the second kind, and hence a point-aggregate of

the first kind is everywhere dense in no interval. As to the question whether

inversely every point-aggregate of the second kind is everywhere dense in

some intervals, Cantor postponed it.

  Point-aggregates  of  the  first  kind  can,  as  we  have  seen,  be  completely

characterized by the notion of derived aggregate, but for those of the second

kind this notion does not suffice, and it is necessary to give it an extension

which presents itself as it were of its own accord when we go deeper into the

question. It may here be remarked that Paul du Bois-Reymond was led by the

study of the general theory of functions to a partly similar development of the

theory of aggregates, and an appreciation of its importance in the theory of

functions. In 1874, he classified functions into divisions, according to the

variations of the functions required in the theory of series and integrals which

serve  for  the  representation  of  “arbitrary”  functions.  He  then  considered

certain distributions of singularities. An infinite aggregate of points which

does not form a continuous line may be either such that in any line, howeversmall,  such  points  occur  (like  the  points  corresponding  to  the  rational

numbers), or in any part, a finite line in which are none of those points exists.

In the latter case, the points are infinitely dense on nearing certain points ;

“for if they are infinite in number, all their distances cannot be finite. But also

not all their distances in an arbitrarily small line can vanish ; for, if so, the

first  case  would  occur.  So  their  distances  can  be  zero  only  in  points,  or,

speaking more correctly, in infinitely small lines.” Here we distinguish : (i)

The points k condense on nearing a finite number of points k; (2) the points
            12

k condense at a finite number of points k, . . . Thus, the roots of o = sin 1/x
23

condense near x = o, those of o = sin 1/sin 1/x near the preceding roots, . . .

The functions with such singularities fill the space between the “common”

functions and the functions with singularities from point to point. Finally, du

Bois-Reymond discussed integration over such a line. In a note of 1879, he

remarked that Dirichlet’s criterion for the integrability of a function is not

sufficient, for we can also distribute intervals in an everywhere dense fashion

(pantachisch) ; that is to say, we can so distribute intervals D on the interval (

−π . . . + π) that in any connected portion, however small, of ( −π . . . + π)

connected intervals D occur. Let, now, φ(x) be o in these D’s and 1 in the

points of ( − π . . . + π) not covered by D’s ; then φ(x) is not integrable,

although  any  interval  inside  (–π  .  .  .  +π)  contains  lines  in  which  it  is

continuous (namely, zero). “To this distribution of intervals we are led when

we  seek  the  points  of  condensation  of  infinite  order  whose  existence  I

announced to Professor Cantor years ago.”

  Consider a series of successive intervals on the line like those bounded by

the points 1, 1/2, 1/3, . . ., 1/v, . . . ; in the interval (1/v . . . 1/(v + 1)) take a

point-aggregate of the first kind and vth species. Now, since each term of the

series of derivatives of P is contained in the preceding ones, and consequently
      (v)(v−1)
each P arises from the preceding P by the falling away (at most) of

points,—that is to say, no new points arise,—then, if P is of the second kind,

P′ will be composed of two point-aggregates, Q and R ; Q consisting of those

points of P which disappear by sufficient progression in the sequence P′, P″, .
    (v)
. ., P, . . ., and R of the points kept in all the terms of this sequence. In the
                                                                                        (∞)
above example, R consists of the single point zero. Cantor denoted R by P,

and called it “ the derived aggregate of P of order ∞ (infinity).” The first
                (∞)(∞+1)
derivative of P was denoted by P, and so on forP+ pl=+3)

.., Pl
        (∞)
Again, P may have a derivative of infinite order which Cantor denoted by
(2∞)
P  ;  and,  continuing  these  conceptual  constructions,  he  arrived  at
                                                            (m∞+n)
derivatives which are quite logically denoted by P, where m and n are

positive integers. But he went still farther, formed the aggregate of common
                                                                                      (∞2)
points of all these derivatives, and got a derivative which he denoted P,

and so on without end. Thus he got derivatives of indices









n
Vooo + 121

n-1

0

4 s gy w s e

0

gy o v

0

9y o s e
                                                                24
  “Here we see a dialectic generation of conceptions,  which always leads

yet farther, and remains both free from every arbitrariness and necessary and

logical in itself.”

We  see  that  point-aggregates  of  the  first  kind  are  characterized  by  the
                (∞)
property that P has no elements, or, in symbols,



                                            (∞)
                                          P ≡ 0,



and also the above example shows that a point-aggregate of the second kind

need not be everywhere dense in any part of an interval.

In  the  first  of  his  papers  of  1882,  Cantor  extended  the  conceptions

“derivative” and “everywhere dense” to. aggregates situated in continua of n

dimensions, and also gave some reflexions on the question as to under what

circumstances  an  (infinite)  aggregate  is well  defined.  These  reflexions,

though  important  for  the  purpose  of  emphasizing  the  legitimacy  of  the
                                (∞)(2∞)
process used for defining P, P, . . ., are more immediately connectedwith the conception of “power,” and will thus be dealt with later. The same

applies  to  the  proof  that  it  is  possible  to  remove  an  everywhere  dense

aggregate from a continuum of two or more dimensions in such a way that

any two points can be connected by continuous circular arcs consisting of the

remaining  points,  so  that  a  continuous  motion  may  be  possible  in  a

discontinuous  space.  To  this  Cantor  added  a  note  stating  that  a  purely

arithmetical theory of magnitudes was now not only known to be possible,

but also already sketched out in its leading features.

We must now turn our attention to the development of the conceptions of

“enumerability” and “power,” which were gradually seen to have a very close

connexion with the theory of derivatives and the theory, arising from this

theory, of the transfinite numbers.

In 1873, Cantor set out from the question whether the linear continuum (of

real numbers) could be put in a one-one correspondence with the aggregate of

whole numbers, and found the rigorous proof that this is not the case. This

proof, together with a proof that the totality of real algebra’ c numbers can be

put  in  such  a  correspondence,  and  hence  that  there  exist  transcendental

numbers in every interval of the number-continuum, was published in 1874.

A real number ω which is a root of a non-identical equation of the form



                                          (4)









where n, a, a, . . ., a are integers, is called a real algebraic number; we may
          01n

suppose n and a positive, a, a, . . ., a to have no common divisor, and (4)
                  001n

to be irreducible. The positive whole number



                          N = n − 1 + | a | + | a | + . . . + | a |
                                            01nmay be called the “height” of ω ; and to each positive integer correspond a

finite number of real algebraic numbers whose height is that integer. Thus we

can arrange the totality of real algebraic numbers in a simply infinite series



                                    ω, ω, . . . , ω, . . .,
                                      12v



by  arranging  the  numbers  corresponding  to  the  height  N  in  order  of

magnitude, and then the various heights in their order of magnitude.

  Suppose, now, that the totality of the real numbers in the interval (α . . . β),

where α < β, could be arranged in the simply infinite series



                                          (5)








ul) uZ)' * '7uw' ¢
Let α′, β′ be the two first numbers of (5), different from one another and from

α, β, and such that α′ < β′ ; similarly, let α″, β″, where α″ < β″, be the first

different numbers in (α′ . . . β′), and so on. The numbers α′, α″, . . . are

members  of  (5)  whose  indices  increase  constantly  ;  and  similarly  for  the

numbers (β′, β″, . . . of decreasing magnitude. Each of the intervals (α . . . β),

(α′ . . . β′), (α″ . . . β″), . . . includes all those which follow. We can then only

conceive two cases : either (a) the number of intervals is finite ;—let the last
    (ν)(ν)
be (α . . . β) ; then, since there is in this interval at most one number of

(5), we can take in it a number η which does not belong to (5) ;—or (b) there

are infinitely many intervals. Then, since α, α′, α″, . . . increase constantly
                                                                      (∞)
without increasing ad infinitum, they have a certain limit α, and similarly
                                                                      (∞)(∞)(∞)
β, β′, β″, . . . decrease constantly towards a certain limit β. If α = β

(which always happens when applying this method to the system (ω)), we
                                      (∞)25(∞)
easily see that the number η = α cannot be in (5). If, on the contrary, α
  (∞)(∞)(∞)
< β, every number η in the interval (α . . . β) or equal to one of its

ends fulfils the condition of not belonging to (;).The property of the totality of real algebraic numbers is that the system (ω)

can be put in a one-to-one or (1, 1)-correspondence with the system (v), and

hence results a new proof of Liouville’s theorem that, in every interval of the

real numbers, there is an infinity of transcendental (non-algebraic) numbers.

This  conception  of  (1,  1)-correspondence  between  aggregates  was  the

fundamental idea in a memoir of 1877, published in 1878, in which some

important theorems of this kind of relation between various aggregates were

given and suggestions made of a classification of aggregates on this basis.

If  two  well-defined  aggregates  can  be  put  into  such  a  (1,  1)-

correspondence (that is to say, if, element to element, they can be made to

correspond completely and uniquely), they are said to be of the same “power”
              26
(Mächtigkeit) or to be “equivalent” (aequivalent). When an aggregate is

finite, the notion of power corresponds to that of number (Anzahl), for two

such aggregates have the same power when, and only when, the number of

their elements is the same.

A part (Bestandteil ; any other aggregate whose elements are also elements

of the original one) of a finite aggregate has always a power less than that of
                                                                                          27
the aggregate itself, but this is not always the case with infinite aggregates,

—for example, the series of positive integers is easily seen to have the same

power as that part of it consisting of the even integers,—and hence, from the

circumstance that an infinite aggregate M is part of N (or is equivalent to a

part of N), we can only conclude that the power of M is less than that of N if

we know that these powers are unequal.

The series of positive integers has, as is easy to show, the smallest infinite

power, but the class of aggregates with this power is extraordinarily rich and

extensive,  comprising,  for  example,  Dedekind’s  “finite  corpora,”  Cantor’s

“systems of points of the vth species,” all n-ple series, and the totality of real

(and also complex) algebraic numbers. Further, we can easily prove that, if M

is an aggregate of this first infinite power, each infinite part of M has the

same power as M, and if M′, M″, . . . is a finite or simply infinite series of

aggregates of the first power, the aggregate resulting from the union of these

aggregates has also the first power.

By the preceding memoir, continuous aggregates have not the first power,

but a greater one ; and Cantor proceeded to prove that the analogue, with

continua, of a multiple series—a continuum of many dimensions—has thesame  power  as  a  continuum  of  one  dimension.  Thus  it  appeared  that  the

assumption  of  Riemann,  Helmholtz,  and  others  that  the  essential

characteristic of an n-ply extended continuous manifold is that its elements

depend on n real, continuous, independent variables (co-ordinates), in such a

way that to each element of the manifold belongs a definite system of values

x, x, . . ., x, and reciprocally to each admissible system x, x, . . ., x
12n12n

belongs  a  certain  element  of  the  manifold,  tacitly  supposes  that  the
                                                                                          28
correspondence of the elements and systems of values is a continuous one.
                                        29
If  we  let  this  supposition  drop,   we  can  prove  that  there  is  a  (1,  1)-

correspondence between the elements of the linear continuum and those of a

n-ply extended continuum.

This evidently follows from the proof of the theorem : Let x, x, . . ., x be
                                                                          12n

real, independent variables, each of which can take any value o ≦ x ≦ 1 ;

then to this system of n variables can be made to correspond a variable t(o ≦

t ≦ 1 ) so that to each determined value of t corresponds one system of

determined values of x, x, . . ., x, and vice versa. To prove this, we set out
                          12n

from the known theorem that every irrational number e between o and 1 can

be represented in one manner by an infinite continued fraction which may be

written :



                                    (α, α, . . ., α, . . .),
                                      12ν



where the α’s are positive integers. There is thus a (1, 1)-correspondence

between the c’s and the various series of α’s. Consider, now, n variables, each

of which can take independently all the irrational values (and each only once)

in the interval (o . . . 1) :el=(al. 1) 01,2 « « «y A1, py » '))
t’z=(a2‘ 1 Q2,2 « « «y A2, py + ')) .oy

en:(an, 1y Qp, 2y « ¢ oy Qu oyy + o+ )y
these n irrational numbers uniquely determine a (n + 1)th irrational number in

(o . . . 1),



                                  d = (β, β, . . . β, . . . ),
                                        12ν



if the relation between α and β :



                                          (6)








30
 is established. Inversely, such a d determines uniquely the series of β’s

and, by (6), the series of the α’s, and hence, again of the e’s. We have only to

show, now, that there can exist a (1, 1)-correspondence between the irrational

numbers o < e < 1 and the real (irrational and rational) numbers o ≦ x ≦ 1.

For this purpose, we remark that all the rational numbers of this interval can

be written in the form of a simply infinite series



                                                          31
                                  φ, φ, . . . , φ, . . . 
                                    12νThen in (o . . . i) we take any infinite series of irrational numbers η, η, . . . ,
                                                                              12
                                  ν
η, . . . (for example, η = √2/2), and let h take any of the values of o . . . 1)
νν

except the φ’s and η’s, so that



                                                              32
                              x ≡ {h, η , φ}, e ≡ {h, η},
                                        ννν



and we can also write the last formula :



                                    e ≡ {h, η, η}.
                                                2ν-12ν



Now, if we write a ∾ b for “ the aggregate of the a’s is equivalent to that of

the b’s,” and notice that a ∾ a, a ∾ b and b ∾ c imply a ∾ c, and that two

aggregates of equivalent aggregates of elements, where the elements of each

latter aggregate have, two by two, no common element, are equivalent, we

remark that



                                h ∾ h, η ∾ η, φ ∾ φ,
                                          ν2ν−1ν2ν



and



                                            x ∾ e.



A generalization of the above theorem to the case of x,x, . . ., x, . . .
                                                                      12ν

being a simply infinite series (and thus that the continuum may be of an

infinity  of  dimensions  while  remaining  of  the  same  power  as  the  linear

continuum) results from the observation that, between the double series {α,
                                                                                          μ

ν}, where



                  e = (α, α, . . ., α, . . .) for μ = 1, 2, . . . ∞
                    μμ, 1μ, 2μ, ν                                                                                      33
and the simple series {β}, a (1, 1)-correspondence can be established by
                            λ

putting



                            λ = μ + (μ + ν − 1)(μ + ν − 2)/2,



and the function on the right has the remarkable property of representing all

the  positive  integers,  and  each  of  them  once  only,  when μ  and ν

independently take all positive integer values.

  “And now that we have proved,” concluded Cantor, “ for a very rich and

extensive field of manifolds, the property of being capable of correspondence

with the points of a continuous straight line or with a part of it (a manifold of

points contained in it), the question arises . . .: Into how many and what

classes (if we say that manifolds of the same or different power are grouped

in the same or different classes respectively) do linear manifolds fall ? By a

process of induction, into the further description of which we will not enter

here, we are led to the theorem that the number of classes is two : the one

containing all manifolds susceptible of being brought to the form : functio

ipsius ν,  where ν  can  receive  all  positive  integral  values  ;  and  the  other

containing all manifolds reducible to the form functio ipsius x, where x can

take all the real values in the interval (o . . . 1).”

In  the  paper  of  1879  already  referred  to,  Cantor  considered  the
                                34
classification  of  aggregates  both  according  to  the  properties  of  their

derivatives and according to their powers. After some repetitions, a rather

simpler proof of the theorem that the continuum is not of the first power was

given. But, though no essentially new results on power were published until

late in 1882, we must refer to the discussion (1882) of what is meant by a

“well-defined ” aggregate.

                                35
The conception of power  which contains, as a particular case, the notion

of whole number may, said Cantor, be considered as an attribute of every

“well-defined”  aggregate,  whatever  conceivable  nature  its  elements  may

have. “ An aggregate of elements belonging to any sphere of thought is said

to be ‘well defined’ when, in consequence of its definition and of the logical

principle  of  the  excluded  middle,  it  must  be  considered  as  intrinsically

determined  whether  any  object  belonging  to  this  sphere  belongs  to  theaggregate  or  not,  and,  secondly,  whether  two  objects  belonging  to  the

aggregate are equal or not, in spite of formal differences in the manner in

which they are given. In fact, we cannot, in general, effect in a sure and

precise manner these determinations with the means at our disposal ; but here

it  is  only  a  question  of intrinsic  determination,  from  which  an  actual  or

extrinsic determination is to be developed by perfecting the auxiliary means.“

Thus, we can, without any doubt, conceive it to be intrinsically determined

whether a number chosen at will is algebraic or not ; and yet it was only

proved in 1874 that e is transcendental, and the problem with regard to π was
                                          36
unsolved when Cantor wrote in 1882.

In  this  paper  was  first  used  the  word  “enumerable  ”  to  describe  an

aggregate which could be put in a (1, 1)-correspondence with the aggregate

of the positive integers and is consequently of the first (infinite) power; and

here  also  was  the  important  theorem  :  In  a n-dimensional  space  (A)  are
                                                                                    37
defined  an  infinity  of  (arbitrarily  small)  continua  of n  dimensions   (a)

separated  from  one  another  and  most  meeting  at  their  boundaries  ;  the

aggregate of the a’s is enumerable.

For refer A by means of reciprocal radii vectores to an n-ply extended

figure B within a (n + 1)-dimensional infinite space A′, and let the points of B

have the constant distance 1 from a fixed point of A′. To every a corresponds

a n-dimensional  part b  of  B  with  a  definite  content,  and  the b’s  are

enumerable, for the number of b’s greater in content than an arbitrarily small
                                                    n3839
number γ is finite, for their sum is less than 2π  (the content of B). 

  Finally, Cantor made the interesting remark that, if we remove from an n-

dimensional continuum any enumerable and everywhere-dense aggregate, the

remainder (), if , does not cease to be continuously connected, in the

 
sense that any two points N, N′ of  can be connected by a continuous line

composed of circular arcs all of whose points belong to .


VI

An application of Cantor’s conception of enumerability was given by a

simpler method of condensation of singularities, the construction of functions

having a given singularity, such as a discontinuity, at an enumerable and

everywhere-dense aggregate in a given real interval. This was suggested by

Weierstrass,  and  published  by  Cantor,  with  Weierstrass’s  examples,  in
    40
1882. The method may be thus indicated : Let φ(x) be a given function withthe single singularity x=o, and (ω) any enumerable aggregate ; put
                                      ν











fix)= Zicws(x s
where the c’s are so chosen that the series and those derived from it in the
            ν

particular cases treated converge unconditionally and uniformly. Then f(x)

has at all points x = ω the same kind of singularity as φ(x) at x=o, and at
                          μ

other points behaves, in general, regularly. The singularity at x = ω is due
                                                                                  μ

exclusively to the one term of the series in which ν = μ ; the aggregate (ω)
                                                                                          ν

may be any enumerable aggregate and not only, as in Hankel’s method, the

aggregate  of  the  rational  numbers,  and  the  superfluous  and  complicating

oscillations produced by the occurrence of the sine in Hankel’s functions is

avoided.

The  fourth  (1882)  of  Cantor’s  papers  “  Ueber  unendliche,  lineare

Punktmannichfaltigkeiten  ”  contained  six  theorems  on  enumerable  point-

aggregates. If an aggregate Q (in a continuum of n dimensions) is such that
                                        41
none of its points is a limit-point, it is said to be “ isolated.” Then, round

every point of Q a sphere can be drawn which contains no other point of Q,

and hence, by the above theorem on the enumerability of the aggregate of

these spheres, is enumerable.

  Secondly, if P′ is enumerable, P is. For let









D(P, P)=R, P-R=Q;
42
 then Q is isolated and therefore enumerable, and R is also enumerable,

since R is contained in P′ ; so P is enumerable.                                                (ν)(α)
The next three theorems state that, if P, or P. where α is any one of the

“definitely  defined  symbols  of  infinity  (bestimmt  definirte

Unendlichkeitssymbole ),” is enumerable, then P is.

If the aggregates P, P, . . . have, two by two, no common point, for the
                        12

aggregate P formed by the union of these (the “ Vereinigungsmenge”) Cantor

now used the notation



                                      P ≡ P + P + . . .
                                            12



Now, we have the following identity



                                                          (ν−1)(ν)(ν)
                P′ ≡ (P′ − P″) + (P″ − P‴) + . . . +(P − P) + P ;



and thus, since



                                                        (ν−1)(ν)
                            P′ − P″, P″ − P‴, . . . , P − P



                                                    (ν)
are all isolated and therefore enumerable, if P is enumerable, then P′ is also.

                          (∞)
Now, suppose that P exists ; then, if any particular point of P′ does not
            (∞)(ν)
belong to P, there is a first one among the derivatives of finite order, P,
                                                        (ν−1)
to which it does not belong, and consequently P contains it as an isolated

point. Thus we can write











P'=(P' =P+ (P"=P")+ ... +(PC-D-Pp0)
+ ... +P=;
and consequently, since an enumerable aggregate of enumerable aggregates is                                                                      (∞)
an enumerable aggregate of the elements of the latter, and P is enumerable,
                                                              (α)
then P′ is also. This can evidently be extended to P, if it exists, provided
                                                            (α)
that the aggregate of all the derivatives from P′ to P is enumerable.

The considerations which arise from the last observation appear to me to

have  constituted  the  final  reason  for  considering  these  definitely  infinite
                        43
indices independently on account of their connexion with the conception of

“power,” which Cantor had always regarded as the most fundamental one in

the whole theory of aggregates. The series of the indices found, namely, is

such  that,  up  to  any  point  (infinity  or  beyond),  the  aggregate  of  them  is

always enumerable, and yet a process exactly analogous to that used in the

proof  that  the  continuum  is  not  enumerable  leads  to  the  result  that  the

aggregate of all the indices such that, if α is any index, the aggregate of all

the indices preceding α is enumerable, is not enumerable, but is, just as the

power of the series of positive integers is the next higher one to all finite

ones, the next greater infinite power to the first. And we can again imagine a

new index which is the first after all those defined, just as after all the finite

ones. We shall see these thoughts published by Cantor at the end of 1882.

It remains to mention the sixth theorem, in which Cantor proved that, if P′

is  enumerable,  P  has  the  property,  which  is  essential  in  the  theory  of

integration, of being “ discrete,” as Harnack called it, “ integrable,” as P. du

Bois-Reymond did, “unextended,” or, as it is now generally called, “content-

less.”


VII

We have thus seen the importance of Cantor’s “definitely defined symbols
                                              (α)
of  infinity”  in  the  theorem  that  if  P  vanishes,  P′,  and  therefore  P,  is

enumerable. This theorem may, as we can easily see by what precedes, be
                                                                                        (α)
inverted as follows : If P′ is enumerable, there is an index α such that P

vanishes. By defining these indices in an independent manner as real, arid in

general transfinite, integers, Cantor was enabled to form a conception of the
        44
enumeral (Anzahl) of certain infinite series, and such series gave a means of

defining  a  series  of  ascending  infinite  “powers.”  The  conceptions  of  “

enumeral  ”  and  “  power  coincided  in  the  case  of  finite  aggregates,  but

diverged  in  the  case  of  infinite  aggregates  ;  but  this  extension  of  the

conception of enumeral served, in the way just mentioned, to develop and

make precise the conception of power used often already.  Thus, from the new point of view gained, we get new insight into the

theory of finite number ; as Cantor put it : “ The conception of number which,

in  finito,  has  only  the  background  of  enumeral,  splits,  in  a  manner  of

speaking, when we raise ourselves to the infinite, into the two conceptions of

power . . . and enumeral . . . ; and, when I again descend to the finite, I see

just as clearly and beautifully how these two conceptions again unite to form

that of the finite integer.”

The significance of this distinction for the theory of all (finite and infinite)
                                              45
arithmetic appears in Cantor’s own work and, above all, in the later work of

Russell.

  Without  this  extension  of  the  conception  of  number  to  the  definitely

infinite numbers, said Cantor, “ it would hardly be possible for me to make

without constraint the least step forwards in the theory of aggregates,” and,

although  “  I  was  led  to  them  [these  numbers]  many  years  ago,  without

arriving at a clear consciousness that I possessed in them concrete numbers of

real  significance,”  yet  “  I  was  logically  forced,  almost  against  my  will,

because in opposition to traditions which had become valued by me in the

course of scientific researches extending over many years, to the thought of

considering the infinitely great, not merely in the form of the unlimitedly

increasing,  and  in  the  form,  closely  connected  with  this,  of  convergent

infinite series, but also to fix it mathematically by numbers in the definite

form of a completed infinite.’ I do not believe, then, that any reasons can be

urged against it which I am unable to combat.”

The indices of the series of the derivatives can be conceived as the series of

finite numbers 1, 2, . . . . . . ., followed by a series of transfinite numbers of

which the first had been denoted by the symbol “∞.” Thus, although there is

no greatest finite number, or, in other words, the supposition that there is a

greatest  finite  number  leads  to  contradiction,  there  is  no  contradiction

involved in postulating a new, non-finite, number which is to be the first after
                                                                        46
all the finite numbers. This is the method adopted by Cantor to define his

numbers independently of the theory of derivatives ; we shall see how Cantor

met any possible objections to this system of postulation.

Let  us  now  briefly  consider  again  the  meaning  of  the  word
                              47
“Mannickfaltigkeitslehre,”  which  is  usually  translated  as  “theory  of

aggregates.” In a note to the Grudlagen, Cantor remarked that he meant bythis word “ doctrine embracing very much, which hitherto I have attempted to

develop only in the special form of an arithmetical or geometrical theory of

aggregates (Mengenlehre). By a manifold or aggregate I understand generally

any multiplicity which can be thought of as one (jedes Viele, welches sich als

Eines denken lasst), that is to say, any totality of definite elements which can

be bound up into a whole by means of a law.” This character of unity was

repeatedly emphasized by Cantor, as we shall see later.

The above quotations about the slow and sure way in which the transfinite

numbers  forced  themselves  on  the  mind  of  Cantor  and  about  Cantor’s

philosophical and mathematical traditions are taken from the Grundlagen.

Both here and in Cantor’s later works we constantly come across discussions

of opinions on infinity held by mathematicians and philosophers of all times,

and besides such names as Aristotle, Descartes, Spinoza, Hobbes, Berkeley,

Locke,  Leibniz,  Bolzano,  and  many  others,  we  find  evidence  of  deep

erudition  and  painstaking  search  after  new  views  on  infinity  to  analyze.

Cantor has devoted many pages to the Schoolmen and the Fathers of the

Church.

The Grundlagen begins by drawing a distinction between two meanings

which  the  word  “  infinity  ”  may  have  in  mathematics.  The  mathematical

infinite, says Cantor, appears in two forms : Firstly, as an improper infinite

  (Uneigentlich-Unendliches),  a  magnitude  which  either  increases  above  all

limits or decreases to an arbitrary smallness, but always remains finite ; so

that  it  may  be  called  a variable finite.  Secondly,  as  a  definite,  a proper

infinite  (Eigentlich-Unendliches),  represented  by  certain  conceptions  in

geometry, and, in the theory of functions, by the point infinity of the complex

plane. In the last case we have a single, definite point, and the behaviour of

(analytic) functions about this point is examined in exactly the same way as it
                            48
is about any other point. Cantor’s infinite real integers are also properly

infinite, and, to emphasize this, the old symbol “ ∞ ,” which was and is used

also for the improper infinite, was here replaced by “ω.”

To define his new numbers, Cantor employed the following considerations.

The series of the real positive integers,



                                          (I)I! 2’ 3) e o oy V,
arises from the repeated positing and uniting of units which are presupposed

and regarded as equal ; the number v is the expression both for a definite

finite enumeral of such successive positings and for the uniting of the posited

units into a whole. Thus the formation of the finite real integers rests on the

principle of the addition of a unit to a number which has already been formed

;  Cantor  called  this  moment  the first  principle  of  generation

(Erzeugungsprincip ). The enumeral of the number of the class (I) so formed

is infinite, and there is no greatest among them. Thus, although it would be

contradictory to speak of a greatest number of the class (I), there is, on the

other hand, nothing objectionable in imagining a new number, ω, which is to

express that the whole collection (I) is given by its law in its natural order of

succession  (in  the  same  way  as  v  is  the  expression  that  a  certain  finite
                                                49
enumeral of units is united to a whole). By allowing further positings of

unity to follow the positing of the number ω, we obtain with the help of the

first principle of generation the further numbers :



                            ω + 1,  ω + 2, . . .,  ω + v, . . .



  Since again here we come to no greatest number, we imagine a new one,

which we may call 2ω, and which is to be the first which follows all the

numbers v and ω + v hitherto formed. Applying the first principle repeatedly

to the number 2ω, we come to the numbers :



                          2ω + 1,  2ω + 2, . . .,  2ω + v, . . .



The  logical  function  which  has  given  us  the  numbers ω  and  2ω  is

obviously  different  from  the  first  principle  ;  Cantor  called  it  the second

principle of generation of real integers, and defined it more closely as follows

: If there is defined any definite succession of real integers, of which there is

no greatest, on the basis of this second principle a new number is created,which is defined as the next greater number to them all.

By the combined application of both principles we get, successively, the

numbers :



                3ω, 3ω + 1, . . ., 3ω + v, . . .,. . ., μω, . . ., μω + v, . . .



and, since no number μω + v is greatest, we create a new next number to all
                                      2
these, which may be denoted by ω. To this follow, in succession, numbers:



                                            2
                                          λω+μω+v,



and further, we come to numbers of the form









Vs
1w+
+v,.-

_1+ .
+ v 0*

vt
and  the  second  principle  then  requires  a  new  number,  which  may

conveniently be denoted by



                                                ω
                                              ω.



And so on indefinitely.

Now, it is seen without difficulty that the aggregate of all the numbers

preceding any of the infinite numbers and hitherto defined is of the power of
                                                                        ω
the first number-class (I). Thus, all the numbers preceding ω are contained

in the formula :vow* +ret 14 . it ot
where μ, v, v,  .  .  ., v  have  to  take  all  finite,  positive,  integral  values
            o1μ

including zero and excluding the combination v = v = . . . = v = o. As is
                                                        σ1μ

well known, this aggregate can be brought into the form of a simply infinite

series, and has, therefore, the power of (I). Since, further, every sequence

(itself of the first power) of aggregates, each of which has the first power,

gives  an  aggregate  of  the  first  power,  it  is  clear  that  we  obtain,  by  the

continuation  of  our  sequence  in  the  above  way,  only  such  numbers  with

which this condition is fulfilled.

Cantor defined the totality of all the numbers α formed by the help of the

two principles



                                          (II)












) & 0 1 L _ﬂ My
“
w (‘)+I . +V 1
Vo +V(l) +
) ’

e
M o ey 10y
o o0y WY
such that all the numbers, from I on, preceding α form an aggregate of the

power of the first number-class (I), as the “second number-class (II).” The

power of (II) is different from that of (I), and is, indeed, the next higher

power, so that no other power lies between them. Accordingly, the second

principle demands the creation of a new number (Ω) which follows all the
                                                                                    50
numbers of (II) and is the first of the third number-class (III), and so on.

  Thus, in spite of first appearances, a certain completion can be given to the

successive formation of the numbers of (II) which is similar to that limitation

present  with  (I).  There  we  only  used  the  first  principle,  and  so  it  wasimpossible to emerge from the series (I) ; but the second principle must lead

not only over (II), but show itself indeed as a means, which, in combination

with the first principle, gives the capacity to break through every limit in the

formation  of  real  integers.  The  above-mentioned  requirement,  that  all  the

numbers to be next formed should be such that the aggregate of numbers

preceding each one should be of a certain power, was called by Cantor the
                                                                                    51
third or limitation-principle (Hemmungs- oder Beschränkungsprincip) and

which acts in such a manner that the class (II) defined with its aid can be

shown to have a higher power than (I) and indeed the next higher power to it.

In fact, the two first principles together define an absolutely infinite sequence

of integers, while the third principle lays successively certain limits on this

process,  so  that  we  obtain  natural  segments  (Abschnitte),  called  number-

classes, in this sequence.

  Cantor’s older (1873, 1878) conception of the “power” of an aggregate

was, by this, developed and given precision. With finite aggregates the power

coincides with the enumeral of the elements, for such aggregates have the

same enumeral of elements in every order. With infinite aggregates, on the

other hand, the transfinite numbers afford a means of defining the enumeral

of  an  aggregate,  if  it  be  “  well  ordered,”  and  the  enumeral  of  such  an

aggregate  of  given  power  varies,  in  general,  with  the  order  given  to  the

elements. The smallest infinite power is evidently that of (I), and, now for the

first  time,  the  successive  higher  powers  also  receive  natural  and  simple

definitions ; in fact, the power of the γth number class is the γth.

                                        52
By  a  “well-ordered”  aggregate,  Cantor  under-stood  any  well-defined

aggregate whose elements have a given definite succession such that there is

a first element, a definite element follows every one (if it is not the last), and

to any finite or infinite aggregate a definite element belongs which is the next

following element in the succession to them all (unless there are no following

elements in the succession). Two well-ordered aggregates are, now, of the

same enumeral (with reference to the orders of succession of their elements

previously  given  for  them)  if  a  one-to-one  correspondence  is  possible

between them such that, if E and F are any two different elements of the one,

and  E′  and  F′  the  corresponding  elements  (consequently  different)  of  the

other, if E precedes or follows F, then E′ respectively precedes or follows F′.

This ordinal correspondence is evidently quite determinate, if it is possible at

all,  and  since  there  is,  in  the  extended  number-series,  one  and  only  onenumber  α  such  that  its  preceding  numbers  (from  I  on)  in  the  natural

succession have the same enumeral, we must put α for the enumeral of both

well-ordered aggregates, if α is infinite, or α − I if α is finite.

The  essential  difference  between  finite  and  infinite  aggregates  is,  now,

seen  to  be  that  a  finite  aggregate  has  the  same  enumeral  whatever  the

succession of the elements may be, but an infinite aggregate has, in general,

different enumerals under these circumstances. However, there is a certain

connexion between enumeral and power—an attribute of the aggregate which

is independent of the order of the elements. Thus, the enumeral of any well-

ordered aggregate of the first power is a definite number of the second class,

and every aggregate of the first power can always be put in such an order that

its enumeral is any prescribed number of the second class. Cantor expressed

this by extending the meaning of the word “enumerable” and saying: Every

aggregate of the power of the first class is enumerable by numbers of the

second class and only by these, and the aggregate can always be so ordered

that it is enumerated by any prescribed number of the second class ; and

analogously for the higher classes.

                                                          53
  From  his  above  remarks  on  the  “absolute”   infinity  of  the  series  of

ordinal numbers and that of powers, it was to be expected that Cantor would

derive the idea that any aggregate could be arranged in a well-ordered series,
                                                                        54
and this he stated with a promise to return to the subject later.

The  addition  and  multiplication  of  the  transfinite  (including  the  finite)

numbers  was  thus  defined  by  Cantor.  Let  M  and  M  be  well-ordered
                                                                    1

aggregates of enumerals α and β, the aggregate which arises when first M is

posited and then M, following it, and the two are united is denoted M + M
                      11

and its enumeral is defined to be α + β. Evidently, if α and β are not both

finite, α + β is, in general, different from β + α. It is easy to extend the

concept of sum to a finite or transfinite aggregate of summands in a definite

order, and the associative law remains valid. Thus, in particular,



                                  α + (β+γ) = (α+β) + γ.



If we take a succession (of enumeral β) of equal and similarly ordered

aggregates,  of  which  each  is  of  enumeral α,  we  get  a  new  well-orderedaggregate, whose enumeral is defined to be the product βα, where β is the

multiplier and α the multiplicand. Here also βα is, in general, different from

aβ ; but we have, in general,



                                          α(βγ)=(αβ)γ.



Cantor also promised an investigation of the “ prime number-property ” of
                                      55
some of the transfinite numbers  a proof of the non-existence of infinitely
                56
small numbers, and a proof that his previous theorem on a point-aggregate
                                                            (α)
P in an n-dimensional domain that, if the derivate P, where α is any integer

of (I) or (II), vanishes, P′, and hence P, is of the first power, can be thus

inverted : If P is such a point-aggregate that P′ is of the first power, there is an
                                        (α)
integer α of (I) or (II) such that P=0, and there is a smallest of such α’s.

This last theorem shows the importance of the transfinite numbers in the

theory of point-aggregates.

  Cantor’s  proof  that  the  power  of  (II)  is  different  from  that  of  (I)  is

analogous to his proof of the non-enumerability of the continuum. Suppose

that we could put (II) in the form of a simple series :



                                          (7)








Agy A2y « « oy Qyy « « oy
we shall define a number which has the properties both of belonging to (II)

and of not being a member of the series (7) ; and, since these properties are

contradictory of one another if the hypothesis be granted, we must conclude

that (II) cannot be put in the form (7), and therefore has not the power of (I).

Let α be the first number of (I) which is greater than α, α the first greater
    κ21κ3

than α, and so on ; so that we have
      κ2                                      I < κ < κ < . . .
                                            23



and



                                    α < α < α < . . .,
                                      1κ2κ3



and



                                    α < α if v < κλ.
                                      vκλ



Now it may happen that, from a certain number α on, all following it in
                                                              κρ

the series (7) are smaller than it ; then it is evidently the greatest. If, on the

other hand, there is no such greatest number, imagine the series of integers

from I on and smaller than α, add to it the series of integers ≧α and > ,
 
                                  11

then the series of integers ≧ and < , and so on ; we thus get a definite

part  of  successive  numbers  of  (I)  and  (II)  which  is  evidently  of  the  first

power, and consequently, by the definition of (II), there is a least number β of

(II) which is greater than all of these numbers. Therefore  and thus also

β > α, and also every number β′ < β is surpassed in magnitude by certain
    v

numbers 

If there is a greatest , then the number γ + I is a member of (II) and not

Uu, =Y
of (7) ; and if there is not a greatest, the number β is a member of (II) and not

of (7).

  Further, the power of (II) is the next greater to that of (I), so that no other

powers lie between them, for any aggregate of numbers of (I) and (II) is of

the power of (I) or (II). In fact, this aggregate Z, when arranged in order of
                                                        1

magnitude, is well-ordered, and may be represented by



                              (αβ), (β=ω, ω+ I, . . . α, . . . )where we always have β < Ω, where Ω is the first number of (III) ; and

consequently (α) is either finite or of the power of (I) or of that of (II),
                  β

quartum non datur. From this results the theorem : If N is any well-defined

aggregate of the second power, M′ is a part of M and M″ is a part of M′, and

we know that M″ is of the same power as M, then M′ is of the same power as

M, and therefore as M″ ; and Cantor remarked that this theorem is generally
                                        57
valid, and promised to return to it. 

  Though the commutative law does not, in general, hold with the transfinite

numbers, the associative law does, but the distributive law is only generally

valid in the form :



                                      (α + β)γ = αγ+βγ,



where α+β, α, and β are multipliers, “as we immediately recognize by inner

intuition.”

The subtraction, division, prime numbers, and addition and multiplication

of numbers which can be put in the form of a rational and integral function of

ω of the transfinite numbers were then dealt with much in the same way as in

the  memoir  of  1897  translated  below.  In  the  later  memoir  the  subject  is

treated far more completely, and was drawn up with far more attention to

logical form than was the Grundlagen.

An interesting part of the Grundlagen is the discussion of the conditions

under which we are to regard the introduction into mathematics of a new

conception, such as ω, as justified. The result of this discussion was already

indicated by the way in which Cantor defined his new numbers : “ We may

regard the whole numbers as ‘actual’ in so far as they, on the ground of

definitions,  take  a  perfectly  determined  place  in  our  understanding,  are

clearly  distinguished  from  all  other  constituents  of  our  thought,  stand  in

definite relations to them, and thus modify, in a definite way, the substance of

our mind.” We may ascribe “ actuality ” to them “ in so far as they must be

held to be an expression or an image (Abbild) of processes and relations in

the outer world, as distinguished from the intellect.” Cantor’s position was,

now, that while there is no doubt that the first kind of reality always implies
            58
the second, the proof of this is often a most difficult metaphysical problem ;but, in pure mathematics, we need only consider the first kind of reality, and

consequently “mathematics is, in its development, quite free, and only subject

to  the  self-evident  condition  that  its  conceptions  are  both  free  from

contradiction  in  themselves  and  stand  in  fixed  relations,  arranged  by

definitions, to previously formed and tested conceptions. In particular, in the

introduction of new numbers, it is only obligatory to give such definitions of

them  as  will  afford  them  such  a  definiteness,  and,  under  certain

circumstances, such a relation to the older numbers, as permits them to be

distinguished from one another in given cases. As soon as a number satisfies

all these conditions, it can and must be considered as existent and real in

mathematics. In this I see the grounds on which we must regard the rational,

irrational, and complex numbers as just as existent as the positive integers.”

  There  is  no  danger  to  be  feared  for  science  from  this  freedom  in  the

formation of numbers, for, on the one hand, the conditions referred to under

which this freedom can alone be exercised are such that they leave only a

very  small  opportunity  for  arbitrariness  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  every

mathematical  conception  has  in  itself  the  necessary  corrective,—if  it  is

unfruitful or inconvenient, it shows this very soon by its unusability, and is

then abandoned.

To support the idea that conceptions in pure mathematics are free, and not

subject to any metaphysical control, Cantor quoted the names of, and the

branches of mathematics founded by, some of the greatest mathematicians of

the nineteenth century, among which an especially instructive example in

Kummer’s introduction of his “ideal” . numbers into the theory of numbers.

But  “applied”  mathematics,  such  as  analytical  mechanics  and  physics,  is

metaphysical both in its foundations and in its ends. “ If it seeks to free itself
                                                                  59
of this, as was proposed lately by a celebrated physicist, it degenerates into

a  ‘describing  of  nature,’  which  must  lack  both  the  fresh  breeze  of  free

mathematical thought and the power of explanation and grounding of natural

appearances.”

The note of Cantor’s on the process followed in the correct formation of

conceptions is interesting. In his judgment, this process is everywhere the

same ; we posit a thing without properties, which is at first nothing else than

a  name  or  a  sign  A,  and  give  it  in  order  different,  even  infinitely  many,

predicates, whose meaning for ideas already present is known, and which

may not contradict one another. By this the relations of A to the conceptionalready present, and in particular to the allied ones, are determined ; when we

have completed this, all the conditions for the awakening of the conception

A, which slumbers in us, are present, and it enters completed into “existence

in the first sense; to prove its ” existence in the second sense is then a matter

of metaphysics.

This  seems  to  support  the  process  by  which  Heine,  in  a  paper  partly

inspired by his discussions with Cantor, defined the real numbers as signs, to

which subsequently various properties were given. But Cantor himself, as we

shall see later, afterwards pointed out emphatically the mistake into which

Kronecker and von Helmholtz fell when they started in their expositions of

the  number-concept  with  the  last  and  most  unessential  thing—the  ordinal

words or signs—in the scientific theory of number ; so that we must, I think,

regard this note of Cantor’s as an indication that, at this time (1882), he was a

supporter of the formalist theory of number,—or at least of rational and real

non-integral numbers.

In fact, Cantor’s notions as to what is meant by “existence” in mathematics

—notions which are intimately connected with his introduction of irrational

and transfinite numbers—were in substance identical with those of Hankel

(1867) on “ possible or impossible numbers.” Hankel was a formalist, though

not a consistent one, and his theory was criticized with great acuteness by

Frege in 1884. But these criticisms mark the beginning of the logical theory

of mathematics, Cantor’s earlier work belonging to the formal stage, and his

later work to what may be called the psyclaological stage.

  Finally, Cantor gave a discussion and exact determination of the meaning

of the conception of “continuum.” After briefly referring to the discussions of

this concept due to Leucippus, Democritus, Aristotle, Epicurus, Lucretius,

and  Thomas  Aquinas,  and  emphasizing  that  we  cannot  begin,  in  this

determination,  with  the  conception  of  time  or  that  of  space,  for  these

conceptions  can  only  be  clearly  explained  by  means  of  a  continuity-

conception which must, of course, be independent of them, he started from

the n-dimensional plane arithmetical space G, that is to say, the totality of
                                                      n

systems of values



                                        (x, x,. . . x),
                                          12nin which every x can receive any real value from − ∞ to + ∞ independently of

the others. Every such system is called an “arithmetical point‟ of G, the “
                                                                                  n

distance ‟of two such points is defined by the expression










+ A/{(xll_xl)z-*-(x’z_x:)z_" o« o +(zln_xn)s})
and by an “ arithmetical point-aggregate P contained in G  is  meant  any
                                                                        n

aggregate of points G selected out of it by a law. Thus the investigation
                          n

comes to the establishment of a sharp and as general as possible a definition

which should allow us to decide when P is to be called a “ continuum.”

If the first derivative P′ is of the power of (I), there is a first number a of (I)
                    (a)
or (II) for which P vanishes ; but if P′ is not of the power of (I), P′ can be

always, and in only one way, divided into two aggregates R and S, where R is

“ reducible,‟ —that is to say, such that there is a first number γ of (I) or (II)

such that



                                            (γ)
                                          R≡0,—



and S is such that derivation does not alter it. Then



                                            S ≡ S′



and consequently also



                                                  (γ)
                                          S ≡ S,



and S is said to be “perfect.” No aggregate can be both reducible and perfect,“ but, on the other hand, irreducible, is not so much as perfect, nor imperfect

exactly the same as reducible, as we easily see with some attention.”

  Perfect aggregates are by no means always everywhere dense; an example

of such an aggregate which is everywhere dense in no interval was given by

Cantor. Thus such aggregates are not fitted for the complete definition of a

continuum, although we must grant that the continuum must be perfect. The

other predicate is that the aggregate must be connected (zusammenhängend),

that is to say, if t and t′ are any two of its points and e a given arbitrarily small

positive number, a finite number of points t, t. . . ., t of P exist such that the
                                                  12v

distances tt, tt, . . ., tt′ are all less than ε.
            112v

“  All  the  geometric  point-continua  known  to  us  are,  as  is  easy  to  see,

connected  ;  and  I  believe,  now,  that  I  recognize  in  these  two  predicates

‘perfect’  and  ‘connected’  the  necessary  and  sufficient  characteristics  of  a

point-continuum.‟

  Bolzano’s (1851) definition of a continuum is certainly not correct, for it

expresses  only one  property  of  a  continuum,  which  is  also  possessed  by

aggregates which arise from G when any isolated aggregate is removed from
                                  n
                                                                                          60
it, and also in those consisting of many separated continua. Also Dedekind 

appeared  to  Cantor  only  to  emphasize another  property  of  a  continuum,

namely, that which it has in common with all other perfect aggregates.

We  will  pass  over  the  development  of  the  theory  of  point-aggregates

subsequently to 1882—Bendixson’s and Cantor’s researches on the power of

perfect aggregates, Cantor’s theory of “ adherences ” and “coherences,” the

investigations of Cantor, Stolz, Harnack, Jordan, Borel, and others on the “

content ”of aggregates, and the applications of the theory of point-aggregates

to the theory of functions made by Jordan, Brodén, Osgood, Baire, Arzelà,

Schoenflies,  and  many  others,—and  will  now  trace  the  development,  in

Cantor’s hands, of the theory of the transfinite cardinal and ordinal numbers

from 1883 to 1895.


VIII

An  account  of  the  development  that  the  theory  of  transfinite  numbers

underwent in Cantor’s mind from 1883 to 1890 is described in his articles

published  in  the Zeitschrift  für  Philosophie  und  philosophische  Kritik  for

1887 and 1888, and collected and published in 1890 under the title Zur Lehrevom Transfiniten. A great part of this little book is taken up with detailed

discussions about philosophers’ denials of the possibility of infinite numbers,
                                                                                      61
extracts from letters to and from philosophers and theologians, and so on. “

All so-called proofs of the impossibility of actually infinite numbers,” said

Cantor, “ are, as may be shown in every particular case and also on general

grounds, false in that they begin by attributing to the numbers in question all

the properties of finite numbers, whereas the infinite numbers, if they are to

be thinkable in any form, must constitute quite a new kind of number as

opposed to the finite numbers, and the nature of this new kind of number is

dependent on the nature of things and is an object of investigation, but not of

our arbitrariness or our prejudice. ”

In 1883 Cantor had begun to lecture on his view of whole numbers and

types of order as general concepts or universals (unum versus alia) which

relate to aggregates and arise from these aggregates when we abstract from

the  nature  of  the  elements.  “  Every  aggregate  of  distinct  things  can  be

regarded  as  a  unitary  thing  in  which  the  things  first  mentioned  are

constitutive elements. If we abstract both from the nature of the elements and

from  the  order  in  which  they  are  given,  we  get  the  ‘cardinal  number’  or

‘power’ of the aggregate, a general concept in which the elements, as so-

called units, have so grown organically into one another to make a unitary

whole that no one of them ranks above the others. Hence results that two

different aggregates have the same cardinal number when and only when they

are what I call ‘equivalent ’ to one another, and there is no contradiction

when, as often happens with infinite aggregates, two aggregates of which one

is  a  part  of  the  other  have  the  same  cardinal  number.  I  regard  the  non-

recognition of this fact as the principal obstacle to the introduction of infinite

numbers. If the act of abstraction referred to, when we have to do with an

aggregate ordered according to one or many relations (dimensions), is only

performed with respect to the nature of the elements, so that the ordinal rank

in which these elements stand to one another is kept in the general concept,

the organic whole arising is what I call ‘ordinal type,’ or in the special case of

well-ordered  aggregates  an  ‘ordinal  number.’  This  ordinal  number  is  the

same thing that I called, in my Grundlagen of 1883, the ‘enumeral (Anzahl)

of a well-ordered aggregate.’ Two ordered aggregates have one and the same

ordinal type if they stand to one another in the relation of ‘similarity,’ which

relation will be exactly defined. These are the roots from which develops

with  logical  necessity  the  organism  of  transfinite  theory  of  types  and  inparticular  of  the  transfinite  ordinal  numbers,  and  which  I  hope  soon  to

publish in a systematic form.”

The contents of a lecture given in 1883 were also given in a letter of 1884.

In  it  was  pointed  out  that  the  cardinal  number  of  an  aggregate  M  is  the

general concept under which fall all aggregates equivalent to M, and that :

“ One of the most important problems of the theory of aggregates, which I

believe I have solved as to its principal part in my Grundlagen, consists in the

question of determining the various powers of the aggregates in the whole of

nature,  in  so  far  as  we  can  know  it.  This  end  I  have  reached  by  the

development of the general concept of enumeral of well-ordered aggregates,

or, what is the same thing, of the concept of ordinal number.” The concept of

ordinal number is a special case of the concept of ordinal type, which relates

to any simply or multiply ordered aggregate in the same way as the ordinal

number to a well-ordered aggregate. The problem here arises of determining

the various ordinal numbers in nature.

  When  Cantor  said  that  he  had  solved  the  chief  part  of  the  problem  of

determining the various powers in nature, he meant that he had almost proved

that the power of the arithmetical continuum is the same as the power of the

ordinal numbers of the second class. In spite of the fact that Cantor firmly

believed this, possibly on account of the fact that all known aggregates in the

continuum had been found to be either of the first power or of the power of

the continuum, the proof or disproof of this theorem has not even now been

carried out, and there is some ground for believing that it cannot be carried

out.

  What Cantor, in his Grundlagen, had noted as the relation of two well-

ordered  aggregates  which  have  the  same  enumeral  was  here  called  the

relation  of  “  similarity,”  and  in  the  laws  of  multiplication  of  two  ordinal

numbers he departed from the custom followed in the Grundlagen and wrote

the multiplier on the right and the multiplicand on the left. The importance of
                                                              βγβ+γ
this alteration is seen by the fact that we can write : α . α= α; whereas we
                                                                    βγγ+β
would have to write, in the notation of the Grundlagen: α · α = α.

At  the  end  of  this  letter,  Cantor  remarked  that  ω  may,  in  a  sense,  be

regarded as the limit to which the variable finite whole number v tends. Here

“ω  is  the  least  transfinite  ordinal  number  which  is  greater  than all finite

numbers ; exactly in the same way that √2 is the limit of certain variable,increasing, rational numbers, with this difference: the difference between √2

and these approximating fractions becomes as small as we wish, whereas ω −

v is always equal to ω. But this difference in no way alters the fact that ω is to

be regarded as as definite and completed as √2, and in no way alters the fact

that ω has no more trace of the numbers v which tend to it than √2 has of the

approximating  fractions.  The  transfinite  numbers  are  in  a  sense new

irrationalities,  and  indeed  in  my  eyes  the  best  method  of  defining finite

irrational  numbers  is  the  same  in  principle  as  my  method  of  introducing

transfinite numbers. We can say that the transfinite numbers stand or fall with

finite irrational numbers, in their inmost being they are alike, for both are

definitely marked off modifications of the actually infinite.”

  With this is connected in principle an extract from a letter written in 1886:

“Finally I have still to explain to you in what sense I conceive the minimum

of the transfinite as limit of the increasing finite. For this purpose we must

consider that the concept of ‘limit’ in the domain of finite numbers has two

essential  characteristics.  For  example,  the  number  1  is  the  limit  of  the

numbers z = I − I/ν) where ν is a variable, finite, whole number, which
          v

increases above all finite limits. In the first place the difference I − z is a
                                                                                    v

magnitude which becomes infinitely small ; in the second place I is the least

of all numbers which are greater than all magnitudes z. Each of these two
                                                                  ν

properties characterizes the finite number I as limit of the variable magnitude

z . Now if we wish to extend the concept of limit to transfinite limits as well,
v

the second of the above characteristics is used ; the first must here be allowed

to drop because it has a meaning only for finite limits. Accordingly I call ω

the limit of the increasing, finite, whole numbers ν, because ω is the least of

all numbers which are greater than all the finite numbers. But ω–ν is always

equal to ω, and therefore we cannot say that the increasing numbers ν come

as near as we wish to ω; indeed any number ν however great is quite as far

off from ω as the least finite number. Here we see especially clearly the very

important fact that my least transfinite ordinal number ω, and consequently

all greater ordinal numbers, lie quite outside the endless series 1, 2, 3, and so

on. Thus ω is not a maximum of the finite numbers, for there is no such

thing.”

In  another  letter  written  in  1886,  Cantor  emphasized  another  aspect  of

irrational numbers. In all of the definitions of these numbers there is used, as

is indeed essential, a special actually infinite aggregate of rational numbers.In both this and another letter of 1886, Cantor returned in great detail to the

distinction between the “ potential ” and “actual” infinite of which he had

made  a  great  point  under  other  names  in  his Grundlagen.  The  potential

infinite  is  a  variable  finite,  and  in  order  that  such  a  variable  may  be

completely known, we must be able to determine the domain of variability,

and this domain can only be, in general, an actually infinite aggregate of

values.  Thus  every  potential  infinite  presupposes  an  actually  infinite,  and

these “domains of variability” which are studied in the theory of aggregates

are  the  foundations  of  arithmetic  and  analysis.  Further,  besides  actually

infinite aggregates, we have to consider in mathematics natural abstractions

from these aggregates, which form the material of the theory of transfinite

numbers.

In 1885, Cantor had developed to a large extent his theory of cardinal

numbers and ordinal types.

In the fairly long paper which he wrote out, he laid particular stress on the

theory of ordinal types and entered into details which he had not published

before as to the definition of ordinal type in general, of which ordinal number

is a particular case. In this paper also he denoted the cardinal number of an

aggregate M by , and the ordinal type of M by M ; thus indicating by lines

 
over the letter that a double or single act of abstraction is to be performed.

In  the  theory  of  cardinal  numbers,  he  defined  the  addition  and

multiplication  of  two  cardinal  numbers  and  proved  the  fundamental  laws

about them in much the same way as he did in the memoir of 1895 which is

translated below. It is characteristic of Cantor’s views that he distinguished

very sharply between an aggregate and a cardinal number that belongs to it :

“Is not an aggregate an object outside us, whereas its cardinal number is an

abstract picture of it in our mind ? ”

In an ordered aggregate of any number of dimensions, such as the totality

of points in space, as determined by three rectangular co-ordinates, or a piece

of  music  whose  dimensions  are  the  sequence  of  the  tones  in  time,  the

duration of each tone in time, the pitch of the tones, and the intensity of the

tones, then “ if we make abstraction of the nature of the elements, while we

retain their rank in all the n different directions, an intellectual picture, a

general concept, is generated in us, and I call this the n-ple ordinal type.” The

definition of the “similarity of ordered aggregates ”is:  “Two n-ply ordered aggregates M and N are called similar if it is possible

so to make their elements correspond to another uniquely and completely

that,  if  E  and  E′  are  any  two  elements  of  M  and  F  and  F′  the  two

corresponding elements of N, then for ν = 1, 2, . . . n the relation of rank of E

to E′ in the νth direction inside the aggregate M is exactly the same as the

relation of rank of F to F′ in the νth direction inside the aggregate N. We will

call  such  a  correspondence  of  two  aggregates  which  are  similar  to  one

another an imaging of the one on the other.”

The addition and multiplication of ordinal types, and the fundamental laws

about them, were then dealt with much as in the memoir of 1895 which is

translated below. The rest of the paper was devoted to a consideration of

problems about n-ple finite types.

In 1888, Cantor, who had arrived at a very clear notion that the essential

part of the concept of number lay in the unitary concept that we form, gave

some interesting criticisms on the essays of Helmholtz and Kronecker, which

appeared in 1887, on the concept of number. Both the authors referred to

started with the last and most unessential feature in our treatment of ordinal

numbers : the words or other signs that we use to represent these numbers.

In 1887, Cantor gave a more detailed proof of the non-existence of actually

infinitely  small  magnitudes.  This  proof  was  referred  to  in  advance  in  the

Grundlagen, and was later put into a more rigorous form by Peano.

We have already referred to the researches of Cantor on point-aggregates

published in 1883 and later ; the only other paper besides those already dealt

with that was published by Cantor on an important question in the theory of

transfinite numbers was one published in 1892. In this paper we can see the

origins of the conception of “ covering” (Belegung) defined in the memoir of

1895 translated below. In the terminology introduced in this memoir, we can

say that the paper of 1892 contains a proof that 2, when exponentiated by a

transfinite cardinal number, gives rise to a cardinal number which is greater

than the cardinal number first mentioned.

The introduction of the concept of “covering” is the most striking advance

in the principles of the theory of transfinite numbers from 1885 to 1895, and

we can now study the final and considered form which Cantor gave to the

theory in two important memoirs of 1895 and 1897. The principal advances

in the theory since 1897 will be referred to in the notes at the end of thisbook.    [481]








CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE


FOUNDING OF THE THEORY OF


TRANSFINITE NUMBERS









(FIRST ARTICLE)



    “Hypotheses non fingo.”

    “Neque enim leges intellectui aut rebus damus ad arbitrium nostrum, sed

    tanquam scribae fideles ab ipsius naturæ voce latas et prolatas excipimus

    et describimus.”

    “Veniet  tempus,  quo  ista  quæ  nunc  latent,  in  lucem  dies  extrahat  et

    longioris ævi diligentia.”



§ 1

The Conception of Power or Cardinal Number

BY an “ aggregate ” (Menge) we are to understand any collection into a

whole  (Zusammenfassung  zu  einem  Ganzen)  M  of  definite  and  separate

objects m  of  our  intuition  or  our  thought.  These  objects  are  called  the

“elements” of M.In signs we express this thus :



                                          (I)








M = {m}.
We denote the uniting of many aggregates M, N, P, . . ., which have no

common elements, into a single aggregate by



                                          (2)








(M, N, P,...).
The elements of this aggregate are, therefore, the elements of M, of N, of P, .

. ., taken together.

We will call by the name “part” or “partial aggregate ” of an aggregate M

any other aggregate M whose elements are also elements of M.
                        1

If M is a part of M and M is a part of M, then M is a part of M.
      2112

  Every aggregate M has a definite “power,” which we will also call its “

cardinal number.”

We will call by the name “power” or “cardinal number” of M the general

concept which, by means of our active faculty of thought, arises from the

aggregate M when we make abstraction of the nature of its various elements

m and of the order in which they are given.



    [482]We denote the result of this double act of abstraction, the cardinal number

or power of M, by



                                          (3)









=l
  Since every single element m, if we abstract from its nature, becomes a

“unit,” the cardinal number  is a definite aggregate composed of units, and

 
this number has existence in our mind as an intellectual image or projection

of the given aggregate M.

We say that two aggregates M and N are “ equivalent,” in signs



                                          (4)








McON or NouoM,
if it is possible to put them, by some law, in such a relation to one another

that to every element of each one of them corresponds one and only one

element  of  the  other.  To  every  part  M  of  M  there  corresponds,  then,  a
                                                1

definite equivalent part N of N, and inversely.
                            1

If we have such a law of co-ordination of two equivalent aggregates, then,

apart from the case when each of them consists only of one element, we can

modify this law in many ways. We can, for instance, always take care that to

a special element m of M a special element n of N corresponds. For if,
                      00

according to the original law, the elements m and n do not correspond to
                                                      00

one another, but to the element m of M the element n of N corresponds, and
                                      01to  the  element n  of  N  the  element m  of  M  corresponds,  we  take  the
                    01

modified law according to which m corresponds to n and m to n and for
                                          0011

the other elements the original law remains unaltered. By this means the end

is attained.

  Every aggregate is equivalent to itself:



                                          (5)








If two aggregates are equivalent to a third, they are equivalent to one another

; that is to say :



                                          (6)









from McoP and Nocu P follows Mcu N.
Of fundamental importance is the theorem that two aggregates M and N

have the same cardinal number if, and only if, they are equivalent : thus,



                                          (7)and



                                          (8)









=l
I
zll

from weget MouN.
Thus  the  equivalence  of  aggregates  forms  the  necessary  and  sufficient

condition for the equality of their cardinal numbers.



    [483]



In fact, according to the above definition of power, the cardinal number 

 
remains unaltered if in the place of each of one or many or even all elements

m of M other things are substituted. If, now, M ∼ N, there is a law of co-

ordination by means of which M and N are uniquely and reciprocally referred

to one another; and by it to the element m of M corresponds the element n of

N.  Then  we  can  imagine,  in  the  place  of  every  element m  of  M,  the

corresponding element n of N substituted, and, in this way, M transforms into

N without alteration of cardinal number. Consequently








=l

2
The  converse  of  the  theorem  results  from  the  remark  that  between  the

elements of M and the different units of its cardinal number M a reciprocally

univocal (or bi-univocal) relation of correspondence subsists. For, as we saw,

 
 grows, so to speak, out of M in such a way that from every element m of M

a special unit of M arises. Thus we can say that                                          (9)









=l
In the same way N ∼  If then  = we have, by (6), M ∼ N.

 
 
We will mention the following theorem, which results immediately from

the conception of equivalence. If M, N, P, . . . are aggregates which have no

common elements, M′, N′, P′, . . . are also aggregates with the same property,

and if



                            M ∾ M′,  N ∾ N′,  P ∾ P′, . . . ,



then we always have



                            (M, N, P, . . .) ∾ (M′, N′, P′, . . .).



§ 2

“Greater” and Less “ with Powers

If for two aggregates M and N with the cardinal numbers  and ,

 
 
both the conditions :

 

      (a) There is no part of M which is equivalent to N,

      (b) There is a part N of N, such that N ∾ M,
                              11


are fulfilled, it is obvious that these conditions still hold if in them M and N

are replaced by two equivalent aggregates M′ and N′. Thus they express a

definite relation of the cardinal numbers a and b to one another.



    [484]  Further, the equivalence of M and N, and thus the equality of a and b, is

excluded  ;  for  if  we  had  M ∾  N,  we  would  have,  because  N ∾  M,  the
                                                                              1

equivalence N ∾ N, and then, because M ∾ N, there would exist a part M of
                11

M  such  that  M ∾  M,  and  therefore  we  should  have  M, ∾  N  ;  and  this
                  1

contradicts the condition (a).

  Thirdly, the relation of a to b is such that it makes impossible the same

relation of b to a; for if in (a) and (b) the parts played by M and N are

interchanged,  two  conditions  arise  which  are  contradictory  to  the  former

ones.

We express the relation of a to b characterized by (a) and (b) by saying: a

is “less” than b or b is “ greater ” than a; in signs



                                          (I)









a<b or b>a.
We can easily prove that,



                                          (2)









if a<b and b<¢, then we always have a <.
Similarly,  from  the  definition,  it  follows  at  once  that,  if  P  is  part  of  an
                                                                        1

aggregate P, from  follows  and from  follows 

 

1< P,
 
We have seen that, of the three relations                                    a = b, a < b, b < a,



each one excludes the two others. On the other hand, the theorem that, with

any  two  cardinal  numbers  a  and  b,  one  of  those  three  relations  must

necessarily be realized, is by no means self-evident and can hardly be proved

at this stage.

  Not until later, when we shall have gained a survey over the ascending

sequence  of  the  transfinite  cardinal  numbers  and  an  insight  into  their

connexion, will result the truth of the theorem :

A. If a and b are any two cardinal numbers, then either a = b or a < b or a >

b.

  From this theorem the following theorems, of which, however, we will

here make no use, can be very simply derived:

B. If two aggregates M and N are such that M is equivalent to a part N of
                                                                                      1

N and N to a part M of M, then M and N are equivalent;
                      1

C. If M is a part of an aggregate M, M is a part of the aggregate M, and
          121

if the aggregates M and M are equivalent, then M is equivalent to both M
                              21

and M;
      2

D. If, with two aggregates M and N, N is equivalent neither to M nor to a

part of M, there is a part N of N that is equivalent to M ;
                              1

E. If two aggregates M and N are not equivalent, and there is a part N of
                                                                                      1

N that is equivalent to M, then no part of M is equivalent to N.



    [485]



§ 3

The Addition and Multiplication of Powers

The union of two aggregates M and N which have no common elements

was  denoted  in  §  1,  (2),  by  (M,  N).  We  call  it  the  “  union-aggregate

(Vereinigungsmenge) of M and N.”

If M′ and N′ are two other aggregates without common elements, and if M∼ M′ and N ∼ N′, we saw that we have



                                    (M, N) ∾ (M′, N′).



Hence  the  cardinal  number  of  (M,  N)  only  depends  upon  the  cardinal

numbers  and 

 
 
This leads to the definition of the sum of a and b. We put



                                          (1)









Since in the conception of power, we abstract from the order of the elements,

we conclude at once that



                                          (2)









a+b=b+a;
and, for any three cardinal numbers a, b, c, we have



                                          (3)at+(b+c)=(a+b)+c.
We now come to multiplication. Any element m of an aggregate M can be

thought to be bound up with any element n of another aggregate N so as to

form a new element (m, n); we denote by (M . N) the aggregate of all these

bindings (m, n), and call it the “aggregate of bindings (Verbindungsmenge) of

M and N.” Thus



                                          (4)









(M. N)={(, n)}.
We see that the power of (M . N) only depends on the powers  and ;

 
 
for, if we replace the aggregates M and N by the aggregates



                              M′ = {m′}  and  N′ = {n′}



respectively  equivalent  to  them,  and  consider m, m′  and n, n’  as

corresponding elements, then the aggregate



                                    (M′. N′) = {(m′, n′)}



is brought into a reciprocal and univocal correspondence with (M. N) by

regarding (m, n) and (m′, n′) as corresponding elements. Thus



                                          (5)(M. N)ou (M. N).
We now define the product a. b by the equation



                                          (6)










a.b=(M.N).
    [486]



An aggregate with the cardinal number a . b may also be made up out of

two aggregates M and N with the cardinal numbers a and b according to the

following rule : We start from the aggregate N and replace in it every element

n by an aggregate M ∾ M ; if, then, we collect the elements of all these
                        n

aggregates M to a whole S, we see that
              n



                                          (7)








Sev (M. N),
and consequentlyU
For,  if,  with  any  given  law  of  correspondence  of  the  two  equivalent

aggregates M and M, we denote by m the element of M which corresponds
                      n

to the element m of M, we have
                  nn



                                          (8)









S={ma};
and  thus  the  aggregates  S  and  (M.  N)  can  be  referred  reciprocally  and

univocally  to  one  another  by  regarding m  and  (m,  n)  as  corresponding
                                                    n

elements.

  From our definitions result readily the theorems :



                                          (9)








a.b=b.aq,
                                          (10)a.(b.c)=(a.b).c,
                                          (11)








a(b+c)=ab+ac;
because:



                                      (M.N) ∾ (N.M),

                                (M. (N . P)) ∾ ((M. N) . P),

                            (M. (N, P)) ∾ ((M . N), (M . P)).



  Addition  and  multiplication  of  powers  are  subject,  therefore,  to  the

commutative, associative, and distributive laws.


§ 4

The Exponentiation of Powers

By a “ covering of the aggregate N with elements of the aggregate M,” or,

more simply, by a “covering of N with M,” we understand a law by which

with every element n of N a definite element of M is bound up, where one

and  the  same  element  of  M  can  come  repeatedly  into  application.  The

element of M bound up with n is, in a way, a one-valued function of n, and

may  be  denoted  by f(n)  ;  it  is  called  a  “  covering  function  of n,”  The

corresponding covering of N will be called f(N).



    [487]



Two coverings f(N) and f(N) are said to be equal if, and only if, for all
                    12

elements n of N the equation



                                          (1)Si(m)=/on)
is fulfilled, so that if this equation does not subsist for even a single element n

= n,  f(N)  and f(N)  are  characterized  as  different  coverings  of  N.  For
  012

example, if m is a particular element of M, we may fix that, for all n’s
              0



                                          f(n) = m;
                                                    0



this  law  constitutes  a  particular  covering  of  N  with  M.  Another  kind  of

covering results if m and m are two different particular elements of M and
                      01

n a particular element of N, from fixing that
0



                                          f(n) = m 
                                            00

                                          f(n) = m,
                                                    1



for all n’s which are different from n.
                                          0

The totality of different coverings of N with M forms a definite aggregate

with the elements f(N); we call it the “covering-aggregate (Belegungsmenge)

of N with M ” and denote it by (N ∣ M). Thus :



                                          (2)









(N | M)={/f(N)}.
If M ∾ M′ and N ∾ N′, we easily find that                                          (3)









(N'| M) o (N” | M),
Thus the cardinal number of (N ∣M) depends only on the cardinal numbers 
                                                          b
 
 M and ; it serves us for the definition of a:



 
                                          (4)









I

|

z
&
For any three aggregates, M, N, P, we easily prove the theorems:



                                          (5)









((N | M).(P | M)) ev ((N, P) | M),
                                          (6)(P M).(P | N)ew(P|(M.N)),
                                          (7)









(P I (N M) O((P.N) | M),
from which, if we put  we have, by (4) and by paying attention to § 3, the

 
theorems for any three cardinal numbers, a, b, and c:



                                          (8)









a". a”=a“+‘,
                                          (9)








c
af. 6°=(a.b)’,
                                          (10)










(ab ¢
) =ah.c
    [488]We see how pregnant and far-reaching these simple formulæ extended to

powers are by the following example. If we denote the power of the linear

continuum X (that is, the totality X of real numbers x such that x ≧ and ≦ 1)

by 0, we easily see that it may be represented by, amongst others, the formula

:



                                          (11)








0

ZNo
                                                                ℵ
where § 6 gives the meaning of ℵ In fact, by (4), 2 is the power of all
                                          0

representations



                                          (12)














 

x=’%‘?+%+ ety

2V
(where f(yv)=o0or 1)
of the numbers x in the binary system. If we pay attention to the fact that

every number x is only represented once, with the exception of the numbers 


L.
          ,  which  are  represented  twice  over,  we  have,  if  we  denote  the

“enumerable” totality of the latter by {s},
                                              v 

 

2®=({s}, X).
If we take away from X any “ enumerable ” aggregate {t} and denote the
                                                                      v

remainder by X, we have :
                1
















X=({s), Xp={%-1}, {#}, X)),
(s} X)={s}, {&}, X)),

{1} oo (s}, {tov{s), X00X;
so









XV ({5}, X),
and thus (§ i)









11>
I

zNo
  From (II) follows by squaring (by § 6, (6))0
0= 2R ZN
- 0
= oo+ Ro
= 2“0 =
=9
and hence, by continued multiplication by 0,



                                          (13)









where ν is any finite cardinal number.

                                                  62
If we raise both sides of (II) to the power  ℵ we get
                                                        0









oNo — (ZNO)NO = %0 o,
But since, by § 6, (8), ℵ ⋅ ℵ = ℵ, we have
                          000



                                          (14)








The formulae (13) and (14) mean that both the ν-dimensional and the ℵ-
                                                                                        0

dimensional continuum have the power of the one-dimensional continuum.
                                                                                          63
Thus the whole contents of my paper in Crelle’s journal, vol. lxxxiv, 1878,are derived purely algebraically with these few strokes of the pen from the

fundamental formulae of the calculation with cardinal numbers.



    [489]



§ 5

The Finite Cardinal Numbers

We will next show how the principles which we have laid down, and on

which  later  on  the  theory  of  the  actually  infinite  or  transfinite  cardinal

numbers  will  be  built,  afford  also  the  most  natural,  shortest,  and  most

rigorous foundation for the theory of finite numbers.

To a single thing e, if we subsume it under the concept of an aggregate E
                        00

= (e) corresponds as cardinal number what we call “one” and denote by i ;
  0,

we have



                                          (1)









1l

g
Let us now unite with E another thing e, and call the union-aggregate E, so
                          011

that



                                          (2)E,=(Ey &)=(e ).
The cardinal number of E is called “two” and is denoted by 2:
                            1



                                          (3)









=il
By addition of new elements we get the series of aggregates



                            E = (E, e), E = (E, e),. . .,
                                212323



which give us successively, in unlimited sequence, the other so-called “ finite

cardinal numbers” denoted by 3, 4, 5, . . . The use which we here make of

these numbers as suffixes is justified by the fact that a number is only used as

a suffix when it has been defined as a cardinal number. We have, if by ν − 1

is understood the number immediately preceding ν in the above series,



                                          (4)









=il

v=-1
                                          (5)EV:(Ev-ly ev)=(eo, €y e,,).
From the definition of a sum in § 3 follows:



                                          (6)









=il

v

=il

v-1+ I;
that is to say, every cardinal number, except 1, is the sum of the immediately

preceding one and 1.

Now, the following three theorems come into the foreground :

A. The terms of the unlimited series of finite cardinal numbers



                                      1, 2, 3, . . ., ν, . . .



are all different from one another (that is to say, the condition of equivalence

established in § 1 is not fulfilled for the corresponding aggregates).



    [490]



B. Every one of these numbers ν is greater than the preceding ones and less

than the following ones (§ 2).

C. There are no cardinal numbers which, in magnitude, lie between two

consecutive numbers ν and ν + 1 (§ 2).

We make the proofs of these theorems rest on the two following ones, D

and E. We shall, then, in the next place, give the latter theorems rigid proofs.

D. If M is an aggregate such that it is of equal power with none of its parts,

then the aggregate (M, e), which arises from M by the addition of a single

new element e, has the same property of being of equal power with none of

its parts.E. If N is an aggregate with the finite cardinal number ν, and N is any part
                                                                            1

of N, the cardinal number of N is equal to one of the preceding numbers 1,
                                    1

2, 3, . . ., ν− 1.

  Proof of D.—Suppose that the aggregate (M, e) is equivalent to one of its

parts  which  we  will  call  N.  Then  two  cases,  both  of  which  lead  to  a

contradiction, are to be distinguished :

(a) The aggregate N contains e as element ; let N = (M e); then M is a
                                                                      11

part  of  M  because  N  is  a  part  of  (M, e).  As  we  saw  in  §  1,  the  law  of

correspondence of the two equivalent aggregates (M, e) and (M, e) can be so
                                                                          1

modified that the element e of the one corresponds to the same element e of

the other ; by that, then, M and M are referred reciprocally and univocally to
                                      1

one another. But this contradicts the supposition that M is not equivalent to

its part M.
          1

(b) The part N of (M, e) does not contain e as element, so that N is either

M or a part of M. In the law of correspondence between (M, e) and N, which

lies at the basis of our supposition, to the element e of the former let the

element f of the latter correspond. Let N = (M, f); then the aggregate M is
                                                        1

put in a reciprocally univocal relation with M. But M is a part of N and
                                                        11

hence of M. So here too M would be equivalent to one of its parts, and this is

contrary to the supposition.

  Proof of  E.—We  will  suppose  the  correctness  of  the  theorem  up  to  a

certain ν  and  then  conclude  its  validity  for  the  number ν  +  1  which

immediately follows, in the following manner:—We start from the aggregate

Eν = (e, e, . . ., e) as an aggregate with the cardinal number ν + 1. If the
      01ν

theorem is true for this aggregate, its truth for any other aggregate with the

same cardinal number ν + 1 follows at once by § 1. Let E′ be any part of E;
                                                                                          ν

we distinguish the following cases :

(a) E′ does not contain e as element, then E is either E or a part of E,
                              νν−1ν−1

and so has as cardinal number either ν or one of the numbers 1, 2, 3, .., ν − 1,

because  we  supposed  our  theorem  true  for  the  aggregate  E,  with  the
                                                                          ν−1

cardinal number ν.



    [491](b) E′ consists of the single element e, then .
 
                                              ν

(c) E′ consists of e and an aggregate E″, so that E′ = (E″, e). E″ is a part
                        νν

of  E  and  has  therefore  by  supposition  as  cardinal  number  one  of  the
    ν-1

numbers 1, 2, 3, . . ., ν − 1. But now , and thus the cardinal number

 
of E′ is one of the numbers 2, 3, . . ., ν.

  Proof of A.—Every one of the aggregates which we have denoted by E
                                                                                          ν

has the property of not being equivalent to any of its parts. For if we suppose

that this is so as far as a certain ν, it follows from the theorem D that it is so

for the immediately following number ν + 1. For ν = 1, we recognize at once

that the aggregate E = (e, e) is not equivalent to any of its parts, which are
                      101

here (e) and (e). Consider, now, any two numbers μ and ν of the series 1, 2,
      01

3, . . . ; then, if μ is the earlier and ν the later, E is a part of E. Thus E
                                                        μ-1ν−1μ−1

and E are not equivalent, and accordingly their cardinal numbers 
 

u=E
      ν−1

and  are not equal.

 
  Proof of B.—If of the two finite cardinal numbers µ and v the first is the

earlier and the second the later, then µ < v. For consider the two aggregates

M=E and N = E; for them each of the two conditions in  2 for  is
 
    µ−1ν−1§

fulfilled. The condition (a) is fulfilled because, by theorem E, a part of M =

E  can  only  have  one  of  the  cardinal  numbers  1,  2,  3,  .  .  ., µ−I,  and
µ−1

therefore, by theorem A, cannot be equivalent to the aggregate N = E The
                                                                                  ν−1.

condition (b) is fulfilled because M itself is a part of N.

  Proof of C.—Let a be a cardinal number which is less than v + 1. Because

of the condition (b) of § , there is a part of E with the cardinal number a. By
                            2v

theorem E, a part of E can only have one of the cardinal numbers 1, 2, 3, . . .,
                        v

v. Thus a is equal to one of the cardinal numbers 1, 2, 3, . . ., v. By theorem

B, none of these is greater than v. Consequently there is no cardinal number a

which is less than v+ I and greater than v.

Of importance for what follows is the following theorem :

F. If K is any aggregate of different finite cardinal numbers, there is one,

K, amongst them which is smaller than the rest, and therefore the smallest of
1all.



    [492]



  Proof.—The aggregate K either contains the number I, in which case it is

the least, κ = 1, or it does not. In the latter case, let J be the aggregate of all
          1

those cardinal numbers of our series, 1, 2, 3, . . ., which are smaller than those

occurring in K. If a number v belongs to J, all numbers less than ν belong to

J. But J must have one element ν such that ν + I, and consequently all
                                        11

greater numbers, do not belong to J, because otherwise J would contain all

finite numbers, whereas the numbers belonging to K are not contained in J.

Thus J is the segment (Abschnitt) (1, 2, 3, . . ., ν). The number ν + I = κ is
                                                        111

necessarily an element of K and smaller than the rest.

  From F we conclude :

G. Every aggregate K= {} of different finite cardinal numbers can be
                                K

brought into the form of a series



                                      K=(κ κ, κ, . . .)
                                            1,23



such that



                                        κ<κ<κ . . .
                                          123,



§ 6

The Smallest Transfinite Cardinal Number Aleph-Zero

  Aggregates with finite cardinal numbers are called “finite aggregates,” all

others  we  will  call  “  transfinite  aggregates”  and  their  cardinal  numbers

“transfinite cardinal numbers.”

The first example of a transfinite aggregate is given by the totality of finite

cardinal numbers ν; we call its cardinal number (§ 1) “ Aleph-zero and denoteit by ℵ; thus we define
      0



                                          (1)










——
<
—

I
That ℵ is a transfinite number, that is to say, is not equal to any finite
      0

number µ, follows from the simple fact that, if to the aggregate {v} is added a

new element e, the union-aggregate ({v}, e) is equivalent to the original
                0o

aggregate {v}. For we can think of this reciprocally univocal correspondence

between them : to the element e of the first corresponds the element  of the
                                    0I

second, and to the element v of the first corresponds the element ν + I of the

other. By § 3 we thus have



                                          (2)








N0+ I =No-
But we showed in § 5 that µ+  is always different from µ, and therefore ℵ is
                                  I0

not equal to any finite number µ.

The number ℵ is greater than any finite number µ:
                  0



                                          (3)No > M-
    [493]



This follows, if we pay attention to § 3, from the three facts that µ = 

 
 , that no part of the aggregate (1, 2, 3, . . .,µ) is equivalent to the

aggregate {ν}, and that (1, 2, 3, . . ., µ) is itself a part of {ν}.

On the other hand, ℵ is the least transfinite cardinal number. If a is any
                            0

transfinite cardinal number different from ℵ, then
                                                  0



                                          (4)








This rests on the following theorems :

A. Every transfinite aggregate T has parts with the cardinal number ℵ.
                                                                                    0

  Proof.—If, by any rule, we have taken away a finite number of elements t,
                                                                                          1

t, . . ., t there always remains the possibility of taking away a further
2ν−1,

element t. The aggregate {t}, where ν denotes any finite cardinal number, is
        νv

a part of T with the cardinal number ℵ, because {t}∼{ν}(§ 1).
                                            0ν

B. If S is a transfinite aggregate with the cardinal number ℵ, and S is any
                                                                        01

transfinite part of S, then .

 
  Proof.—We  have  supposed  that  S ∼  {ν}.  Choose  a  definite  law  of

correspondence between these two aggregates, and, with this law, denote by

s that element of S which corresponds to the element ν of {ν}, so that
ν                                          S = {s}.
                                                  ν



The part S of S consists of certain elements s. of S, and the totality of
            1κ

numbers κ forms a transfinite part K of the aggregate {ν}. By theorem G of §

5 the aggregate K can be brought into the form of a series



                                          K ={κ},
                                                  ν



where



                                          κ < κ ;
                                            νν+1



consequently we have










S,

{5}
Hence follows that S ∼ S, and therefore .
 
                      1

  From A and B the formula (4) results, if we have regard to § 2.

  From (2) we conclude, by adding I to both sides,



                                  ℵ + 2 = ℵ + 1 = ℵ,
                                    000



and, by repeating this



                                          (5)N0+V=No-
We have also



                                          (6)










No+ No = No-
    [494]



  For, by (I) of § 3, ℵ + ℵ is the cardinal number  because
({a}, {8}
                        00









|
|

|
K
—

I

—~—
QU
N |
Now, obviously{}={zv—1}, {2}),
{2v—1}, {2v}) v ({a,}, {4,}),
and therefore










 

 

—
<
—
The equation (6) can also be written



                                        ℵ ⋅ 2 = ℵ ;
                                          00



and, by adding ℵ repeatedly to both sides, we find that
                  0



                                          (7)








No - V=V . No= No-
We also have



                                          (8)








No - No = No-
  Proof.—By (6) of § 3, ℵ ⋅ ℵ is the cardinal number of the aggregate of
                              00

bindings                                          {( µ, ν)},



where µ and ν are any finite cardinal numbers which are independent of one

another. If also λ represents any finite cardinal number, so that {λ}, {µ.}, and

{ν} are only different notations for the same aggregate of all finite numbers,

we have to show that









{(s )} o (A}
Let us denote µ + ν by ρ; then p takes all the numerical values 2, 3, 4, . . .,

and there are in all ρ − 1 elements (µ, ν) for which µ + ν = ρ, namely :



                            (1 , ρ−1), (2, ρ−2),. . ., (ρ−1, 1).



In this sequence imagine first the element (1, 1), for which ρ=2, put, then the

two elements for which ρ=3, then the three elements for which ρ= 4, and so

on. Thus we get all the elements (µ , ν) in a simple series :



                  (1, 1); (1, 2),(2, 1); (1, 3),(2, 2),(3, 1); (1, 4),(2, 3),



and here, as we easily see, the element (µ, ν) comes at the λth place, where



                                          (9)7\___’u+(u+u— I)z(lu-h/—Z)'
The variable λ takes every numerical value 1, 2, 3, . . ., once. Consequently,

by  means  of  (9),  a  reciprocally  univocal  relation  subsists  between  the

aggregates {ν} and {(µ, ν)}.



    [495]



                                                                                  32
If both sides of the equation (8) are multiplied by ℵ, we get ℵ0 = ℵ
                                                                  00

=ℵ, and, by repeated multiplications by ℵ, we get the equation, valid for
  00

every finite cardinal number ν :



                                          (10)








Nov =No-
The theorems E and A of § 5 lead to this theorem on finite aggregates :

C: Every finite aggregate E is such that it is equivalent to none of its parts.

This theorem stands sharply opposed to the following one for transfinite

aggregates :

D. Every transfinite aggregate T is such that it has parts T which are
                                                                            1

equivalent to it.

  Proof.—By theorem A of this paragraph there is a part S = {t} of T with
                                                                            ν

the  cardinal  number ℵ.  Let  T=(S,  U),  so  that  U  is  composed  of  those
                          0

elements of T which are different from the elements t. Let us put S={t},
                                                                ν1ν+1

T=(S, U); then T is a part of T, and, in fact, that part which arises out of T
111

if we leave out the single element t. Since S ∼ S, by theorem B of this
                                            11

paragraph, and U ∼ U, we have, by § 1, T ∼ T.
                                                    1

In  these  theorems  C  and  D  the  essential  difference  between  finite  and

transfinite aggregates, to which I referred in the year 1877, in volume lxxxiv

[1878] of Crelle’s journal, p. 242, appears in the clearest way.  After  we  have  introduced  the  least  transfinite  cardinal  number ℵ and
                                                                                    0

derived its properties that lie the most readily to hand, the question arises as

to the higher cardinal numbers and how they proceed from ℵ. We shall
                                                                            0

show that the transfinite cardinal numbers can be arranged according to their

magnitude, and, in this order, form, like the finite numbers, a “ well-ordered

aggregate  in  an  extended  sense  of  the  words.  Out  of ℵ  proceeds,  by  a
                                                                      0

definite law, the next greater cardinal number ℵ out of this by the same law
                                                        1

the next greater ℵ, and so on. But even the unlimited sequence of cardinal
                    0

numbers



                                ℵ, ℵ, ℵ, . . . , ℵ, . . .
                                    012ν



does not exhaust the conception of transfinite cardinal number. We will prove

the existence of a cardinal number which we denote by ℵ and which shows
                                                                    ω

itself to be the next greater to all the numbers ℵ; out of it proceeds in the
                                                          ν

same way as ℵ out of ℵ a next greater ℵ, and so on, without end.
                1ω+1



    [496]



To every transfinite cardinal number a there is a next greater proceeding

out of it according to a unitary law, and also to every unlimitedly ascending

well-ordered aggregate of transfinite cardinal numbers, {a}, there is a next

greater proceeding out of that aggregate in a unitary way.

For the rigorous foundation of this matter, discovered in 1882 and exposed

in  the  pamphlet Grundlagen  einer  allgemeinen  Mannichifaltigkeits-lehre

(Leipzig, 1883) and in volume xxi of the Mathematische Annalen, we make

use of the so-called “ ordinal types ” whose theory we have to set forth in the

following paragraphs.


§ 7

The Ordinal Types of Simply Ordered Aggregates

We  call  an  aggregate  M  “  simply  ordered  ”  if  a  definite  “  order  ofprecedence” (Rangordnung) rules over its elements m, so that, of every two

elements m and m, one takes the “ lower ” and the other the “ higher ” rank,
            12

and so that, if of three elements m, m, and m, m, say, is of lower rank than
                                      1231

m, and m is of lower rank than m, then m is of lower rank than m.
22313

The relation of two elements m and m, in which m has the lower rank in
                                      121

the given order of precedence and m the higher, is expressed by the formulae
                                          2

:



                                          (1)









Thus, for example, every aggregate P of points defined on a straight line is a

simply ordered aggregate if, of every two points p and p belonging to it,
                                                            12

that one whose co-ordinate (an origin and a positive direction having been

fixed upon) is the lesser is given the lower rank.

It is evident that one and the same aggregate can be “ simply ordered ”

according to the most different laws. Thus, for example, with the aggregate R

of  all  positive  rational  numbers p/q  (where p  and q  are  relatively  prime

integers)  which  are  greater  than  o  and  less  than  I,  there  is,  firstly,  their

“natural” order according to magnitude ; then they can be arranged (and in

this order we will denote the aggregate by R) so that, of two numbers pq
                                                    01/1

and p/q for which the sums p + q and p + q have different values, that
      221122

number for which the corresponding sum is less takes the lower rank, and, if

p + q = p + q, then the smaller of the two rational numbers is the lower.
1122

In this order precedence, our aggregate, since to one and the same value of

p+q only a finite number of rational numbers p/q belongs, evidently has the

formwhere



                                          r ≺ r.
                                            νν+1





    [497]



  Always, then, when we speak of a “ simply ordered ” aggregate M, we

imagine laid down a definite order or precedence of its elements, in the sense

explained above.

  There are doubly, triply, ν-ply and a-ply ordered aggregates, but for the

present we will not consider them. So in what follows we will use the shorter

expression “ordered aggregate” when we mean “simply ordered aggregate.”

  Every ordered aggregate M has a definite “ordinal type,” or more shortly a

definite “type,” which we will denote by



                                          (2)








=)
By this we understand the general concept which results from M if we only

abstract from the nature of the elements m, and retain the order of precedence

among them. Thus the ordinal type  is itself an ordered aggregate whose

 
elements are units which have the same order of precedence amongst one

another as the corresponding elements of M, from which they are derived byabstraction.

We call two ordered aggregates M and N “ similar (ähnlich) if they can be

put into a bi-univocal correspondence with one another in such a manner that,

if m and m are any two elements of M and n and n the corresponding
    1212

elements of N, then the relation of rank of m to m in M is the same as that
                                                    12

of n to n in N. Such a correspondence of similar aggregates we call an
  12

“imaging” (Abbildung)  of  these  aggregates  on  one  another.  In  such  an

imaging,  to  every  part—which  obviously  also  appears  as  an  ordered

aggregate—M of M corresponds a similar part N of N.
                11

We  express  the  similarity  of  two  ordered  aggregates  M  and  N  by  the

formula :



                                          (3)









  Every ordered aggregate is similar to itself.

If two ordered aggregates are similar to a third, they are similar to one

another.



    [498]



A simple consideration shows that two ordered aggregates have the same

ordinal type if, and only if, they are similar, so that, of the two formulæ



                                          (4)one is always a consequence of the other.

If, with an ordinal type  we also abstract from the order of precedence of

 
the elements, we get (§ i) the cardinal number  of the ordered aggregate M,

 
which is, at the same time, the cardinal number of the ordinal type . From 

 always follows , that is to say, ordered aggregates of equal types

 
always  have  the  same  power  or  cardinal  number;  from  the  similarity  of

ordered  aggregates  follows  their  equivalence.  On  the  other  hand,  two

aggregates may be equivalent without being similar.

We will use the small letters of the Greek alphabet to denote ordinal types.

If α is an ordinal type, we understand by



                                          (5)








QU
its corresponding cardinal number.

The ordinal types of finite ordered aggregates offer no special interest. For

we  easily  convince  ourselves  that,  for  one  and  the  same  finite  cardinal

number v, all simply ordered aggregates are similar to one another, and thus

have one and the same type. Thus the finite simple ordinal types are subject

to the same laws as the finite cardinal numbers, and it is allowable to use the

same signs 1, 2, 3, . . ., ν, . . . for them, although they are conceptually

different  from  the  cardinal  numbers.  The  case  is  quite  different  with  the

transfinite ordinal types ; for to one and the same cardinal number belong

innumerably many different types of simply ordered aggregates, which, in

their totality, constitute a particular “ class of types ” (Typenclasse). Every

one  of  these  classes  of  types  is,  therefore,  determined  by  the  transfinite

cardinal number α which is common to all the types belonging to the class.Thus we call it for short the class of types [α]. That class which naturally

presents  itself  first  to  us,  and  whose  complete  investigation  must,

accordingly, be the next special aim of the theory of transfinite aggregates, is

the class of types [ℵ] which embraces all the types with the least transfinite
                      0

cardinal number ℵ. From the cardinal number which determines the class of
                    0

types [α] we have to distinguish that cardinal number α′ which for its part is

determined by the class of types [α]. The latter is the cardinal number which

(§ 1) the class [α] has, in so far as it represents a well-defined aggregate

whose elements are all the types α with the cardinal number a. We will see

that a is different from a, and indeed always greater than a.



    [499]



If in an ordered aggregate M all the relations of precedence of its elements

are inverted, so that “ lower ” becomes “ higher ” and “ higher ” becomes “

lower ” everywhere, we again get an ordered aggregate, which we will denote

by



                                          (6)








*M
and call the “inverse” of M. We denote the ordinal type of *M, if , by



 
                                          (7)It may happen that *α = α, as, for example, in the case of finite types or in

that of the type of the aggregate of all rational numbers which are greater than

O and less than i in their natural order of precedence. This type we will

investigate under the notation η.

We remark further that two similarly ordered aggregates can be imaged on

one another either in one manner or in many manners ; in the first case the

type in question is similar to itself in only one way, in the second case in

many  ways.  Not  only  all  finite  types,  but  the  types  of  transfinite  “  well-

ordered aggregates,” which will occupy us later and which we call transfinite

“  ordinal  numbers,”  are  such  that  they  allow  only  a  single  imaging  on

themselves. On the other hand, the type η is similar to itself in an infinity of

ways.

We will make this difference clear by two simple examples. By ω we

understand the type of a well-ordered aggregate



                                    (e, e, . . ., e, . . .),
                                      12ν



in which



                                          e ≺ e,
                                            νν+1



and  where  ν  represents  all  finite  cardinal  numbers  in  turn.  Another  well-

ordered aggregate



                                  (ƒ, ƒ, . . . ,ƒ , . . . ),
                                      12ν



with the condition



                                          ƒ ≺ ƒ,
                                            νv+1of the same type ω can obviously only be imaged on the former in such a way

that e and ƒ are corresponding elements. For e, the lowest element in rank
    νν1

of  the  first,  must,  in  the  process  of  imaging,  be  correlated  to  the  lowest

element ƒ, of the second, the next after e in rank (e) to ƒ, the next after ƒ,
          11221

and  so  on.  Every  other  bi-univocal  correspondence  of  the  two  equivalent

aggregates {e} and {ƒ} is not an “imaging” in the sense which we have
              νν

fixed above for the theory of types.



    [500]



On the other hand, let us take an ordered aggregate of the form



                                            {e},
                                                ν



where ν represents all positive and negative finite integers, including O, and

where likewise



                                          e ≺e.
                                            νν+1



This aggregate has no lowest and no highest element in rank. Its type is, by

the definition of a sum given in § 8,



                                          *ω + ω.



It is similar to itself in an infinity of ways. For let us consider an aggregate of

the same type



                                            {ƒ},
                                                νwhere








S <Josr
Then the two ordered aggregates can be so imaged on one another that, if we

understand by ν a definite one of the numbers ν′, to the element e of the
                  0ν′

first the element ƒ of the second corresponds. Since ν′ is arbitrary, we
                    ν0′+ν′0

have here an infinity of imagings.

The concept of “ ordinal type” developed here, when it is transferred in

like manner to “ multiply ordered aggregates,” embraces, in conjunction with

the concept of “ cardinal number or ” power “ introduced in § 1, everything

capable  of  being  numbered (Anzahlmässige)  that  is  thinkable,  and  in  this

sense cannot be further generalized. It contains nothing arbitrary, but is the

natural  extension  of  the  concept  of  number.  It  deserves  to  be  especially

emphasized that the criterion of equality (4) follows with absolute necessity

from the concept of ordinal type and consequently permits of no alteration.

The  chief  cause  of  the  grave  errors  in  G.  Veronese’s Grundziige  der

Geometrie (German by A. Schepp, Leipzig, 1894) is the non-recognition of

this point.



    [501]



On  page  30  the  “  number (Anzahl oder Zahl)  of  an  ordered  group”  is

defined in exactly the same way as what we have called the “ ordinal type of

a simply ordered aggregate ” (Zur Lehre vom Transfiniten, Halle, 1890., pp.

68–75 ; reprinted from the Zeitschr. für Philos. und philos. Kritik, for 1887).

But  Veronese  thinks  that  he  must  make  an  addition  to  the  criterion  of

equality. He says on page 31: “ Numbers whose units correspond to one

another uniquely and in the same order and of which the one is neither a part
                                                                  64
of the other nor equal to a part of the other are equal.”  This definition of

equality contains a circle and thus is meaningless. For what is the meaning of

“ not equal to a part of the other” in this addition? To answer this question,we must first know when two numbers are equal or unequal. Thus, apart from

the arbitrariness of his definition of equality, it presupposes a definition of

equality, and this again presupposes a definition of equality, in which we

must know again what equal and unequal are, and so on ad infinitum. After

Veronese has, so to speak, given up of his own free will the indispensable

foundation for the comparison of numbers, we ought not to be surprised at

the lawlessness with which, later on, he operates with his pseudo-transfinite

numbers, and ascribes properties to them which they cannot possess simply

because they themselves, in the form imagined by him, have no existence

except on paper. Thus, too, the striking similarity of his “ numbers to the very

absurd  ”  infinite  numbers  “  in  Fontenelle’s Géométrie  de  l’Infini  (Paris,

1727)  becomes  comprehensible.  Recently,  W.  Killing  has  given  welcome

expression to his doubts concerning the foundation of Veronese’s book in the
                                                                    65
Index lectionum of the Münster Academy for 1895–1896. 


§ 8

Addition and Multiplication of Ordinal Types

The union-aggregate (M, N) of two aggregates M and N can, if M and N

are ordered, be conceived as an ordered aggregate in which the relations of

precedence of the elements of M among themselves as well as the relations of

precedence of the elements of N among themselves remain the same as in M

or  N  respectively,  and  all  elements  of  M  have  a  lower  rank  than  all  the

elements of N. If M′ and N′ are two other ordered aggregates, M ≃ M′ and N

≃ N′, then (M, N) ≃ (M′, N′) ; so the ordinal type of (M, N) depends only on

the ordinal types  and  . Thus, we define:



                                          (1)










a+;3=(m).
    [502]In the sum α + β we call α the “augend” and β the “addend.”

For any three types we easily prove the associative law:



                                          (2)









at+(B+y)=(a+B)+7y.
On  the  other  hand,  the  commutative  law  is  not  valid,  in  general,  for  the

addition of types. We see this by the following simple example.

If ω is the type, already mentioned in § 7, of the well-ordered aggregate



                          E = (e, e, . . . . e . . .).  e < e,
                                  12vvv+1



then 1 + ω is not equal to ω + 1. For, if ƒ is a new element, we have by (1) :












 

1+w=(f, E),
w+1=(E, f).
But the aggregate



                              (ƒ, E) = (ƒ, e, e,. . ., e, . . .)
                                              12v



is similar to the aggregate E, and consequently                                        1 + ω = ω.



On the contrary, the aggregates E and (E, ƒ) are not similar, because the first

has no term which is highest in rank, but the second has the highest term f.

Thus ω + 1 is different from ω = 1 + ω.

  Out of two ordered aggregates M and N with the types α and β we can set

up  an  ordered  aggregate  S  by  substituting  for  every  element n  of  N  an

ordered aggregate M which has the same type α as M, so that
                      n



                                          (3)








and, for the order of precedence in



                                          (4)









S={M,}
we make the two rules :

(1) Every two elements of S which belong to one and the same aggregate

M are to retain in S the same order of precedence as in M;
nn

(2) Every two elements of S which belong to two different aggregates 

and  have the same relation of precedence as n and n have in N.
                                                          12

The ordinal type of S depends, as we easily see, only on the types α and β ;

we define                                          (5)










v
    [503]



In this product α is called the “ multiplicand ” and β the “multiplier.”

In any definite imaging of M on M let m be the element of M that
                                              nnn

corresponds to the element m of M; we can then also write



                                          (6)









S={m}.
Consider a third ordered aggregate P = {p} with the ordinal type P = γ, then,

by (5),a.B={m), B.y={n}, (a.B).y={0m),},
a.(B.y)= {m( )}
But the two ordered aggregates {} and {} are similar, and are imaged

(),
7 (mg)
on one another if we regard the elements  and  as corresponding.

(m),
" (mg)
Consequently, for three types α, β, and γ the associative law



                                          (7)









(a.B8).y=a.(B.vy)
subsists. From (1) and (5) follows easily the distributive law



                                          (8)









a.(B+y)=a.B+a.vy;
but only in this form, where the factor with two terms is the multiplier.

On the contrary, in the multiplication of types as in their addition, the

commutative  law  is  not  generally  valid.  For  example,  2  .ω and ω  .2  are

different types ; for, by (5),










 

2. 0=, f1; € Sa; - - -} eA,,',A/;A; )=
while 

w =
2= (¢ e
(], 2y -+

ey € s
’ w"w.fi;f;)‘-

ey Juy + o

)
is obviously different from ω.

If we compare the definitions of the elementary operations for cardinal

numbers, given in § 3, with those established here for ordinal types, we easily

see that the cardinal number of the sum of two types is equal to the sum of

the cardinal numbers of the single types, and that the cardinal number of the

product of two types is equal to the product of the cardinal numbers of the

single types. Every equation between ordinal types which proceeds from the

two elementary operations remains correct, therefore, if we replace in it all

the types by their cardinal numbers.



    [504]



§ 9

The Ordinal Types η of the Aggregate R of all Rational Numbers which

are Greater than o and Smaller than 1, in their Natural Order of

Precedence

By R we understand, as in § 7, the system of all rational numbers p/q (p

and q being relatively prime) which > 0 and < 1, in their natural order of

precedence, where the magnitude of a number determines its rank. We denote

the ordinal type of R by η:



                                          (I)Al
But we have put the same aggregate in another order of precedence in which

we call it R. This order is determined, in the first place, by the magnitude of
            0

p + q, and in the second place—for rational numbers for which p + q has the

same value —by the magnitude of p/q itself. The aggregate R is a well-
                                                                            0

ordered aggregate of type ω :



                                          (2)









Ro=(ry, 720« - s %4y . . .), where 7,<l7,.,
                                          (3)










Al

.
Both R and R have the same cardinal number since they only differ in the
              0

order of precedence of their elements, and, since we obviously have  ,

 
we also have



                                          (4)=l

x|
Thus the type η belongs to the class of types [ℵ].
                                                      0

  Secondly, we remark that in R there is neither an element which is lowest

in rank nor one which is highest in rank. Thirdly, R has the property that

between every two of its elements others lie. This property we express by the

words : R is “ everywhere dense” (überalldicht).

We will now show that these three properties characterize the type η of R,

so that we have tł. e following theorem :

If we have a simply ordered aggregate M such that



    (a)  ;

 
    (b) M has no element which is lowest in rank, and no highest ;

    (c) M is everywhere dense ;



then the ordinal type of M is η:








=l
  Proof.—Because of the condition (a), M can be brought into the form of a

well-ordered aggregate of type w ; having fixed upon such a form, we denote

it by M. and put
      0



                                          (5)My=(my, my, .. ., m,, ...
    [505]



We have now to show that



                                          (6)









that is to say, we must prove that M can be imaged on R in such a way that

the relation of precedence of any and every two elements in M is the same as

that of the two corresponding elements in R.

Let the element r in R be correlated to the element m in M. The element
                      11

r has a definite relation of precedence to r in R. Because of the condition
21

(b), there are infinitely many elements m of M which have the same relation
                                                v

of precedence in M to m as r to r in R ; of them we choose that one which
                            121

has the smallest index in M, let it be  and correlate it to r. The element r
                                023

has  in  R  definite  relations  of  precedence  to r  and r  ;  because  of  the
                                                          12

conditions (b) and (c) there is an infinity of elements m of M which have the
                                                                v

same relation of precedence to m and  in M as r to r and r to R ; of them
",
                                      1312

we  choose  that—let  it  be   —which  has  the  smallest  index  in  M, and
"
                                                                                    0

correlate it to r. According to this law we imagine the process of correlation
                3

continued. If to the v elements



                                      r, r, r, . . . , r
                                      123v



of R are correlated, as images, definite elementsMyy My My ooy My,
which have the same relations of precedence amongst one another in M as the

corresponding elements in R, then to the element r of R is to be correlated
                                                            v+1

that element  of M which has the smallest index in M of those which
M1
                                                                      0

have the same relations of precedence to








Myy My Moy ooy T

v
in M as r to r r, . . ., r in R.
          v+112v

In this manner we have correlated definite elements  of M to all the

m,
elements r  of  R,  and  the  elements   have  in  M  the  same  order  of
 
          v

precedence as the corresponding elements r in R. But we have still to show
                                                  v

that the elements  include all the elements m of M, or, what is the same
 
                                                        v

thing, that the series



                                      I, l, l,. . .,l,. . .
                                          23v



is only a permutation of the series



                                      1, 2, 3, . . . v, . . .





    [506]



We prove this by a complete induction : we will show that, if the elements m
                                                                                          1m . . ., m appear in the imaging, that is also the case with the following
2,v

element m.
          v+1

Let λ be so great that, among the elements








Mhyy My Dy, ooy My,
the elements



                                      m, m, . . . , m,
                                        12v



which, by supposition, appear in the imaging, are contained. It may be that

also m is found among them ; then m appears in the imaging. But if
      v+1v+1

m is not among the elements
v+1








Myy My My ooy My,
, then m has with respect to these elements a definite ordinal position in M
        v+1

; infinitely many elements in R have the same ordinal position in R with

respect to r, r, . . ., r, amongst which let r be that with the least index in
            12λλ+σ

R. Then m has, as we can easily make sure, the same ordinal position
0v+1

with respect toMyy My My ooy Dy oy
in M as r has with respect to
        λ+σ



                                      r, r, . . . , r
                                        12λ+σ–1



in R. Since m, m, . . ., m have already appeared in the imaging, m is that
              12vv+1

element with the smallest index in M which has this ordinal position with

respect to








My My ooy My
Consequently, according to our law of correlation,









Thus, in this case too, the element m appears in the imaging, and r is
                                            v+1λ+σ

the element of R which is correlated to it.

We see, then, that by our manner of correlation, the whole aggregate M is

imaged on the whole aggregate R ; M and R are similar aggregates, which

was to be proved.

  From  the  theorem  which  we  have  just  proved  result,  for  example,  the

following theorems :



    [507]



The  ordinal  type  of  the  aggregate  of  all  negative  and  positive  rational

numbers, including zero, in their natural order of precedence, is η.The ordinal type of the aggregate of all rational numbers which are greater

than a and less than b, in their natural order of precedence, where a and b are

any real numbers, and a < b, is η.

The ordinal type of the aggregate of all real algebraic numbers in their

natural order of precedence is η.

The ordinal type of the aggregate of all real algebraic numbers which are

greater than a and less than b, in their natural order of precedence, where a

and b are any real numbers and a < b, is η.

For all these ordered aggregates satisfy the three conditions required in our
                                                                  *
theorem for M (see Crelle’s Journal, vol. lxxvii, p. 258).

If  we  consider,  further,  aggregates  with  the  types  —according  to  the

definitions given in § 8—written



    *
    [ Cf. Section V of the Introduction.]



η + η, ηη, (1 + η)η, (η + 1)η, (1 + η + 1)η, we find that those three conditions

are also fulfilled with them.

  Thus we have the theorems :



                                          (7)








n+n=ny,
                                          (8)nm=n€,
                                          (9)








(I4n)y=n,
                                          (10)









(n+ 1)yp=n,
                                          (11)








(T+n+1)p=7.
The repeated application of (7) and (8) gives for every finite number v:



                                          (12)








n.v=n,
                                          (13)1

.
On the other hand we easily see that, for v > 1, the types 1 + η, η + 1, v . η, 1

+ η + 1 are different both from one another and from η. We have



                                          (14)








n+1+y

=n
but η + v + η, for v > 1, is different from η.

  Finally, it deserves to be emphasized that



                                          (15)









    [508]



§ 10

The Fundamental Series contained in a Transfinite Ordered Aggregate

Let us consider any simply ordered transfinite aggregate M. Every part of

M is itself an ordered aggregate. For the study of the type  , those parts of M

M
which have the types ω and *ω appear to be especially valuable ; we call

them “ fundamental series of the first order contained in M,” and the former

—of  type ω—we  call  an  “ascending”  series,  the  latter—of  type  *ω—a

“descending  ”  one.  Since  we  limit  ourselves  to  the  consideration  of

fundamental  series  of  the  first  order  (in  later  investigations  fundamental

series of higher order will also occupy us), we will here simply call them

“fundamental series.” Thus an “ascending fundamental series ” is of the form                                          (1)










{av} ’ where a, < Ayi1s
a “descending fundamental series ” is of the form



                                          (2)









{bv}) where bv > bv-H-
The letter ν, as well as κ, λ, and µ, has everywhere in our considerations the

signification of an arbitrary finite cardinal number or of a finite type (a finite

ordinal number).

We call two ascending fundamental series {a} and {a′ in M “coherent”
                                                        νν

(zusammengehörig), in signs



                                          (3)









{a}11{a"},
if, for every element a there are elements a′ such that
                        νλa, < a,)\’
and also for every element a′ there are elements a such that
                                νµ



                                          a′ ≺ a.
                                            vµ



Two descending fundamental series {b} and {b′} in M are said to be
                                                  νν

“coherent,” in signs



                                          (4)









{o.} 1142},
if for every element b there are elements b′ such that
                        νλ









bv > b’M
and for every element b′ there are elements b such that
                          νµo, >b,.
An ascending fundamental series {a} and a descending one {b} are said
                                            νν

to be “coherent,” in signs



                                          (5)









{a,}11{2.},
if (a) for all values of ν and µ



                                            a ≺ b
                                            νµ



and (b) in M exists at most one (thus either only one or none at all) element

m such that, for all v’s,
0



                                        a ≺ m ≺ b.
                                          ν0ν





    [509]



  Then we have the theorems :

A. If two fundamental series are coherent to a third, they are also coherent

to one another.

B. Two fundamental series proceeding in the same direction of which one

is part of the other are coherent.

If there exists in M an element m which has such a position with respect
                                          0

to the ascending fundamental series {a} that :
                                            ν(a) for every ν



                                          a ≺ m,
                                            ν0



(b)  for  every  element m  of  M  that  precedes m  there  exists  a  certain
                                                              0

number ν such that
        0



                                  a ≻ m,  for   ,
 

S
                                    ν



then we will call m a “limiting element (Grenz-element ) of {a} in M” and
                      0ν

also a “ principal element (Hauptelement) of M.” In the same way we call m
                                                                                          0

a “ principal element of M ” and also “ limiting element of {b} in M ” if
                                                                            ν

these conditions are satisfied :

(a) for every ν



                                          b ≻ m,
                                            ν0



(b) for every element m of M that follows m exists a certain number ν
                                                        00

such that



                                  b ≻ m,  for   .
 

S
                                    ν



A fundamental series can never have more than one limiting element in M

; but M has, in general, many principal elements.

We perceive the truth of the following theorems :

C. If a fundamental series has a limiting element in M, all fundamental

series coherent to it have the same limiting element in M.

D.  If  two  fundamental  series  (whether  proceeding  in  the  same  or  inopposite directions) have one and the same limiting element in M, they are

coherent.

If M and M′ are two similarly ordered aggregates, so that



                                          (6)









and we fix upon any imaging of the two aggregates, then we easily see that

the following theorems hold :



    [510]



E. To every fundamental series in M corresponds as image a fundamental

series in M′, and inversely ; to every ascending series an ascending one, and

to every descending series a descending one ; to coherent fundamental series

in M correspond as images coherent fundamental series in M′, and inversely.

F. If to a fundamental series in M belongs a limiting element in M, then to

the corresponding fundamental series in M′ belongs a limiting element in M′,

and inversely; and these two limiting elements are images of one another in

the imaging.

G. To the principal elements of M correspond as images principal elements

of M′, and inversely.

If an aggregate M consists of principal elements, so that every one of its

elements is a principal element, we call it an “aggregate which is dense in

itself (insichdichte Menge).” If to every fundamental series in M there is a

limiting element in M, we call M a “closed (abgeschlossene) aggregate.” An

aggregate which is both “dense in itself” and “closed” is called a “perfect

aggregate.” If an aggregate has one of these three predicates, every similar

aggregate has the same predicate; thus these predicates can also be ascribedto the corresponding ordinal types, and so there are “types which are dense in

themselves,”  “closed  types,”  “perfect  types,”  and  also  “everywhere-dense

types” (§ 9).

For example, η is a type which is “dense in itself,” and, as we showed in §

9, it is also “everywhere-dense,” but it is not “closed.” The types ω and *ω

have no principal elements, but ω + ν and ν + *ω each have a principal

element, and are “closed ” types. The type ω . 3 has two principal elements,

but is not “closed” ; the type ω . 3 + ν has three principal elements, and is

“closed.”


§ 11

The Ordinal Type θ of the Linear Continuum X

We turn to the investigation of the ordinal type of the aggregate X = {x} of

all  real  numbers x,  such  that x ≧  0  and ≦  1  in  their  natural  order  of

precedence, so that, with any two of its elements x and x′,



                                    x ≺ x′,  if  x < x′.



Let the notation for this type be



                                          (1)










Xl
    [511]



  From  the  elements  of  the  theory  of  rational  and  irrational  numbers  we

know that every fundamental series {x} in X has a limiting element x in X,
                                            ν0

and  that  also,  inversely,  every  element x  of  X  is  a  limiting  element  ofcoherent fundamental series in X. Consequently X is a “ perfect aggregate ”

and θ is a “perfect type.”

But θ is not sufficiently characterized by that; besides that we must fix our

attention on the following property of X. The aggregate X contains as part the

aggregate R of ordinal type η investigated in § 9, and in such a way that,

between any two elements x and x of X, elements of R lie.
                                01

We will now show that these properties, taken together, characterize the

ordinal type θ of the linear continuum X in an exhaustive manner, so that we

have the theorem :

If an ordered aggregate M is such that (a) it is “perfect,” and (b) in it is

contained an aggregate S with the cardinal number  and which bears

 
such  a  relation  to  M  that,  between  any  two  elements m  and m  of  M
                                                                        01

elements of S lie, then .

 
  Proof.—If S had a lowest or a highest element, these elements, by (b),

would bear the same character as elements of M ; we could remove them

from S without S losing thereby the relation to M expressed in (b). Thus, we

suppose that S is without lowest or highest element, so that, by § 9, it has the

ordinal type η. For since S is a part of M, between any two elements s and s
                                                                                  01

of S other elements of S must, by (b), lie. Besides, by (b) we have . Thus

vl
the aggregates S and R are “similar” to one another.










We fix on any “ imaging ” of R on S, and assert that it gives a definite “

imaging ” of X on M in the following manner:

Let all elements of X which, at the same time, belong to the aggregate R

correspond as images to those elements of M which are, at the same time,

elements of S and, in the supposed imaging of R on S, correspond to the said

elements of R. But if x is an element of X which does not belong to R, x
                          00

may be regarded as a limiting element of a fundamental series {x} contained
                                                                            νin X, and this series can be replaced by a coherent fundamental series {}

contained in R. To this corresponds as image a fundamental series {} in S

S,
and M, which, because of (a), is limited by an element m of M that does not
                                                                  0

belong to S (F, § 10). Let this element m of M (which remains the same, by
                                                0

E, C, and D of § 10, if the fundamental series {x} and { } are replaced by
                                                        ν

others  limited  by  the  same  element x  in  X)  be  the  image  of x  in  X.
                                              00

Inversely, to every element m of M which does not occur in S belongs a
                                  0

quite definite element x of X which does not belong to R and of which m is
                          00

the image.



    [512]



In this manner a bi-univocal correspondence between X and M is set up,

and we have now to show that it gives an “imaging” of these aggregates.

This is, of course, the case for those elements of X which belong to R, and

for those elements of M which belong to S. Let us compare an element r of R

with an element x of X which does not belong to R ; let the corresponding
                    0

elements of M be s and m. If r < x, there is an ascending fundamental series
                            00

{  }, which is limited by x and, from a certain ν on,
                                00



r<r,,
 for  .



 

YS
The image of {  } in M is an ascending fundamental series {  }, which

will be limited by an m of M, and we have (§ 10)  ≺ m for every ν, and 
I,
                          00

s <5,
 for  . Thus (§ 7) s ≺ m.
 

=
                                    0

If r > x we conclude similarly that s ≻ m.
          00

Let us consider, finally, two elements x and x′ not belonging to R and the
                                                00

elements m and m′ corresponding to them in M ; then we show, by an
            00

analogous consideration, that, if x < x′, then m ≺ m′.
                                      0000

The proof of the similarity of X and M is now finished, and we thus have=
  HALLE, March 1895.    [207]








CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE


FOUNDING OF THE THEORY OF


TRANSFINITE NUMBERS









(SECOND ARTICLE)


§12

Well-Ordered Aggregates

AMONG simply ordered aggregates “well-ordered aggregates ” deserve a

special place ; their ordinal types, which we call “ordinal numbers,” form the

natural  material  for  an  exact  definition  of  the  higher  transfinite  cardinal

numbers or powers,—a definition which is throughout conformable to that

which was given us for the least transfinite cardinal number Aleph-zero by

the system of all finite numbers v (§ 6).

We call a simply ordered aggregate F (§ 7) “ well-ordered if its elements f

ascend in a definite succession from a lowest f in such a way that :
                                                      1

I. There is in F an element f which is lowest in rank.
                                  1

II. If F′ is any part of F and if F has one or many elements of higher rank

than  all  elements  of  F′,  then  there  is  an  element f′  of  F  which  follows

immediately after the totality F’, so that no elements in rank between f′ and F′          66
occur in F.

In particular, to every single element f of F, if it is not the highest, follows

in  rank  as  next  higher  another  definite  element f′;  this  results  from  the

condition II if for F’ we put the single element f. Further, if, for example, an

infinite series of consecutive elements









el ’7”
<rLe' <L <
e 0
e® <L g+
is contained in F in such a way, however, that there are also in F elements of
                                  (v)
higher rank than all elements e,then, by the second condition, putting for F′
              (v)
the totality {e}, there must exist an element f′ such that not only








S >
for all values of v, but that also there is no element g in F which satisfies the

two conditions











e<rf,
>
for all values of v.



    [208]  Thus, for example, the three aggregates



                                    (a a, . . ., a, . . .), 
                                      12v

                        (a a, . . ., a, . . ., b, b. . ., b, . . .), 
                            1,2v12μ

                    (a, a, . . ., a,  b, b, . . ., b, . . . c, c, c),
                      12v. . .12μ123



where








4, <0 <6, <0 <6 <6<,
are well-ordered. The two first have no highest element, the third has the

highest element c; in the second and third b immediately follows all the
                    31

elements a, in the third c immediately follows all the elements a and b.
          v1vμ

In the following we will extend the use of the signs ≺ and ≻, explained in §

7, and there used to express the ordinal relation of two elements, to groups of

elements, so that the formulæ












M < N,
M > N
are the expression for the fact that in a given order all the elements of the

aggregate M have a lower, or higher, respectively, rank than all elements of

the aggregate N.

A. Every part F of a well-ordered aggregate F has a lowest element.
                    1

  Proof.—If the lowest element f of F belongs to F, then it is also the
                                        11lowest element of F1. In the other case, let F′ be the totality of all elements of

F′ which have a lower rank than all elements F, then, for this reason, no
                                                          1

element of F lies between F′ and F. Thus, if f′ follows (II) next after F′, then
                                        1

it belongs necessarily to F and here takes the lowest rank.

B. If a simply ordered aggregate F is such that both F and every one of its

parts have a lowest element, then F is a well-ordered aggregate.



    [209]



  Proof.—Since F has a lowest element, the condition I is satisfied. Let F′ be

a part of F such that there are in F one or more elements which follow F′ ; let

F be the totality of all these elements and f′ the lowest element of F, then
11

obviously f′ is the element of F which follows next to F′. Consequently, the

condition II is also satisfied, and therefore F is a well-ordered aggregate.

C.  Every  part  F′  of  a  well-ordered  aggregate  F  is  also  a  well-ordered

aggregate.

  Proof.—By theorem A, the aggregate F′ as well as every part F″ of F′

(since it is also a part of F) has a lowest element ; thus by theorem B, the

aggregate F′ is well-ordered.

D. Every aggregate G which is similar to a well-ordered aggregate F is also

a well-ordered aggregate.

  Proof.—If  M  is  an  aggregate  which  has  a  lowest  element,  then,  as

immediately follows from the concept of similarity (§ 7), every aggregate N

similar to it has a lowest element. Since, now, we are to have G ≃ F, and F

has, since it is a well-ordered aggregate, a lowest element, the same holds of

G. Thus also every part G′ of G has a lowest element ; for in an imaging of G

on F, to the aggregate G′ corresponds a part F′ of F as image, so thatG L F.
But, by theorem A, F′ has a lowest element, and therefore also G′ has. Thus,

both  G  and  every  part  of  G  have  lowest  elements.  By  theorem  B,

consequently, G is a well-ordered aggregate.

E. If in a well-ordered aggregate G, in place of its elements g well-ordered

aggregates are substituted in such a way that, if F and F are the well-
                                                              gg′

ordered aggregates which occupy the places of the elements g and g′ and g ≺

g′, then also F ≺ F, then the aggregate H, arising by combination in this
                gg′

manner of the elements of all the aggregates F, is well-ordered.
                                                      g

  Proof.—Both H and every part H of H have lowest elements, and by
                                            1

theorem B this characterizes H as a well-ordered aggregate. For, if g is the
                                                                                  1

lowest element of G, the lowest element of  is at the same time the lowest

element of H. If, further, we have a part H of H, its elements belong to
                                                    1

definite aggregates F which form, when taken together, a part of the well-
                        g

ordered aggregate {F}, which consists of the elements F and is similar to
                        gg

the aggregate G. If, say,  is the lowest element of this part, then the lowest

element of the part of H contained in  is at the same time the lowest
                              1

element of H.



    [210]



§ 13

The Segments of Well-Ordered Aggregates

If f is any element of the well-ordered aggregate F which is different from

the initial element f, then we will call the aggregate A of all elements of F
                      1

which precede f a “ segment (Abschnitt) of F,” or, more fully, “ the segment

of F which is defined by the element f.” On the other hand, the aggregate R of

all the other elements of F, including f, is a “remainder of F,” and, more fully,

“the remainder which is determined by the element f.” The aggregates A and

R are, by theorem C of § 12, well-ordered, and we may, by § 8 and § 12,

write :



                                          (1)F=(A, R),
                                          (2)









R=(/, R),
                                          (3)









A <R.
R′ is the part of R which follows the initial element f and reduces to o if R

has, besides f, no other element.

 

For example, in the well-ordered aggregate



                  F = (a, a, . . ., a,. . . b, b,. . ., b, . . . c, c, c),
                          12v12μ123



the segment



                                            (a a)
                                              1,2



and the corresponding remainder                  (a, a, . . . a, . . . b, b . . . b, . . . c, c, c)
                      34v+212,μ123



are determined by the element a ; the segment
                                    3



                                    (a a, . . . , a, . . . )
                                      1,2v



and the corresponding remainder



                              (b, b, . . ., b, . . . c, c, c)
                                  12μ123



are determined by the element b; and the segment
                                    1



                        (a, a, . . ., a, . . . b, b, . . ., b, . . . c)
                          12v12µ1



and the corresponding segment



                                            (c, c)
                                              23



by the element c.
                  2

If A and A′ are two segments of F, f and f′ their determining elements, and



                                          (4)<A
then A′ is a segment of A. We call A′ the “less,” and A the “greater” segment

of F :



                                          (5)









A'<A.
Correspondingly we may say of every A of F that it is “less” than F itself :



                                            A<F.





    [211]



A.  If  two  similar  well-ordered  aggregates  F  and  G  are  imaged  on  one

another, then to every segment A of F corresponds a similar segment B of G,

and to every segment B of G corresponds a similar segment A of F, and the

elements f and g of F and G by which the corresponding segments A and B

are determined also correspond to one another in the imaging.

  Proof.—If  we  have  two  similar  simply  ordered  aggregates  M  and  N

imaged on one another, m and n are two corresponding elements, and M′ is

the aggregate of all elements of M which precede m and N′ is the aggregate

of  all  elements  of  N  which  precede n,  then  in  the  imaging  M′  and  N′

correspond to one another. For, to every element m′ of M that precedes m

must correspond, by § 7, an element n′ of N that precedes n, and inversely. If

we apply this general theorem to the well-ordered aggregates F and G we get

what is to be proved.

B. A well-ordered aggregate F is not similar to any of its segments A.

  Proof.—Let us suppose that F ≃ A, then we will imagine an imaging of Fon A set up. By theorem A the segment A′ of A corresponds to the segment A

of F, so that A′ ≃ A. Thus also we would have A′ ≃ F and A′ < A. From A′

would result, in the same manner, a smaller segment A″ of F, such that A″ ≃

F and A″ < A′; and so on. Thus we would obtain an infinite series



                                                  (v)(v+1)
                            A > A′ > A″ . . . A > A . . .



of segments of F, which continually become smaller and all similar to the
                                                    (v)
aggregate F. We will denote by f, f′, f″, . . ., f, . . . the elements of F which

determine these segments ; then we would have









FoF > O >
We would therefore have an infinite part



                                                    (v)
                                  (f, f′, f″, . . ., f, . . .)



of F in which no element takes the lowest rank. But by theorem A of § 12

such parts of F are not possible. Thus the supposition of an imaging F on one

of its segments leads to a contradiction, and consequently the aggregate F is

not similar to any of its segments.



    [212]



  Though by theorem B a well-ordered aggregate F is not similar to any of

its segments, yet, if F is infinite, there are always other parts of F to which F

is similar. Thus, for example, the aggregate                                  F = (a, a, . . ., a, . . .)
                                          12v



is similar to every one of its remainders



                                (a, a, . . ., a, . . .).
                                    k+1k+2k+v



Consequently, it is important that we can put by the side of theorem B the

following :

C.  A  well-ordered  aggregate  F  is  similar  to  no  part  of  any  one  of  its

segments A.

  Proof.—Let us suppose that F′ is a part of a segment A of F and F′ ≃ F. We

imagine an imaging of F on F′; then, by theorem A, to a segment A of the

well-ordered aggregate F corresponds as image the segment F″ of F′ ; let this

segment be determined by the element f′ of F′. The element f′ is also an

element of A, and determines a segment A′ of A of which F″ is a part. The

supposition  of  a  part  F′  of  a  segment  A  of  F  such  that  F′ ≃  F  leads  us

consequently to a part F″ of a segment A′ of A such that F″ ≃ A. The same

manner of conclusion gives us a part F‴ of a segment A″ of A′ such that F‴ ≃

A′. Proceeding thus, we get, as in the proof of theorem B, an infinite series of

segments of F which continually become smaller:



                                                  (v)(v+1)
                            A > A′ > A″ . . . A > A. . .,



and thus an infinite series of elements determining these segments:



                                                (v)(v+1)
                              f ≻ f′ ≻ f″ . . . f ≻ f . . .,



in which is no lowest element, and this is impossible by theorem A of § 12.

Thus there is no part F′ of a segment A of F such that F′ ≃ F.

D. Two different segments A and A′ of a well-ordered aggregate F are notsimilar to one another.

  Proof.—If A′ < A, then A′ is a segment of the well-ordered aggregate A,

and thus, by theorem B, cannot be similar to A.

E. Two similar well-ordered aggregates F and G can be imaged on one

another only in a single manner.

  Proof,—Let us suppose that there are two different imagings of F on G,

and let f be an element of F to which in the two imagings different images g

and g′ in G correspond. Let A be the segment of F that is determined by f, and

B and B′ the segments of G that are determined by g and g′. By theorem A,

both A ≃ B and A ≃ B′, and consequently B ≃ B′, contrary to theorem D.



    [213]



F. If F and G are two well-ordered aggregates, a segment A of F can have

at most one segment B in G which is similar to it.

  Proof.—If the segment A of F could have two segments B and B′ in G

which were similar to it, B and B′ would be similar to one another, which is

impossible by theorem D.

G. If A and B are similar segments of two well-ordered aggregates F and

G, for every smaller segment A′ < A of F there is a similar segment B′ < B of

G and for every smaller segment B′ < B of G a similar segment A′ < A of F.

The proof follows from theorem A applied to the similar aggregates A and

B.

H. If A and A′ are two segments of a well-ordered aggregate F, B and B′

are two segments similar to those of a well-ordered aggregate G, and A′ < A,

then B′ < B.

The proof follows from the theorems F and G.

I. If a segment B of a well-ordered aggregate G is similar to no segment of

a well-ordered aggregate F, then both every segment B′ > B of D and G itself

are similar neither to a segment of F nor F itself.

The proof follows from theorem G.

K. If for any segment A of a well-ordered aggregate F there is a similarsegment B of another well-ordered aggregate G, and also inversely, for every

segment B of G a similar segment A of F, then F ≃ G.

  Proof.—We can image F and G on one another according to the following

law: Let the lowest element f of F correspond to the lowest element g of G.
                                11

If f ≻ f is any other element of F, it determines a segment A of F. To this
      1

segment belongs by supposition a definite similar segment B of G, and let the

element g of G which determines the segment B be the image of F. And if g

is any element of G that follows g, it determines a segment B of G, to which
                                      1

by supposition a similar segment A of F belongs. Let the element f which

determines this segment A be the image of g. It easily follows that the bi-

univocal correspondence of F and G defined in this manner is an imaging in

the sense of § 7. For if f and f′ are any two elements of F, g and g′ the

corresponding elements of G, A and A′ the segments determined by f and f′,

B and B′ those determined by g and g′, and if, say,



                                            f′ < f,



then



                                            A′ < A.





    [214]



By theorem H, then, we have



                                            B′ < B,



and consequently                                            g′ ≺ g.



L. If for every segment A of a well-ordered aggregate F there is a similar

segment B of another well-ordered aggregate G, but if, on the other hand,

there is at least one segment of G for which there is no similar segment of F,

then there exists a definite segment B of G such that B ≃ F.
                                          11

  Proof.—Consider  the  totality  of  segments  of  G  for  which  there  are  no

similar segments in F. Amongst them there must be a least segment which we

will call B.  This  follows  from  the  fact  that,  by  theorem  A  of  §  12,  the
            1

aggregate  of  all  the  elements  determining  these  segments  has  a  lowest

element ; the segment B of G determined by that element is the least of that
                            1

totality. By theorem 1, every segment of G which is greater than B is such
                                                                                1

that no segment similar to it is present in F. Thus the segments B of G which

correspond to similar segments of F must all be less than B, and to every
                                                                        1

segment B < B belongs a similar segment A of F, because B is the least
                11

segment of G among those to which no similar segments in F correspond.

Thus, for every segment A of F there is a similar segment B of B, and for
                                                                                1

every segment B of B there is a similar segment A of F. By theorem K, we
                        1

thus have








M. If the well-ordered aggregate G has at least one segment for which

there  is  no  similar  segment  in  the  well-ordered  aggregate  F,  then  every

segment A of F must have a segment B similar to it in G.

  Proof.—Let B be the least of all those segments of G for which there are
                  1
                            67
no similar segments in F. If there were segments in F for which there were

no corresponding segments in G, amongst these, one, which we will call A,
                                                                                          1

would  be  the  least.  For  every  segment  of  A  would  then  exist  a  similar
                                                      1

segment of B, and also for every segment of B a similar segment of A.
              111Thus, by theorem K, we would have










    [215]



But this contradicts the datum that for B there is no similar segment of F.
                                                  1

Consequently, there cannot be in F a segment to which a similar segment in

G does not correspond.

N. If F and G are any two well-ordered aggregates, then either :

 

      (a) F and G are similar to one another, or

      (b) there is a definite segment B of G to which F is similar, or
                                            1

      (c) there is a definite segment A of F to which G is similar;
                                            1


and each of these three cases excludes the two others.

  Proof.—The relation of F to G can be any one of the three :

(a) To every segment A of F there belongs a similar segment B of G, and

inversely, to every segment B of G belongs a similar one A of F ;

(b) To every segment A of F belongs a similar segment B of G, but there is

at least one segment of G to which no similar segment in F corresponds;

(c) To every segment B of G belongs a similar segment A of F, but there is

at least one segment of F to which no similar segment in G corresponds.

The case that there is both a segment of F to which no similar segment in

G  corresponds  and  a  segment  of  G  to  which  no  similar  segment  in  F

corresponds is not possible ; it is excluded by theorem M.

By theorem K, in the first case we haveIn the second case there is, by theorem L, a definite segment B of B such
                                                                            1

that









and in the third case there is a definite segment A of F such that
                                                        1









We cannot have F ≃ G and F ≃ B simultaneously, for then we would have G
                                      1

≃ B, contrary to theorem B ; and, for the same reason, we cannot have both F
  1

≃ G and G ≃ A Also it is impossible that both F ≃ B and G ≃ A, for, by
                111

theorem A, from F ≃ B would follow the existence of a segment B′ of B
                          111

such that A ≃ B′. Thus we would have G ≃ B′ contrary to theorem B.
            111

O. If a part F′ of a well-ordered aggregate F is not similar to any segment

of F, it is similar to F itself.

  Proof.—By theorem C of § 12, F′ is a well-ordered aggregate. If F′ were

similar neither to a segment of F nor to F itself, there would be, by theorem

N, a segment F′ of F′ which is similar to F. But F′ is a part of that segment
                11

A of F which is determined by the same element as the segment F′ of F′.
                                                                                  1

Thus  the  aggregate  F  would  have  to  be  similar  to  a  part  of  one  of  its

segments, and this contradicts the theorem C.    [216]



§ 14

The Ordinal Numbers of Well-Ordered Aggregates

By § 7, every simply ordered aggregate M has a definite ordinal type ;

 
this type is the general concept which results from M if we abstract from the

nature of its elements while retaining their order of precedence, so that out of

them proceed units (Einsen) which stand in a definite relation of precedence

to one another. All aggregates which are similar to one another, and only

such, have one and the same ordinal type. We call the ordinal type of a well-

ordered aggregate F its “ordinal number.”

If a and β are any two ordinal numbers, one can stand to the other in one of

three possible relations. For if F and G are two well-ordered aggregates such

that









then, by theorem N of § 13, three mutually exclusive cases are possible :

 

      (a)

                                              F ≃ G;

      (b) There is a definite segment B of G such that
                                              1










      (c) There is a definite segment A of F such that
                                              1As we easily see, each of these cases still subsists if F and G are replaced

by aggregates respectively similar to them. Accordingly, we have to do with

three mutually exclusive relations of the types α and β to one another. In the

first case α=β; in the second we say that α<β; in the third we say that α>β.

Thus we have the theorem

A. If α and β are any two ordinal numbers, we have either α=β or α<β or

α>β.

  From the definition of minority and majority follows easily :

B. If we have three ordinal numbers α, β, γ, and if α<β and β<γ, then α<γ.

  Thus the ordinal numbers form, when arranged in order of magnitude, a

simply  ordered  aggregate  ;  it  will  appear  later  that  it  is  a  well-ordered

aggregate.



    [217]



The operations of addition and multiplication of the ordinal types of any

simply ordered aggregates, defined in § 8, are, of course, applicable to the

ordinal  numbers.  If   and ,  where  F  and  G  are  two  well-ordered

 
aggregates, then



                                          (1)










a+pB=(F, G).
The aggregate of union (F, G) is obviously a well-ordered aggregate too;thus we have the theorem :

C. The sum of two ordinal numbers is also an ordinal number.

In the sum α+β, α is called the “augend” and β the “addend.”

  Since F is a segment of (F, G), we have always



                                          (2)









a<a+pf.
On the other hand, G is not a segment but a remainder of (F, G), and may

thus, as we saw in § 13, be similar to the aggregate (F, G). If this is not the

case, G is, by theorem O of § 13, similar to a segment of (F, G). Thus



                                          (3)









B<a+p.
Consequently we have :

D. The sum of the two ordinal numbers is always greater than the augend,

but greater than or equal to the addend. If we have α+β=α+γ, we always have

β=γ.

In general α+β and β+α are not equal. On the other hand, we have, if γ is a

third ordinal number,



                                          (4)(a+B)+y=a+(B+y)
That is to say :

E. In the addition of ordinal numbers the associative law always holds.

If  we  substitute  for  every  element g  of  the  aggregate  G  of  type β  an

aggregate  F  of  type α,  we  get,  by  theorem  E  of  §  12,  a  well-ordered
            g

aggregate H whose type is completely determined by the types α and β and

will be called the product α.β:



                                          (5)









                                          (6)









T
F. The product of two ordinal numbers is also an ordinal number.

In the product α. β, α is called the “multiplicand” and β the “multiplier.”

In general α.β and β.α are not equal. But we have (§ 8)



                                          (7)(@.B).y=a.(B.7)
That is to say :



    [218]



G. In the multiplication of ordinal numbers the associative law holds.

The distributive law is valid, in general (§ 8), only in the following form :



                                          (8)










a.(B+y)=a.B+a.7y.
  With reference to the magnitude of the product, the following theorem, as

we easily see, holds :

H. If the multiplier is greater than 1, the product of two ordinal numbers is

always  greater  than  the  multiplicand,  but  greater  than  or  equal  to  the

multiplier. If we have α.β=α.γ, then it always follows that β=γ.

On the other hand, we evidently have



                                          (9)a.I=1.a=a.
We have now to consider the operation of subtraction. If α and β are two

ordinal numbers, and α is less than β, there always exists a definite ordinal

number which we will call β—α, which satisfies the equation



                                          (10)









at+(B—a)=p.
For if , G has a segment B such that ; we call the corresponding

 
remainder S, and have












G=(B, 9),
B=a+S;
and therefore



                                          (11)









The determinateness of β−α appears clearly from the fact that the segment B

of G is a completely definite one (theorem D of § 13), and consequently alsoS is uniquely given.

We  emphasize  the  following  formulæ,  which  follow  from  (4),  (8),  and

(10):



                                          (12)









(y+B8B)—(y+a)=B-a,
                                          (13)









y(B—a)=yB—ya.
It is important to reflect that an infinity of ordinal numbers can be summed

so that their sum is a definite ordinal number which depends on the sequence

of the summands. If



                                    β, . β, . . ., β, . . .
                                      12v



is any simply infinite series of ordinal numbers, and we have



                                          (14)9

vy
then, by theorem E of § 12,



                                          (15)









G=(Gy, Gy, ..

oy Gy o
is also a well-ordered aggregate whose ordinal number represents the sum of

the numbers β.
              v



    [219]



We have, then,



                                          (16)









Bt B+ -

e +B+ ..
and, as we easily see from the definition of a product, we always have



                                          (17)y.(Bi+Bat ... +B+ .. )
=‘)’-,31+'y-,32+ c +y.B,,+. .
If we put



                                          (18)










ay=)61+Bg+- .. +ﬁv:
then



                                          (19)










a,=(Gy, Gy, ..

5.
We have



                                          (20)Ayt1> Ay,
and, by (10), we can express the numbers β, by the numbers α as follows :
                                                  vv



                                          (21)









B1 =a, '8v+1 = Apy1— Ay
The series



                                    α, α, . . ., α, . . .
                                      12v



thus  represents any  infinite  series  of  ordinal  numbers  which  satisfy  the

condition (20); we will call it a “fundamental series” of ordinal numbers (§

10).  Between  it  and β  subsists  a  relation  which  can  be  expressed  in  the

following manner :

(a) The number β is greater than α for every v, because the aggregate (G,
                                          v1

G, . . ., G), whose ordinal number is α, is a segment of the aggregate G
2vv

which has the ordinal number β;

(b) If β′ is any ordinal number less than β, then, from a certain v onwards,

we always have



                                            α > β′.
                                            v



For, since β′ < β, there is a segment B of the aggregate G which is of type β′.

The element of G which determines this segment must belong to one of the

parts G; we will call this part . But then B′ is also a segment of (G, G, . .
 
      v12

., ), and consequently  Thus
 
 
                                  .                                            α > β′
                                            v



for v ≧ v.
          0

  Thus β is the ordinal number which follows next in order of magnitude

after all the numbers α; accordingly we will call it the “limit” (Grenze) of the
                        v

numbers α for increasing v and denote it by , so that, by (16) and (21):
          v



                                          (22)










Lima=aq+(u—u)+. . . +(an—a)+. ..
    [220]



We may express what precedes in the following theorem :

1. To every fundamental series {α} of ordinal numbers belongs an ordinal
                                          v

number   which  follows  next,  in  order  of  magnitude,  after  all  the

Lim a,
numbers α; it is represented by the formula (22).
          v

If by γ we understand any constant ordinal number, we easily prove, by the

aid  of  the  formulae  (12),  (13),  and  (17),  the  theorems  contained  in  the

formulæ:



                                          (23)Lim (y+a,)=vy+Lim q,;
                                          (24)










Lim y.q=y.Lim q,.
We have already mentioned in § 7 that all simply ordered aggregates of

given finite cardinal number v have one and the same ordinal type. This may

be proved here as follows. Every simply ordered aggregate of finite cardinal

number is a well-ordered aggregate ; for it, and every one of its parts, must

have a lowest element,—and this, by theorem B of § 12, characterizes it as a

well-ordered aggregate. The types of finite simply ordered aggregates are

thus  none  other  than  finite  ordinal  numbers.  But  two  different  ordinal

numbers α and β cannot belong to the same finite cardinal number v. For if,

say, α < β and Ḡ = β, then, as we know, there exists a segment B of G such

that . Thus the aggregate G and its part B would have the same finite

cardinal number v. But this, by theorem C of § 6, is impossible. Thus the

finite ordinal numbers coincide in their properties with the finite cardinal

numbers.

The case is quite different with the transfinite ordinal numbers ; to one and

the same transfinite cardinal number a belong an infinity of ordinal numbers

which form a unitary and connected system. We will call this system the

“number-class Z(a),” and it is a part of the class of types [α] of § 7. The next

object of our consideration is the number-class , which we will call “ the

Z(13)
second  number-class.”  For  in  this  connexion  we  understand  by  “the  first

number-class” the totality {v} of finite ordinal numbers.



    [221]§ 15

The Numbers of the Second Number-Class 

Z(m)
The second number-class  is the totality {α} of ordinal types α of well-

Z(x)
ordered aggregates of the cardinal number  (§ 6).


A. The second number-class has a least number 

 
  Proof.—By ω we understand the type of the well-ordered aggregate



                                          (1)









Fo=( s iz o5 35 s ¢ ¢ o)
where v runs through all finite ordinal numbers and



                                          (2)









S sr.
Therefore (§ 7)



                                          (3)Il

|

o
and (§ 6)



                                          (4)









el
Thus ω is a number of the second number-class, and indeed the least. For if γ

is any ordinal number less than ω, it must (§ 14) be the type of a segment of

F. But F has only segments
00



                                    A = (ƒ, ƒ, . . ., ƒ),
                                            12v



with finite ordinal number v. Thus γ = v. Therefore there are no transfinite

ordinal numbers which are less than ω, and thus ω is the least of them. By the

definition of  given in § 14, we obviously have .

Lim «,
 
B.  If α  is  any  number  of  the  second  number-class,  the  number α  +  1

follows it as the next greater number of the same number-class.

  Proof.—Let F be a well-ordered aggregate of the type α and of the cardinal

number ℵ :
          0



                                          (5)|

Il
                                          (6)









Ql

Il
We have, where by g is understood a new element,



                                          (7)









at+1=(F, g).
Since F is a segment of (F, g), we have



                                          (8)









at1I>a
We also have 

No+ =1 (§6).
Therefore the number α + 1belongs to the second number-class. Between α

and α + 1 there are no ordinal numbers ; for every number γ which is less

than α + 1 corresponds, as type, to a segment of (F, g), and such a segment

can only be either F or a segment of F. Therefore γ is either equal to or less

than α.



    [222]



C. If α, α, . . ., α, . . . is any fundamental series of numbers of the first or
        12v

second number-class, then the number  (§ 14) following them next in

Lim a,
order of magnitude belongs to the second number-class.

  Proof.—By § 14 there results from the fundamental series {α} the number
                                                                          v

Lim α if we set up another series β, β, . . ., β, . . ., where
      v12v



                    β = α, β = α − α . . ., β = α − α, . . .
                      11221,v+1v+1v



If, then, G, G, . . ., G, . . . are well-ordered aggregates such that
          12v









then also



                                G = (G, G, . . ., G, . . .)
                                        12v



is a well-ordered aggregate and2!

Lim a,=
It only remains to prove that









Since the numbers β, β, . . ., β, . . . belong to the first or second number-
                      12v

class, we have









ol

véNO)
and thus









Qll
But,  in  any  case,  G  is  a  transfinite  aggregate,  and  so  the  case is

 

G<no
excluded.

We will call two fundamental series {α} and {α′} of numbers of the first
                                                vv

or second number-class (§ 10) “ coherent, ” in signs :                                          (9)









{a} I {a},
if for every v there are finite numbers λ and μ such that
                                            00



                                          (10)









a x> ay,

A=
and



                                          (11)










a>dy B2 po
    [223]



D. The limiting numbers  and  belonging respectively to two

Limq,
Limd',
fundamental series {α} and {α′} are equal when, and only when, {α} || {α
                        vvv

′}.
v


  Proof.—For the sake of shortness we put  ,  . We willLim a,=8
 
first suppose that {α} ||{α′} ; then we assert that β = γ. For if β were not
                      vv

equal to γ, one of these two numbers would have to be the smaller. Suppose

that β < γ. From a certain v onwards we would have α′ >β (§ 14), and
                                                                      v

consequently, by (11), from a certain μ onwards we would have α > β. But
                                                                              µ

this is impossible because  . Thus for all µ’s we have α < β.
B=Lim q,
                                                                          µ

If,  inversely,  we  suppose  that β  =  γ,  then,  because α <  γ,  we  must
                                                                      v

conclude that, from a certain λ onwards, α′ > α, and, because α′ < β, we
                                                    λvv

must conclude that, from a certain µ onwards, α > α′. That is to say, {α} ∥
                                                        μvv

{α′}.
  v

E. If α is any number of the second number-class and v any finite ordinal
                                                                    0

number, we have v + α = α, and consequently also α–v = α.
                    00

  Proof.—We will first of all convince ourselves of the correctness of the

theorem when a = ω. We have












w=fasTas =5 .Sy o+ )i
vo=_(L1p Lo - - - g'vo)!
and consequently









 

D=0
1f2’ ..

* 'gvn!f:l

g -

=(gv

Vo+w
But if α > ω, we havea=w+(a—w),

vwta=@+e)+(@a—v)=v+(a—w)=a.
F. If v is any finite ordinal number, we have v . ω = ω.
        00

  Proof.—In order to obtain an aggregate of the type v . ω  we  have  to
                                                                    0

substitute for the single elements ƒ of the aggregate (ƒ, ƒ, . . ., ƒ, . . .)
                                          v12v

aggregates  of the type v. We thus obtain the aggregate
(Lo Brw 2 &0

 
                                              0











(rv &rw - o L &av - &avg - 2 &b
gv,zﬁ o0 0y gv,vo) LI -),
which is obviously similar to the aggregate {ƒ}. Consequently
                                                    v



                                        v . ω = ω.
                                          0



The same result is obtained more shortly as follows.


By (24) of § 14 we have, since ,w=Lim »
Vo 0= Lim Vo V-

14
On the other hand,



                                        {vv} ∥{v},
                                          0



and consequently









Lim yyv=Lim v= ;

v v
so that



                                          v ω = ω.
                                            0





    [224]



G. We have always



                                      (α + v)ω = αω,
                                              0



where α is a number of the second number-class and v a number of the first
                                                                0

number-class.

  Proof.—We haveLimy=o.
By (24) of § 14 we have, consequently,










(a+vy)o=Lim (a+vy)r.
ButI 2 v

S NS N
(a+vv= (a+vo)+(a+vo)+ cooF(at )
I v—1I

=a+(,+a)+@+a)...+a)+y,

I 2 v
= ata+t+ ... +aty

=av+v,
Now we have, as is easy to see,



                                      {αv+v}∥ {αv},
                                            0



and consequently










Lim (a+v)v=Lim (av+y,)=Lim avr=ae.
H. If α is any number of the second number-class, then the totality {α′} of

numbers α′ of the first and second number-classes which are less than α form,

in their order of magnitude, a well-ordered aggregate of type α.

  Proof.—Let F be a well-ordered aggregate such that , and let ƒ be the
                                                                                  1

lowest element of F. If α′ is any ordinal number which is less than α, then, by

§ 14, there is a definite segment A′ of F such that








and inversely every segment A′ determines by its type  a number α′ < α

 
of the first or second number-class. For, since ,  can only be either a

 
 
finite cardinal number or ℵ. The segment A′ is determined by an element ƒ′
                                0

≻ ƒ of F, and inversely every element f′ ≻ ƒ of F determines a segment A′ of
  11

F. If ƒ′ and ƒ″ are two elements of F which follow ƒ in rank, A′ and A″ are
                                                              1

the segments of F determined by them, α′ and α″ are their ordinal types, and,

say ƒ′ ≺ ƒ″, then, by § 13, A′ < A″ and consequently α′ < α″. If, then, we put F

= (ƒ, F′), we obtain, when we make the element ƒ′ of F′ correspond to the
  1

element α′ of {α′}, an imaging of these two aggregates. Thus we have    [225]



But , and, by theorem E, α–1 = α. Consequently









 
{a’}

a.
Since , we also have ; thus we have the theorems :

 
 
I. The aggregate {α′} of numbers α′ of the first and second number-classes

which  are  smaller  than  a  number α  of  the  second  number-class  has  the

cardinal number ℵ.
                    0

K. Every number α of the second number-class is either such that (a) it

arises out of the next smaller number α by the addition of I :
                                            −1



                                        α = α + I,
                                              −1



or (b) there is a fundamental series {α} of numbers of the first or second
                                              v

number-class such thata=Lim q,,
  Proof.—Let . If F has an element g which is highest in rank, we have

 
F=(A, g), where A is the segment of F which is determined by g. We have

then the first case, namely,









a=K+I=a_1+ I.
There exists, therefore, a next smaller number which is that called α.
                                                                                1

But if F has no highest element, consider the totality {α′} of numbers of

the first and second number-classes which are smaller than α. By theorem H,

the aggregate {α′}, arranged in order of magnitude, is similar to the aggregate

F ; among the numbers α′, consequently, none is greatest. By theorem I, the

aggregate {α′} can be brought into the form {α′} of a simply infinite series.
                                                        v

If we set out from α′, the next following elements α′, α′, . . . in this order,
                        123

which is different from the order of magnitude, will, in general, be smaller

than α′ ; but in every case, in the further course of the process, terms will
      1

occur which are greater than α′1 ; for α′ cannot be greater than all other
                                                1

terms, because among the numbers {α′} there is no greatest. Let that number
                                            v

α′ which has the least index of those greater than α′ be  . Similarly, let 
v1

be that number of the series {α′}which has the least index of those which are
                                    v

greater  than .  By  proceeding  in  this  way,  we  get  an  infinite  series  of

increasing numbers, a fundamental series in fact,











al al al al
1 p’, P,’ .. ey pyd * o @
    [226]We have
















I<P2<Ps< . .<py<p,+1: ..y
4 ’ ’ ’ ’
a1<apz<a,,3< o .<an<apy+1. .o

d.<d,, alwaysif u<p',;
and since obviously , we always have









 
Hence we see that every number α′, and consequently every number α′ < α,
                                        v

is exceeded by numbers  for sufficiently great values of v. But α is the

number which, in respect of magnitude, immediately follows all the numbers

α′, and consequently is also the next greater number with respect to all If,

therefore, we put , we have










 

dy=ay, 6, =0
a=Lim a,.
  From the theorems B, C, . . ., K it is evident that the numbers of the second

number-class  result  from  smaller  numbers  in  two  ways.  Some  numbers,which we call “ numbers of the first kind (Art),” are got from a next smaller

number α by addition of I according to the formula
          −1



                                        α = α + I;
                                              −1



The other numbers, which we call “numbers of the second kind,” are such

that for any one of them there is not a next smaller number α, but they arise
                                                                      −1

from fundamental series {α} as limiting numbers according to the formula
                              v










a=Lim a,.
Here α is the number which follows next in order of magnitude to all the

numbers α.
          v

We call these two ways in which greater numbers proceed out of smaller ones

“ the first and the second principle of generation of numbers of the second
                68
number-class.”


§ 16

The Power of the Second Number-Class is equal to the Second Greatest

Transfinite Cardinal Number Aleph-One

Before  we  turn  to  the  more  detailed  considerations  in  the  following

paragraphs of the numbers of the second number-class and of the laws which

rule them, we will answer the question as to the cardinal number which is

possessed by the aggregate  of all these numbers.



Z(wp)={a)
    [227]



A. The totality {α} of all numbers a of the second number-class forms,when arranged in order of magnitude, a well-ordered aggregate.

  Proof.—If we denote by A the totality of numbers of the second number-
                                  α

class  which  are  smaller  than  a  given  number α,  arranged  in  order  of

magnitude, then A is a well-ordered aggregate of type α − ω. This results
                    α

from theorem H of § 14. The aggregate of numbers α′ of the first and second

number-class which was there denoted by {α′}, is compounded out of {v}

and A, so that
    α



                                        {α′}=({v}, A).
                                                      α



Thus








and since








we have









Let J be any part of {α} such that there are numbers in {α} which are

greater than all the numbers of J. Let, say, α be one of these numbers. Then J

is also a part of , and indeed such a part that at least the number α of 
A,

Loy +1
A,
Lo, +1
                                                                                0is greater than all the numbers of J. Since  is a well-ordered aggregate, by

A
§ 12 a number α′ of  and therefore also of {α}, must follow next to all the

A+
numbers of J. Thus the condition II of § 12 is fulfilled in the case of {α} ; the

condition I of § 12 is also fulfilled because {α} has the least number ω.

Now, if we apply to the well-ordered aggregate {α} the theorems A and C

of § 12, we get the following theorems :

B.  Every  totality  of  different  numbers  of  the  first  and  second  number-

classes has a least number.

C.  Every  totality  of  different  numbers  of  the  first  and  second  number-

classes arranged in their order of magnitude forms a well-ordered aggregate.

We will now show that the power of the second number-class is different

from that of the first, which is ℵ.
                                    0

D. The power of the totality {α} of all numbers α of the second number-

class is not equal to ℵ.
                        0

  Proof.—If {α} were equal to ℵ, we could bring the totality {α} into the
                                        0

form of a simply infinite series



                                      γ γ, . . ., γ, . . .
                                        12v



such that {γ} would represent the totality of numbers of the second number-
            v

class in an order which is different from the order of magnitude, and {γ}
                                                                                        v

would contain, like {α}, no greatest number.



    [228]



  Starting from γ, let  be the term of the series which has the least index of
Vs,
                  1

those greater than γ,  the term which has the least index of those greater
Ve,
                      1

than , and so on. We get an infinite series of increasing numbers,



Vs,
                                        γ γ, . . ., γ
                                          12vsuch that
















I<py<pg-.. <Pp<pp+1< ...
V1<V, <Vo,++ <Vo,<Yo11< -

Yo = Yo,

)
By theorem C of § 15, there would be a definite number δ of the second

number-class, namely,











d=Lim y,,
which is greater than all numbers  Consequently we would have



                                            δ > γ
                                                  v



for every v. But {γ} contains all numbers of the second number-class, and
                    v

consequently also the number δ ; thus we would have, for a definite v,
                                                                                0which equation is inconsistent with the relation  The supposition 

8>y,
consequently leads to a contradiction.

E. Any totality {β} of different numbers β of the second number-class has,

if it is infinite, either the cardinal number ℵ or the cardinal number {α} of
                                                    0

the second number-class.

  Proof.—The aggregate {β}, when arranged in its order of magnitude, is,

since it is a part of the well-ordered aggregate {α}, by theorem O of § 13,

similar either to a segment , which is the totality of all numbers of the

 
same  number-class  which  are  less  than α,  arranged  in  their  order  of
                                                    0

magnitude, or to the totality {α} itself. As was shown in the proof of theorem

A, we have










ag — .
Thus we have either  or  , and consequently  is either

{Bl=a—w
{B}={a}
equal to  or . But  is either a finite cardinal number or is equal to

 
ℵ  (theorem  I  of  §  15).  The  first  case  is  here  excluded  because  {β}  is
0

supposed to be an infinite aggregate. Thus the cardinal number  is either

 
equal to ℵ or .
 
          0

F.  The  power  of  the  second  number-class  {α}  is  the  second  greatest

transfinite cardinal number Aleph-one.



    [229]



  Proof.—There is no cardinal number a which is greater than ℵ and less
                                                                              0

than . For if not, there would have to be, by § 2, an infinite part {β} of {α}

 
such that . But by the theorem E just proved, the part {β} has either the

 
cardinal number ℵ or the cardinal number . Thus the cardinal number 
 
                    0is  necessarily  the  cardinal  number  which  immediately  follows ℵ  in
                                                                                      0

magnitude ; we call this new cardinal number ℵ.
                                                        1

In  the  second  number-class   we  possess,  consequently,  the  natural

Z(x)
representative for the second greatest transfinite cardinal number Aleph-one.


§ 17

                                  µµ−1
The Numbers of the Form ωv + ωv+ . . . + v.
                                    01µ

It is convenient to make ourselves familiar, in the first place, with those

numbers of  which are whole algebraic functions of finite degree of ω.

Z(%)
Every such number can be brought—and brought in only one way—into the

form



                                          (1)










p=wrvpt+ o I+ ...,
where µ, v are finite and different from zero, but v v, . . .,v may be zero.
          012µ

This rests on the fact that



                                          (2)









oV + 'y ="y,
if µ′ < µ and v > o, v′ > o. For, by (8) of § 14, we haveoV + o'v =" (V' + 0"~ *),
and, by theorem E of § 15,









Vv S
+ o Fy =ty
Thus, in an aggregate of the form









v+ HvE L
all  those  terms  which  are  followed  towards  the  right  by  terms  of  higher

degree in ω may be omitted. This method may be continued until the form

given in (I) is reached. We will also emphasize that



                                          (3)









v+ "V = o*(v+V).
Compare, now, the number φ with a number ψ of the same kind:



                                          (4)Y=a"
pot
p1+ .
. +PA-
If µ and λ are different and, say, μ < λ, we have by (2) φ + ψ = ψ, and

therefore φ < ψ.



    [230]



If µ = λ, v, and ρ are different, and, say, v < ρ, we have by (2)
              0000



                                λλ−1
                        φ + (ω(ρ−v) + ωρ + . . . +ρμ) = ψ,
                                  001



and therefore










p <.
If, finally,









e e Ve 1= Po-1y

o< M,
but v is different from p and, say, v < ρ, we have by (2)
    σσσσ+ A-0, — -
¢ (w (Pw V¢)+w)\ 1p¢+1+ ot ot 7 +p“)=‘\,b’
and therefore again



                                            φ < ψ.



  Thus, we see that only in the case of complete identity of the expressions φ

and ψ can the numbers represented by them be equal.

The addition of φ and ψ leads to the following result :

 

      (a) If μ < λ, then, as we have remarked above,



                                              φ + ψ = ψ ;



      (b) If μ = λ, then we have



                                          λλ−1
                            φ + ψ = ω(v + ρ) + ωρ+ . . . +ρλ ;
                                            001



      (c) If μ>λ, we haved+ Y=g+ o 4. ..+ o1+ 0o+ po)
b oy x x s s
In order to carry out the multiplication of φ and ψ, we remark that, if p is a

finite number which is different from zero, we have the formula :



                                          (5)









pp=wvp+ o Tyt ... F
It easily results from the carrying out of the sum consisting of p terms φ+φ+ .

. . +φ. By means of the repeated application of the theorem G of § 15 we get,

further, remembering the theorem F of § 15,



                                          (6)










¢w=(d4+1’
and consequently also



                                          (7)









po*

wu+k
By the distributive law, numbered (8) of § 14, we haveP =patpot+ po’ oyt . o+ Popr-1F o
Thus the formulae (4), (5), and (7) give the following result :



    (a) If pλ=o, we have









pY =

w*"py +

a)y.+)\—lp1+ e

+o* o 1=V ;
    (b) If ρ is not equal to zero, we have
            λ















¢\b=w"+" =
potw Al
Pt
1 + o*tpr_1+ w'ropr
+o* Iyt .
    [231]



We arrive at a remarkable resolution of the numbers φ in the following

manner. Let



                                          (8)¢=lly"Ko+wMK1+ o .. +(I/‘7K‘r)
where









M>py>pg> e oo > pr 20
and k, k . . ., k, are finite numbers which are different from zero. Then we
    01τ

have









¢ = ("1 + '+ . . . + @i, ) (@ Py + 1)
By the repeated application of this formula we get











¢ =i (wtr-17 k1, 4 1) (wtr-2"Fr-1k, a4 1), . .
("~ + 1),
But, now,



                                      λλ
                                    ωk + I = (ω + 1),
                                                          κif κ is a finite number which is different from zero; so that :



                                          (9)













¢ = i (wPT-17Fr 4 D), oy (@tr-27 -1 Tk, g . .
v (g 1)kq-
              λ
The factors ω + 1 which occur here are all irresoluble, and a number φ can

be represented in this product-form in only one way. If μ = 0, then φ is of the
                                                                  τ

first kind, in all other cases it is of the second kind.

The apparent deviation of the formulae of this paragraph from those which

were given in Math. Ann., vol. xxi, p. 585 (or Grundlagen, p. 41), is merely a

consequence of the different writing of the product of two numbers : we now

put the multiplicand on the left and the multiplicator on the right, but then we

put them in the contrary way.


§ 18

            69a
The Power  γ in the Domain of the Second Number-Class

Let ξ be a variable whose domain consists of the numbers of the first and

second  number-classes  including  zero.  Let γ  and δ  be  two  constants

belonging to the same domain, and let



                                          δ>0, γ>1.



We can then assert the following theorem :

A. There is one wholly determined one-valued function f(ξ) of the variable

ξ such that :

       (a)



                                                f(0) = δ.



      (b) If ξ′ and ξ″ are any two values of ξ, and if



                                                  ξ′<ξ″,

        then



                                                f(ξ)<f(ξ″).





    [232]



(c) For every value of ξ we have









SE+D)=/(E)y-
(d) If {ξ} is any fundamental series, then {f(ξ)} is one also, and if we
            vv

have










£

Lim §,,
thenS§)=Lim £(£,).
  Proof.—By (a) and (c), we have



                              f(1)=δγ, f(2)=δγγ, f(3)=δγγγ, . . .,



and, because δ>o and γ > 1, we have



                          f(1)<f(2)<f(3)< . . . <f(v)<f(v+1)< . . .



  Thus the function f(ξ) is wholly determined for the domain ξ<ω. Let us

now suppose that the theorem is valid for all values of ξ which are less than

α, where α is any number of the second number-class, then it is also valid for

ξ≦α. For if α is of the first kind, we have from (c):



                                      f(α)=f(α-)γ>f(α-)
                                                11



so that the conditions (b), (c), and (d) are satisfied for ξ≦α. But if α is of the

second kind and {a} is a fundamental series such that Lim α=α, then it ν
                      vv

follows from (b) that also {f(α)} is a fundamental series, and from (d) that
                                    v

f(α)=Lim f(α). If we ν take another fundamental series {α′} such that Lim α
            vv

′ = α, then, because of (b), the two funda-ν mental series {f(α)} and {f(α′)}
vvv

are  coherent,  and  thus  also f(α)=Lim f(α′).  The  value  of f(α)  is, ν
                                                      v

consequently, uniquely determined in this case also.

If α′ is any number less than α, we easily convince ourselves that f(α′) <

f(α). The conditions (b), (c), and (d) are also satisfied for . Hence follows

 
the validity of the theorem for all values of ξ. For if there were exceptionalvalues of ξ for which it did not hold, then, by theorem B of § 16, one of them,

which we will call α, would have to be the least. Then the theorem would be

valid for ξ<α, but not for ξ≦α, and this would be in contradiction with what

we have proved. Thus there is for the whole domain of ξ one and only one

function f(ξ) which satisfies the conditions (α) to (d).



    [233]



If we attribute to the constant δ the value 1 and then denote the function

f(ξ) by



                                                ξ
                                              γ,



we can formulate the following theorem :

B. If γ is any constant greater than I which belongs to the first or second
                                                          ξ
number-class, there is a wholly definite function y of ξ such that:

      0
(a) γ=1;

(b) If ξ′<ξ″ then

                                          ξ+1ξ
(c) For every value of ξ we have γ=γγ;

                                                    ξv
(d) If {ξ} is a fundamental series, then {γ} is such a series, and we have,
          v

if ξ=Lim ξ, the ν equation
          v










y‘e =Lim ‘ygl'.
We can also assert the theorem :

C. If f(ξ) is the function of ξ which is characterized in theorem A, we haveS(€)=6v"
  Proof.—If we pay attention to (24) of § 14, we easily convince ourselves
                      ξ
that the function δγ satisfies, not only the conditions (a), (b), and (c) of

theorem A, but also the condition (d) of this theorem. On account of the
                                                                                ξ
uniqueness of the function f(ξ), it must therefore be identical with δγ.

D. If α and β are any two numbers of the first or second number-class,

including zero, we have









y* =gty
                                                    α+ξ
  Proof.—We consider the function φ(ξ)=γ. Paying attention to the fact

that, by formula (23) of § 14,










Lim (a+§)=a+Lim §,
we recognize that φ(ξ) satisfies the following four conditions :

 

              α
(a) φ(o) = γ;

(b) If ξ′<ξ″, then φ(ξ′) <φ(ξ″);

(c) For every value of ξ we have φ(ξ+ 1)=φ(ξ)γ;

(d) If {ξ} is a fundamental series such that Lim ξ=ξ, we have ν
          vv¢(6)=Lim ¢(£.).
                                                  α
By theorem C we have, when we put δ=γ,









(&) =v"y"
If we put ξ=β in this, we have









ytE=
YyP.
E. If α and β are any two numbers of the first or second number-class,

including zero, we have










7=y
    [234]



                                                      αξ
  Proof.—Let us consider the function ψ(ξ)=γ and remark that, by (24) of §

14, we always have  , then we can, by theorem D, assert the

Lim af,=a Lim §,
following:(a) ψ(o)=1;

(b) If ξ′<ξ″, then ψ(ξ′)<ψ(ξ″);

                                                          α
(c) For every value of ξ we have ψ(ξ+1) = ψ(ξ)γ;

(d) If {ξ} is a fundamental series, then {ψ(ξ)} is also such a series, and
          νν

we have, if  , the equation  .

 
VA(§)=Lim ¥(£,)
                                                                α
  Thus, by theorem C, if we substitute in it i for δ and γ for γ,









V() =(v")".
                            ξ
On the magnitude of γ in comparison with ξ we can assert the following

theorem :

F. If γ > 1, we have, for every value of ξ,










yt =L
  Proof.—In the cases ξ=o and ξ=1 the theorem is immediately evident. We

now show that, if it holds for all values of ξ which are smaller than a given

number α>1, it also holds for ξ=α.

If α is of the first kind, we have, by supposition,









and consequentlyHence








y*Zaytay(y=1)
Since both α and γ–I are at least equal to I, and α+I=α, we have
              -1–1









If, on the other hand, α is of the second kind and










a=Lim ay,
then, because αν <α, we have by supposition









ConsequentlyLim q, < Lim *,
v
that is to say,









If, now, there were values of ξ for which









>

Y
one of them, by theorem B of § 16, would have to be the least. If this number

is denoted by α, we would have, for ξ<α,










E<9¥
but



                                                α
                                            α>γ,



which contradicts what we have proved above.    [235]



Thus we have for all values of ξ










§ 19

The Normal Form of the Numbers of the Second Number-Class
                                                                            ξ
Let a be any number of the second number-class. The power ω will be, for

sufficiently great values of  greater than α. By theorem F of § 18, this is

 
always the case for ξ>α; but in general it will also happen for smaller values

of ξ.

By theorem B of § 16, there must be, among the values of ξ for which



                                              ξ
                                            ω > α,



one  which  is  the  least.  We  will  denote  it  by β,  and  we  easily  convince

ourselves that it cannot be a number of the second kind. If, indeed, we had










B=Lim 3,,
we would have, since β < β,
                          νB,

All
and consequently










Lim o® Z a.
Thus we would have








whereas we have



                                            β
                                            ω > α.



  Therefore β is of the first kind. We denote β by α, so that β = α + 1, and
                                                      -100

consequently can assert that there is a wholly determined number α of the
                                                                                  0

first or second number-class which satisfies the two conditions :



                                          (I)0 <
0w a ™ > a.
  From the second condition we conclude that










does not hold for all finite values of ν, for if it did we would have









Lim "
0Y=0"w < «
The least finite number ν for which









o™y >a
will be denoted by k+1. Because of (1), we have K>o.
                      00



    [236]



  There is, therefore, a wholly determined number K of the first number-
                                                                0

class such that



                                          (2)o' kga, «(ko+1)>a.
If we put  , we have



a—wog=a’
                                          (3)









a=w"
w°"o+a'
and



                                          (4)









0<a <w™, O<ky<wo.
But α can be represented in the form (3) under the conditions (4) in only a

single  way.  For  from  (3)  and  (4)  follow  inversely  the  conditions  (2)  and

thence the conditions (1). But only the number α=β satisfies the conditions
                                                        0−1

(1), and by the conditions (2) the finite number k is uniquely determined.
                                                            0

From (1) and (4) follows, by paying attention to theorem F of § 18, thata<a,

a,
Thus we can assert the following theorem :

A.  Every  number  α  of  the  second  number-class  can  be  brought,  and

brought in only one way, into the form








a=ow"Ky+d,
where









’
0<Zd' <w™ O<ky<w,
and α′ is always smaller than α, but α. is smaller than or equal to α.
                                          0

If α′ is a number of the second number-class, we can apply theorem A to it,

and we have



                                          (5)









’ 7
a=ow;+a,
where0<d"<w", O<K <o,
and



                                      α<α,  α″<α′.
                                        10



In general we get a further sequence of analogous equations :



                                          (6)









’” ”
a =wgt+a,
                                          (7)









a

0

= w3 + o
But this sequence cannot be infinite, but must necessarily break off. For

the numbers α, α′, α″, . . . decrease in magnitude :



                                        α>α′>α″>α‴. . .



If a series of decreasing transfinite numbers were infinite, then no term would

be the least ; and this is impossible by theorem B of § 16. Consequently we

must have, for a certain finite numerical value τ,    [237]



If we now connect the equations (3), (5), (6), and (7) with one another, we

get the theorem :

B. Every number α of the second number-class can be represented, and

represented in only one way, in the form









a=w" %+ o+ ...+,
where α, α′ . . . α are numbers of the first or second number-class, such that
        01τ

:









aQ>a;>a>. . . >a, 20,
while κ, κ, . . . . κ, τ + 1 are numbers of the first number-class which are
      01τ

different from zero.

The form of numbers of the second number-class which is here shown will

be called their “ normal form ” ; α is called the “ degree ” and α the “
                                          0τ

exponent ” of α. For τ = o, degree and exponent are equal to one another.

  According as the exponent α is equal to or greater than zero, α is a number
                                  τ

of the first or second kind.Let us take another number β in the normal form :



                                          (8)









B=wPAg+ PN+ . .. +ofoA,.
The formulæ:



                                          (9)









o* K’ +
o
k=w"(x'+
),
                                          (10)









o ! a? 1 QI
"k + o0k =0k,

a<a,
where κ, κ′, κ″. here denote finite numbers, serve both for the comparison of

α with β and for the carrying out of their sum and difference. These are

generalizations of the formulae (2) and (3) of § 17.

For  the  formation  of  the  product  αβ,  the  following  formulæ  come  into

consideration :



                                          (11)A =% A+ 0"+ . .. +0*k,, O<A<w;
                                          (12)








aw=@»*!;
                                          (13)








ao®

wﬂo+ﬂ”

/

>0.
                            β
The  exponentiation α  can  be  easily  carried  out  on  the  basis  of  the

following formulae :



                                          (14)









=0+ ..., 0<A<o.
The terms not written on the right have a lower degree than the first. Hence
                                                      λ
follows readily that the fundamental series {α} and {} are coherent, so

that



                                          (15)aw._
= ™®
)
ag >0
Thus, in consequence of theorem E of § 18, we have :



                                          (16)









wB' _ aomﬂ'

ay >0,

’

>0.
By the help of these formulæ we can prove the following theorems:



    [238]



C. If the first terms  ,  of the normal forms of the two numbers α

and β are not equal, then α is less or greater than β according as  is less or

greater than  . But if we have









0N
™Ky =
PAg, @*
Ky = WP\
-
.y 0PK,
= ON
P
and if  is less or greater than  , then α is correspondingly less or

™"

i1
0
greater than β.

D. If the degree α of α is less than the degree β of β, we have
                      00



                                            α+β=β.If α = β, then
  00









a+B=wf(o+No) + PN+ . . . +&™ A,
But if








Bo,
<
1
ap+

0

a,2f3

°)

&5

> B,

a

0>

ay> 3
then










a+B=w‘mKo+ oo +waPKP+(DBOAo+COBlA1+ oo e +aﬁ¢xq.
E. If β is of the second kind (β>0), then
                                    ϭ









aIB = w“0+ﬂoxo + wﬂo‘f'ﬂl}\l + ...+ w¢0+ﬁcrxo_ = w"‘-OIB g
But if β is of the first kind (β=0), then
                                ϭa3 = PN+ @ tPA + . L o™ Be-IN @k,
+ okt .. F 0k,
F. If β is of the second kind (β>0), then
                                    ϭ









af = w*P.
But if β is of the first kind (β=0), and indeed ϐ=β′+λ, where β′ is of the
                                    ϭϭ

second kind, we have:









af = w*F o,
G. Every number α of the second number-class can be represented, in only

one way, in the product-form :










a=w"% (0" + ;- 1(0”+ Dicroz . .« (0 + g,
and we haveYo=Qn Y1=0Qr-1= 01 Vo= Ar—2=0r_1y + « «, Yr =0 — Ay,
whilst κ, κ . . . κ have the same denotation as in the normal form. The
        01,τ
        γ
factors ω+ 1 are all irresoluble.

H.  Every  number  α  of  the  second  kind  which  belongs  to  the  second

number-class can be represented, and represented in only one way, in the

form









’
a=w",
where γ>o and α′ is a number of the first kind which belongs to the first or
        0

second number-class.



    [239]



I. In order that two numbers α and β of the second number-class should

satisfy the relation



                                          α+β=β+α,



it is necessary and sufficient that they should have the form



                                          α=γμ, β=γν,



where μ and ν are numbers of the first number-class.K. In order that two numbers α and β of the second number-class, which

are both of the first kind, should satisfy the relation



                                            αβ=βα,



it is necessary and sufficient that they should have the form









Q
]

v

B

=%
where μ and ν are numbers of the first number-class.

In order to exemplify the extent of the normal form dealt with and the

product-form immediately connected with it, of the numbers of the second

number-class,  the  proofs,  which  are  founded  on  them,  of  the  two  last

theorems, I and K, may here follow.

  From the supposition



                                          α+β=β+α



we first conclude that the degree α of α must be equal to the degree β of β.
                                        00

For if, say, α < β we would have, by theorem D,
              00,



                                            a+β=β,



and consequently



                                            β+α=β,which is not possible, since, by (2) of § 14,



                                            β+α>β.



  Thus we may put









a=wpu+d, B=ow+f,
where the degrees of the numbers α′ and β′ are less than α, and μ and ν are
                                                                      0

infinite numbers which are different from zero. Now, by theorem D we have









a+B=e(u+v)+B, B+a=w(u+v)+d,
and consequently









o(u+v)+ B =w(ntv)+a
By theorem D of § 14 we have consequently



                                            β′=α′.



Thus we havea=0"u+a, B=ov+d,
and if we put








w+a' =1y
we have, by (11):



                                        α=γμ,  β=γν.





    [240]



Let  us  suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that α and β  are  two  numbers  which

belong  to  the  second  number-class,  are  of  the  first  kind,  and  satisfy  the

condition



                                          αβ = βα,



and we suppose that



                                              α>β.



We will imagine both numbers, by theorem G, in their product-form, and let                                      α=δα′,  β=δβ′,



where α′ and β′ are without a common factor (besides 1) at the left end. We

have then



                                            α′>β′,



and



                                          α′δβ′=β′δα′.



All the numbers which occur here and farther on are of the first kind,

because this was supposed of α and β.

The last equation, when we refer to theorem G, shows that α′ and β′ cannot

be both transfinite, because, in this case, there would be a common factor at

the left end. Neither can they be both finite; for then δ would be transfinite,

and, if κ is the finite factor at the left end of δ, we would have



                                            α′κ=β′κ,



and thus



                                            α′>β′,



Thus there remains only the possibility that



                                        α′>ω  β′<ω



But the finite number β′ must be 1:                                            β′=1,



because otherwise it would be contained as part in the finite factor at the left

end of α′.

We arrive at the result that β=δ, consequently



                                            α=βα′,



where α′ is a number belonging to the second number-class, which is of the

first kind, and must be less than α:



                                            α′<α.



Between α′ and β the relation



                                          α′β= βα′



subsists.



    [241]



  Consequently if also α′>β, we conclude in the same way the existence of a

transfinite number of the first kind α″ which is less than α′ and such that



                                    α′=βα″,  α″ β=βα″.



If also α″ is greater than β, there is such a number α‴ less than α″, such that                                  α″ =βα‴,  α‴ β=βα‴,



and so on. The series of decreasing numbers, α, α′, α″, α‴, . . ., must, by

theorem B of § 16, break off. Thus, for a definite finite index ρ, we must
                                                                              0

have









If








we have








a=Bp°+l
, B=8;
the theorem K would then be proved, and we would have



                                  γ=β,  μ=ρ+1,  ν=1.
                                                0



But ifo < ,3,
then we put









a) = BI’
and have










a=RBy BB1=PBB PBi<B
Thus there is also a finite number ρ such that
                                        1










B=ByBsy BiBa=PBsB1 Ba<pBi
In general, we have analogously :









B1=0B4"Bs BeBs=PsBsy Ls<Ps
and so on. The series of decreasing numbers β, β, β, . . . also must, by
                                                        123

theorem B of § 16, break off. Thus there exists a finite number κ such thatBe-1=B=
If we put



                                            β=γ,
                                              κ



then



                                            uν
                                        α=γ, β=γ,



where μ and ν are numerator and denominator of the continued fraction.
















    [242]



§ 20

The ε-Numbers of the Second Number-Class

The degree α of a number α is, as is immediately evident from the normal
                0

form :                                          (1)









a=w'kyg+o'kyt. ..y Gg> 0> .., 0<k, <w,
when we pay attention to theorem F of § 18, never greater than α; but it is a

question whether there are not numbers for which α=α. In such a case the
                                                              0

normal form of α would reduce to the first term, and this term would be equal
  α
to ω, that is to say, α would be a root of the equation



                                          (2)










F=£
On the other hand, every root α of this equation would have the normal form
α
ω; its degree would be equal to itself.

The numbers of the second number-class which are equal to their degree

coincide, therefore, with the roots of the equation (2). It is our problem to

determine these roots in their totality. To distinguish them from all other

numbers we will call them the “ε-numbers of the second number-class.” That

there are such ε-numbers results from the following theorem :

A. If γ is any number of the first or second number-class which does not

satisfy the equation (2), it determines a fundamental series {γ} by means of

the equations"= wY,

Ya=o"

o o0y

-yy = va—l’
The limit  of this fundamental series ν is always an ε-number.

Lim y,=E(y)
                                                            γ
  Proof.—Since γ is not an ε-number, we have ω>γ, that is to say, γ>γ.
                                                                                      1

Thus, by theorem B of § 18, we have also  , that is to say, γ > γ; and in
0" > "
                                                                            21

the  same  way  follows  that γ>γ,  and  so  on.  The  series  {γ}  is  thus  a
                                    32ν

fundamental series. We denote its limit, which is a function of γ, by E(γ) and

have :










o®P=Lim o =Lim y,.;=E(y).

v
Consequently E(γ) is an ε-number.

B. The number ε=E(1)=Lim ω, where
                    0ν








wg = 0™,
is the least of all the ε-numbers.



    [243]



  Proof.—Let e′ be any ε-number, so thatSince ε′>ω, we have  , that is to say, ε′>ω.
PR
                                                      1

Similarly  , that is to say, ε′>ω, and so on.
w’ > w™
                                          2

We have in general



                                            ε′>ω,
                                                  ν



and consequently









>Lim w,,
that is to say,








€-
Thus ε=E(1) is the least of all ε-numbers.
      0

C. If ε′ is any e-number, ε″ is the next greater ε-number, and γ is any

number which lies between them :



                                            ε′<γ<ε″,



then E(γ)=ε″.  Proof.—From



                                            ε′<γ<ε″



follows








o <
o<
o
)
that is to say,





                                              ε′<γ<ε″.
                                                  1





Similarly we conclude



                                            ε′<γ<ε″,
                                              2



and so on. We have, in general,



                                          ε′< γ<ε″,
                                                ν



and thus



                                        ε′<E(γ)≦ε″.By theorem A, E(γ) is an ε-number. Since ε″ is the e-number which follows e′

next in order of magnitude, E(γ) cannot be less than e″, and thus we must

have



                                          E(γ) = e″.



  Since ε′+1 is not an ε-number, simply because all ε-numbers, as follows
                                        ξ
from the equation of definition ξ=ω, are of the second kind, ε′+1 is certainly

less than ε″, and thus we have the following theorem :

D. If ε′ is any ε-number, then E(ε′+1) is the next greater ε-number.

To the least ε-number, ε, follows, then, the next greater one:
                              0



                                        ε = E(ε+1),
                                        10



to this the next greater number :



                                        ε = E(ε+1),
                                        21



and so on. Quite generally, we have for the (ν+1)th ε-number in order of

magnitude the formula of recursion



                                          (3)










€v=E(€v—l+ I)‘
    [244]But that the infinite series



                                      ε, ε, . . . ε, . . .
                                        01ν



by no means embraces the totality of ε-numbers results from the following

theorem :

E. If ε, ε′, ε″, . . . is any infinite series of e-numbers such that



                                              (ν)(ν+1)
                                ε<ε′<ε″ . . . ε<ε< . . .,



          (ν)
then Lim ε is an ε-number, and, in fact, the ν e-number which follows next
                                                (ν)
in order of magnitude to all the numbers ε.

  Proof.—












Lim ((v) ( )
. 12
w’ =Lim o* =Lim ¥,
              (ν)
That Lim ε is the e-number which follows next ν in order of magnitude
                      (ν)(ν)
to all the numbers ε results from the fact that Lim ε is the number of the ν

second number-class which follows next in order of magnitude to all the
          (ν)
numbers ε.

F.  The  totality  of  ε-numbers  of  the  second  number-class  forms,  when

arranged in order of magnitude, a well-ordered aggregate of the type Ω of the

second number-class in its order of magnitude, and has thus the power Aleph-

one.

  Proof.—The  totality  of  e-numbers  of  the  second  number-class,  when

arranged in their order of magnitude, forms, by theorem C of § 16, a well-ordered aggregate :



                                          (4)









€y €1y + ¢« oy €yy o o e €yply o o 0 €g' 0 0 vy
whose law of formation is expressed in the theorems D and E. Now, if the

index α′ did not successively take all the numerical values of the second

number-class, there would be a least number α which it did not reach. But

this would contradict the theorem D, if α were of the first kind, and theorem

E, if α were of the second kind. Thus α′ takes all numerical values of the

second number-class.

If we denote the type of the second number-class by Ω, the type of (4) is



                                                22
                                    ω+Ω=ω+ω(Ω−ω).





    [245]



                  22
But since ω+ω=ω, we have



                                          ω+Ω=Ω;



and consequentlyg
3
o

=l

1l
G. If ε is any ε-number and α is any number of the first or second number-

class which is less than ε:



                                              α<ε,



then ε satisfies the three equations :



                                                      ε
                                    α+ε=ε, αε=ε, α=ε.



  Proof.—If α is the degree of α, we have α≦α, and consequently, because
                00
                                                              ε
of α < ε, we also have α < ε. But the degree of ε=ω is ε; thus α has a less
                            0

degree than e. Consequently, by theorem D of § 19,



                                            α+ε=ε,



and thus



                                            α+ε=ε.
                                            0



On the other hand, we have, by formula (13) of § 19,ae=a 2o te
W' =0T =n"=¢,
and thus



                                            αε = ε.
                                            0



Finally, paying attention to the formula (16) of § 19,







 
                                                                              ξ
H. If α is any number of the second number-class, the equation α=ξ



                                              ξ
                                            α=ξ



has no other roots than the ε-numbers which are greater than α.

  Proof.—Let β be a root of the equation



                                              ξ
                                            α=ξ,



so that



                                              β
                                            α=β



Then, in the first place, from this formula follows that



                                              β>α.



On the other hand, β must be of the second kind, since, if not, we would have                                              β
                                            α>β.



Thus we have, by theorem F of § 19,








aﬂ = “oﬂ_
and consequently









    [246]



By theorem F of § 19, we have








and thus









BZ a0
But β cannot be greater than αβ; consequently
                                  0                                            αβ=β,
                                            0



and thus



                                              β
                                            ω= β.



Therefore β is an ε-number which is greater than α.

 

  HALLE, March 1897.NOTES








IN a sense the most fundamental advance made in the theoretical arithmetic

of  finite  and  transfinite  numbers  is  the  purely  logical  definition  of  the

number-concept.  Whereas  Cantor  (see  pp.  74,  86,  112  above)  defined  “

cardinal number” and “ ordinal type” as general concepts which arise by

means of our mental activity, that is to say, as psychological entities, Gottlob

Frege had, in his Grundlagen der Arithmetik of 1884, defined the “ number

(Anzahl) of a class u ” as the class of all those classes which are equivalent

(in the sense of pp. 75, 86 above) to u. Frege remarked that his “ numbers ”

are the same as what Cantor (see pp. 40, 74, 86 above) had called “powers,”

and that there was no reason for restricting “numbers” to be finite. Although

Frege  worked  out,  in  the  first  volume  (1893)  of  his Grundgesetze  der

Arithmetik, an important part of arithmetic, with a logical accuracy previously

unknown and for years afterwards almost unknown, his ideas did not become

at all widely known until Bertrand Russell, who had arrived independently at

this logical definition of “cardinal number,” gave prominence to them in his
                                        70
Principles of Mathematics of 1903. The two chief reasons in favour of this

definition  are  that  it  avoids,  by  a  construction  of  “numbers”  out  of  the

fundamental entities of logic, the assumption that there are certain new and

undefined entities called “numbers”; and that it allows us to deduce at once

that the class defined is not empty, so that the cardinal number of u “exists”

in  the  sense  defined  in  logic  :  in  fact,  since u is equivalent to itself, the

cardinal  number  of u  has u  at  least  as  a  member.  Russell  also  gave  an

analogous  definition  for  ordinal  types  or  the  more  general  “  relation
          71
numbers.”An account of much that has been done in the theory of aggregates since

1897 may be gathered from A. Schoenflies’s reports : Die Entwickelung der

Lehre  von  den  Punktmannig  faltigkeiten,  Leipzig,  1900;  part  ii,  Leipzig,

1908. A second edition of the first part was published at Leipzig and Berlin in

1913,  in  collaboration  with  H.  Hahn,  under  the  title  : Entwickelung  der

Mengenlehre und ihrer Anwendungen. These three books will be cited by

their  respective  dates  of  publication,  and,  when  references  to  relevant

contributions not mentioned in these reports are made, full references to the

original place of publication will be given.

  Leaving  aside  the  applications  of  the  theory  of  transfinite  numbers  to

geometry  and  the  theory  of  functions,  the  most  important  advances  since

1897 are as follows :

(1) The proof given independently by Ernst Schröder (1896) and Felix

Bernstein (1898) of the theorem B on p. 91 above, without the supposition

that  one  of  the  three  relations  of  magnitude  must  hold  between  any  two

cardinal numbers (1900, pp. 16-18; 1913, pp. 34–41; 1908, pp. 10–12).

(2) The giving of exactly expressed definitions of arithmetical operations

with cardinal numbers and of proofs of the laws of arithmetic for them by A.

N. Whitehead (Amer. Journ. of Math., vol. xxiv, 1902, pp. 367–394). Cf.

Russell, Principles, pp. 117–120. A more modern form is given in Whitehead

and Russell’s Principia, vol. ii, pp. 66–186.

(3)  Investigations  on  the  question  as  to  whether  any  aggregate  can  be

brought into the form of a well-ordered aggregate. This question Cantor (cf.

1900, p. 49; 1913, p. 170; and p. 63 above) believed could be answered in the

affirmative. The postulate lying at the bottom of this theorem was brought

forward in the most definite manner by E. Zermelo and E. Schmidt in 1904,

and  Zermelo  afterwards  gave  this  postulate  the  form  of  an  “axiom  of

selection” (1913, pp. 16, 170-184; 1908, pp. 33–36). Whitehead and Russell

have dealt with great precision with the subject in their Principia, vol. i,

Cambridge, 1910, pp. 500-568. It may be remarked that Cantor, in his proof

of theorem A on p. 105 above, and in that of theorem C on pp. 161-162
      72
above,  unconsciously  used  this  axiom  of  infinite  selection.  Also  G.  H.

Hardy in 1903 (1908, pp. 22–23) used this axiom, unconsciously at first, in a

proof that it is possible to have an aggregate of cardinal number ℵ in the
                                                                                  1

continuum of real numbers.But  there  is  another  and  wholly  different  question  which  crops  up  in

attempts at a proof that any aggregate can be well ordered. Cesare Burali-

Forti had in 1897 pointed out that the series of all ordinal numbers, which is

easily seen to be well ordered, must have the greatest of all ordinal numbers

as its type. Yet the type of the above series of ordinal numbers followed by

its type must be a greater ordinal number, for β + 1 is greater than β. Burali-

Forti  concluded  that  we  must  deny  Cantor’s  fundamental  theorem  in  his

memoir of 1897. A different use of an argument analogous to Burali-Forti’s

was made by Philip E. B. Jourdain in a paper written in 1903 and published

in 1904 (Philosophical Magazine, 6th series, vol. vii, pp. 61–75). The chief

interest of this paper is that it contains a proof which is independent of, but

practically identical with, that discovered by Cantor in 1895, and of which

some trace is preserved in the passage on p. 109 above and in the remark on

the theorem A of p. 90. This proof of Cantor’s and Jourdain’s consists of two

parts. In the first part it is established that every cardinal number is either an

Aleph or is greater than all Alephs. This part requires the use of Zermelo’s

axiom; and Jourdain took the “proof” of this part of the theorem directly from

Hardy’s paper of 1903 referred to above. Cantor assumed the result required,

and indeed the result seems very plausible.

The second part of the theorem consists in the proof that the supposition

that a cardinal number is greater than all Alephs is impossible. By a slight

modification of Burali-Forti’s argument, in which modification it is proved

that there cannot be a greatest Aleph, the conclusion seems to follow that no

cardinal number can be other than an Aleph.

The  contradiction  discovered  by  Burali-Forti  is  the  best  known  to
                                                                            73
mathematicians ; but the simplest contradiction was discovered  by Russell

(Principles,  pp.  364–368,  101–107)  from  an  application  to  “the  cardinal

number of all things ” of Cantor’s argument of 1892 referred to on pp. 99–

100 above. Russell’s contradiction can be reduced to the following : If w is

the class of all those terms x such that x is not a member of x, then, if w is a

member of w, it is plain that w is not a member of w; while if w is not a

member of w, it is equally plain that w is a member of w. The treatment and

final solution of these paradoxes, which concern the foundations of logic and
                                                                                          74
which are closely allied to the logical puzzle known as “the Epimenides,”
                                                                                    75
has  been  attempted  unsuccessfully  by  very  many  mathematicians,   and

successfully by Russell (cf. Principles, pp. 523–528; Principia, vol. i, pp. 26–31, 39–90).

The theorem A on p. 105 is required (see theorem D on p. 108) in the proof

that the two definitions of infinity coincide. On this point, cf. Principles, pp.

121–123; Principia, vol. i, pp. 569–666; vol. ii, pp. 187–298.

(4)  Investigation  of  number-classes  in  general,  and  the  arithmetic  of
                                                                                76
Alephs by Jourdain in 1904 and 1908, and G. Hessenberg in 1906  (1913,

pp. 131–136; 1908, pp. 13–14).

(5) The definition, by Felix Hausdorff in 1904-1907, of the product of an

infinity  of  ordinal  types  and  hence  of  exponentiation  by  a  type.  This

definition is analogous to Cantor’s definition of exponentiation for cardinal

numbers on p. 95 above.§ Cf. 1913, pp. 75–80; 1908, pp. 42–45.

(6) Theorems due to J. König (1904) on the § Cf. Jourdain, Mess. of Math.

(2), vol. xxxvi, May 1906, pp. 13–16. inequality of certain cardinal numbers;

and the independent generalization of these theorems, together with one of

Cantor’s (see pp. 81–82 above), by Zermelo and Jourdain in 1908 (1908, pp
                                                                                          .

16-17; 1913, pp. 65-67).

(7) Hausdorff’s contributions from 1906 to 1908 to the theory of linear

ordered aggregates (1913, pp. 185–205; 1908, pp. 40–71).

(8)  The  investigation  of  the  ordinal  types  of  multiply  ordered  infinite

aggregates by F. Riess in 1903, and Brouwer in 1913 (1913, pp. 85–87).INDEX








    Abel, Niels Henrike
    Abelian functions
    Absolute infinity
    Actuality of numbers
    Addition of cardinal numbers
          of ordinal types
          of transfinite numbers
    Adherences
      Aggregates, definition of
          of bindings
          of union
    Alembert, Jean Lerond d’
    Algebraic numbers
    Aquinas, Thomas
    Aristotle
    Arithmetic, foundations of, with Weierstrass
          with Frege and Russell
    Arzelà
    Associative law with transfinite numbers

    Baire, René
    Bendixson, Ivar
    Berkeley, George
    Bernoulli, Daniel
    Bernstein, Felix
      Bois-Reymond, Paul du
    Bolzano, Bernard
    Borel, Émile
    Bouquet
    Briot
    Brodén
    Brouwer
      Burali-Forti, Cesare    Cantor, Georg
          Dedekind axiom
    Cardinal number (see also Power)
          finite
          smallest transfinite
    Cardinal numbers, operations with
          series of transfinite
    Cauchy, Augustin Louis
    Class of types
    Closed aggregates types
    Coherences
    Coherent series
    Commutative law with transfinite numbers
      Condensation of singularities
    Connected aggregates
    Content of aggregates
      Content-less
    Continuity of a function
      Continuous motion in discontinuous space
    Continuum
    Contradiction, Russell’s
      Convergence of series
    Cords, vibrating, problem of

      D’Alembert (see Alembert, J. L. d’).
    Dedekind, Richard
    Definition of aggregate
    Democritus
    De Morgan, Augustus
    Density in itself
      Derivatives of point-aggregates
    Descartes, René
    Dirichlet, Peter Gustav Lejeune
    Discrete aggregates
    Distributive law with transfinite numbers

    Enumerability
    Enumeral
    Epicurus
    Epimenides
    Equivalence of aggregates
    Euler, Leonhard
      Everywhere-dense aggregates
          types
    Exponentiation of transfinite numbers

    Fontenelle
    Formalism in mathematics
    Fourier, Jean Baptiste Joseph
    Freedom in mathematics
    Frege, Gottlob    Function, conception of
    Functions, theory of analytic
          arbitrary
          theory of real
    Fundamental series

    Gauss, Carl Friedrich
    Generation, principles of
    Gudermann

    Hahn, H.
    Haller, Albrecht von
    Hankel, Hermann
    Hardy, G. H.
    Harnack, Axel
    Hausdorff, Felix
    Heine, H. E.
    Helmholtz, H. von
    Hessenberg, Gerhard
    Hobbes, Thomas

    Imaginaries
    Induction, mathematical
    Infinite, definition of
      Infinitesimals
    Infinity, proper and improper
    Integrability, Riemann’s conditions of
    Integrable aggregates
    Inverse types
    Irrational numbers
          analogy of transfinite numbers with
    Isolated aggregate
          point

    Jacobi, C. G. J.
    Jordan, Camille
    Jourdain, Philip E. B.

    Killing, W.
    Kind of a point-aggregate
    Kirchhoff, G.
    König, Julius
    Kronecker, L.
    Kummer, E. E.

    Lagrange, J. L.
    Leibniz, G. W. von
    Leucippus
    Limitation, principle of
    Limiting element of an aggregate
      Limit-point
    Limits with transfinite numbers    Liouville, J.
    Lipschitz, R.
    Locke, J.
    Lucretius

    Mach, Ernst
    Maximum of a function
    Mittag-Leffler, Gosta
    Mutliplication of cardinal numbers
          of ordinal types
          of transfinite numbers

    Newton, Sir Isaac
    Nominalism, Cantor’s
      Number-concept, logical definition of

    Ordinal number (see also Enumeral)
          numbers, finite
          type
          type of aggregate of rational numbers
          types of multiply ordered aggregates
    Osgood, W. F.

    Peano, G.
    Perfect aggregates
          types
    Philosophical revolution brought about by Cantor’s work
    Physical conceptions and modern mathematics
      Point-aggregates, Cantor’s early work on
          theory of
    Potential, theory of
    Power, second
          of an aggregate
    Prime numbers, transfinite
    Principal element of an aggregate
    Puiseux, V.

    Reducible aggregates
    Relation numbers
    Riemann, G. F. B.
    Riess, F.
    Russell, Bertrand

    Schepp, A.
    Schmidt, E.
    Schoenflies, A.
    Schwarz
    Second number-class, cardinal number of
          epsilon-numbers of the
            exponentiation in
          normal form of numbers of
          numbers of    Segment of a series.
    Selections
    Similarity
    Species of a point-aggregate
    Spinoza, B.
    Steiner, J.
    Stolz, O.
      Subtraction of transfinite numbers

    Teubner, B. G.
    Transfinite numbers
      Trigonometrical developments

      Unextended aggregates
    Upper limit

    Veronese, G.

    Weierstrass, Karl
      Well-ordered aggregates
      Well-ordering
    Whitehead, A. N.

    Zeno
    Zermelo, E.
    Zermelo’s axiom1   Vol. xlvi, 1895, pp. 481–512 ; vol. xlix, 1897, pp. 207–246. v


2   Essays on the Theory of Numbers (I, Continuity and Irrational Numbers;

II, The  Nature  and  Meaning  of  Numbers),  translated  by  W.  W.  Beman,

Chicago, 1901. I shall refer to this as Essays on Number.


3   By F. Marotte, Sur les fondements de la théorie des ensembles transfinis,

Paris, 1899.


4   Cf, the references given in my papers in the Archiv der Mathematik und

Physik, 3rd series, vol. x, 1906, pp. 255-256, and Isis, vol. i, 1914, pp. 670–

677.  Much  of  this  Introduction  is  taken  from  my  account  of  “  The

Development of the Theory of Transfinite Numbers ” in the above-mentioned

Archiv, 3rd series, vol. x, pp. 254–281 ; vol. xiv, 1909, pp. 289–311 ; vol.

xvi, 1910, pp. 21–43; vol. xxii, 1913, pp. 1–21.


5   The arbitrary functions chiefly considered in this connexion by Euler were

what he called “ discontinuous ” functions. This word does not mean what we

now mean (after Cauchy) by it. Cf. my paper in Isis, vol. i, 1914, pp. 661–

703.


6   “ Sur la convergence des series trigonométriques qui servent a représenter

une fonction arbitraire entre des limites données,” Journ. für Math., vol. iv,

1829, pp. 157–169; Ges. Werke, vol. i, pp. 117–132.


7   Cf. Jourdain, “ The Theory of Functions with Cauchy and Gauss,” Bibl.

Math. (3), vol. vi, 1905, pp. 190–207.


8   “ Sur les fondements arithmétiques de la théorie des functions d’après

Weierstrass, ” Congrès des Mathématiques à Stockholm, 1909, p. 10.


9   This method was first used by Bernard Bolzano in 1817.


10   The separation of analysis from geometry, which appeared in the work of

Lagrange, Gauss, Cauchy, and Bolzano, was a consequence of the increasing

tendency  of  mathematicians  towards  logical  exactitude  in  defining  their

conceptions  and  in  making  their  deductions,  and,  consequently,  in

discovering the limits of validity of their conceptions and methods. However,the true connexion between the founding of analysis on a purely arithmetical

basis—“ arithmetization, ” as it has been called—and logical rigour, can only

be definitely and convincingly shown after the comparatively modern thesis

is proved that all the concepts (including that of number) of pure mathematics

are wholly logical. And this thesis is one of the most important consequences

to which the theory whose growth we are describing has forced us.


11   On the attempts of Bolzano, Hankel, and Stolz to prove arithmetically,

without an arithmetical theory of real numbers, the sufficiency of the above

criterion, see Ostwald’s Klassiker, No. 153, pp. 42, 95, 107.


12      It  must  be  remembered  that  Cauchy’s  theory  was  not  one  of  these.

Cauchy  did  not  attempt  to  define  real  numbers  arithmetically,  but  simply

presupposed their existence on geometrical grounds.


13   Math. Ann., vol. xxi, 1883, p. 566.


14   It is not implied that ne given elements are finite in number.


15   Cf. Jourdain, Math. Gazette, Jan. 1908, vol. iv, pp. 201–209.


16   Even if y is finite for every single x of the interval a≦x≦b, all these y’s

need not be, in absolute amount, less than some finite number (for example,

f(x) = 1/x for x>0, f(0) = 0, in the interval 0≦ x ≦1), but if they are (as in the

case of the sum of a uniformly convergent series), these y’s have a finite

upper and lower limit in the sense defined.


17   There is another conception (due to Cauchy and P. du Bois-Reymond)

allied to that of upper and lower limit. With every infinite aggregate, there are

(attained) upper and lower points of condensation, which we may call by the

Latin name “Limites.”


18      Those  memoirs  of  Cantor’s  that  will  be  considered  here  more

particularly, and which constitute by far the greater part of his writings, are

contained in : Journ. für Math., vols. lxxvii and lxxxiv, 1874 and 1878; Math.

Ann., vol. iv, 1871, vol. v, 1872, vol. xv, 1879, vol. xvii, 1880, vol. xx, 1882,

vol. xxi, 1883.19   It may be proved that this condition (2) is necessary and sufficient that

the sum to infinity of the series corresponding to the sequence (1) should be a

“  finite  numerical  magnitude”  in  Weierstrass’s  sense  ;  and  consequently

Cantor’s  theory  of  irrational  numbers  has  been  described  as  a  happy

modification of Weierstrass’s,


20   This is connected with Cantor’s formalistic view of real numbers (see

below).


21   To each numerical magnitude belongs a determined point, but to each

point are related as co-ordinates numberless equal numerical magnitudes.


22   In 1880, Cantor wrote of the “dialectic generation of conceptions, which

always leads farther and yet remains free from all arbitrariness, necessary and

logical,” of the transfinite series of indices of derivatives. “I arrived at this ten

years ago [this was written in May 1880] ; on the occasion of my exposition

of the number-conception, I did not refer to it.” And in a letter to me of 31st

August 1905, Professor Cantor wrote : “Was die transfiniten Ordnungszahlen

betrifft, ist es mir wahrscheinlich, dass ich schon 1871 eine Vorstellung von

ihnen gehabt habe. Den Begriff der Abzählbarkeit bildete ich mir erst 1873.”


23   At the beginning of the first paper, Cantor stated: “As we shall show

later,  it  is  on  this  notion  [of  derived  aggregate]  that  the  simplest  and

completest explanation respecting the determination of a continuum rests”

(see below).


24   To this passage Cantor added the note : “I was led to this generation ten

years ago [the note was written in May 1880], but when exposing my theory

of the number-conception I did not refer to it.”


25   For if it were, we would have η=u, p being a determined index ; but that
                                            p
                                      (p)(p)
is not possible, for up is not in (α . . . β), whilst η, by definition, is.


26   The word “power” was borrowed from Steiner, who used it in a quite

special, but allied, sense, to express that two figures can be put, element for

element, in projective correspondence.


27   This curious property of infinite aggregates was first noticed by BernardBolzano, obscurely stated (“ . . . two unequal lengths [may be said to] contain

the  same  number  of  points  ”)  in  a  paper  of  1864  in  which  Augustus  De

Morgan argued for a proper infinite, and was used as a definition of “infinite”

by Dedekind (independently of Bolzano and Cantor) in 1887.


28   That is to say, an infinitely small variation in position of the element

implies an infinitely small variation of the variables, and reciprocally.


29   In the French translation only of this memoir of Cantor’s is added here:

“and this happens very often in the works of these authors (Riemann and

Helmholtz).” Cantor had revised this translation.


30   If we arrange the n series of α’s in a double series with n rows, this

means that we are to enumerate the α’s in the order α, α, . . . α, α, ,
                                                              1, 12, 1n, 112

α, , . . . , and that the νth term of this series is β.
22ν


31   This is done most simply as follows : Let p/q be a rational number of this

interval  in  its  lowest  terms,  and  put p+q  =  N.  To  each p/q  belongs  a

determined positive integral value of N, and to each such N belong a finite

number of fractions p/q. Imagine now the numbers p/g arranged so that those

which belong to smaller values of N precede those which belong to larger

ones, and those for which N has the same value are arranged the greater after

the smaller.


32   This notation means : the aggregate of the x’s is the union of those of the

h’s, ην’s, and φ’s ; and analogously for that of the e’s.
                ν


33   Enumerate the double series {α} diagonally, that is to say, in the order
                                        μ, ν

                        α, α, α, α, α, α, . . .
                        1, 11, 22, 11, 32, 23, 1

The term of this series whose index is (μ, ν) is the λth, where λ = 1 + 2 + 3 + .

. . + (μ + ν − 2) + μ = (μ + ν − 2)/2 + μ.


34   Linear aggregates alone were considered, since all the powers of the

continua of various dimensions are to be found in them.


35   “That foundation of the theory of magnitudes which we may consider to

be the most general genuine moment in the case of manifolds.”36   Lindemann afterwards proved that π is transcendental. In this passage,

Cantor seemed to agree with Dedekind.


37   With every a the points of its boundary are considered as belonging to it.


38   In the French translation (1883) of Cantor’s memoir, this number was

corrected to 2π(n + 1)/2/Γ((n + 1)/2).


39   When n = 1, the theorem is that every aggregate of intervals on a (finite

or infinite) straight line which at most meet at their ends is enumerable. The

end-points are consequently enumerable, but not always the derivative of this

aggregate of end-points.


40   In a letter to me of 29th March 1905, Professor Cantor said : “At the

conception of enumerability, of which he [Weierstrass] heard from me at

Berlin in the Christmas holidays of 1873, he was at first quite amazed, but

one or two days passed over, [and] it became his own and helped him to an

unexpected development of his wonderful theory of functions.”


41   Cantor expressed this . Cf. Dedekind’s Essays on Numbers, p.

DQ, Q)=0
48.


42   If an aggregate B is contained in A, and E is the aggregate left when B is

taken from A, we write



                                            E ≡ A − B.




43      When  considered  independently  of  P,  these  indices  form  a  series

beginning with the finite numbers, but extending beyond them ; so that it

suggests itself that those other indices be considered as infinite (or transfinite)

numbers.


44   I have invented this word to translate “Anzahl,” to avoid confusion with

the word “number” (Zahl).


45      Cf.,  for  example,  pp.  113,  158–159  of  the  translations  of  Cantor’smemoirs of 1895 and 1897 given below.


46   “ Ueber unendliche, lineare Punktmannichfaltigkeiten. V.” [December

1882], Math. Ann., vol. xxi, 1883, pp. 545–591 ; reprinted, with an added

preface,  with  the  title  : Grundlagen  einer  allgenzeinen

Mannichfaltigkeitslehre.  Ein  mathematisch-philosophischer  Versuch  in  der

Lehre des Unendlichen, Leipzig, 1883 (page It of the Grundlagen is page n +

544 of the article in the Math. Ann.). This separate publication, with a title

corresponding more nearly to its contents, was made “ since it carries the

subject  in  many  respects  much  farther  and  thus  is,  for  the  most  part,

independent of the earlier essays ” (Preface). In Acta Math., ii, pp. 381–408,

part of the Grundlagen was translated into French.


47      Or  “Mannigfaltigkeitslehre,”  or,  more  usually,  “Mengenlehre”  ;in

French, “théorie des ensembles.” The English “ theory of manifolds” has not

come into general usage.


48   “ The behaviour of the function in the neighbourhood of the infinitely

distant point shows exactly the same occurrences as in that of any other point

lying in finito, so that hence it is completely justified to think of the infinite,

in this case, as situated in a point.”


49   “ It is even permissible to think of the newly and created number ω as the

limit to which the numbers v strive, if by that nothing else is understood than

that ω is to be the first integer which follows all the numbers v, that is to say,

is to be called greater than every v.” Cf. the next section.

If we do not know the reasons in the theory of derivatives which prompted

the  introduction  of ω,  but  only  the  grounds  stated  in  the  text  for  this

introduction,  it  naturally  seems  rather  arbitrary  (not  apparently,  useful)  to

create w  because  of  the  mere  fact  that  it  can  apparently  be  defined  in  a

manner  free  from  contradiction.  Thus,  Cantor  discussed  (see  below)  such

introductions  or  creations,  found  in  them  the  distinguishing  mark  of  pure

mathematics, and justified them on historical grounds (on logical grounds

they perhaps seem to need no justification).


50   It is particularly to be noticed that the second principle will take us

beyond any class, and is not merely adequate to form numbers which are the

limit-numbers  of  some enumerable  series  (so  that  a  “third  principle”  isrequired to form n). The first and second principles together form all the

numbers considered, while the “ principle of limitation ” enables us to define

the various number-classes, of unbrokenly ascending powers in the series of

these numbers.


51   “ This principle (or requirement, or condition) circumscribes (limits)

each number-class.”


52   The origin of this conception can easily be seen to be the defining of

such aggregates as can be “enumerated” (using the word in the wider sense of

Cantor, given below) by the transfinite numbers. In fact, the above definition

of  a  well-ordered  aggregate  simply  indicates  the  construction  of  any

aggregate of the class required when the first two principles are used, but to

generate elements, not numbers.

An  important  property  of  a  well-ordered  aggregate,—indeed,  a

characteristic property,—is that any series of terms in it, a, a, . . ., a, . . .,
                                                                      12v

where a precedes av, must be finite. Even if the well-ordered aggregate in
        v+1

question is infinite, such a series as that described can never be infinite.


53   Cantor said “that, in the successive formation of number-classes, we can

always go farther, and never reach a limit that cannot be surpassed, —so that

we  never  reach  an  even  approximate  comprehension  (Erfassen)  of  the

Absolute,—I  cannot  doubt.  The  Absolute  can  only  be  recognized

(anerkannt), but never apprehended (erkannt), even approximately. For just

as  inside  the  first  number-class,  at  any  finite  number,  however  great,  we

always  have  the  same  ‘power’  of  greater  finite  numbers  before  us,  there

follows any transfinite number of any one of the higher number-classes an

aggregate of numbers and classes which has not in the least lost in ‘power’ in

comparison with the whole absolutely infinite aggregate of numbers, from I

on. The state of things is like that described by Albrecht von Haller: ‘ich

zieh’ sie ab [die ungeheure Zahl] und Du [die Ewigkeit) liegst ganz vor mir.’

The absolutely infinite sequence of numbers thus seems to me to be, in a

certain sense, a suitable symbol of the Absolute ; whereas the infinity of (I),

which has hitherto served for that purpose, appears to me, just because I hold

it to be an idea (not presentation) that can be apprehended as a vanishing

nothing in comparison with the former. It also seems to me remarkable that

every number-class—and therefore every power—corresponds to a definitenumber of the absolutely infinite totality of numbers, and indeed reciprocally,

so that corresponding to any transfinite number y there is a (γth) power ; so

that the various powers also form an absolutely infinite sequence. This is so

much the more remarkable as the number γ which gives the rank of a power

(provided that γ has an immediate predecessor) stands, to the numbers of that

number-class which has this power, in a magnitude-relation whose smallness

mocks all description,—and this the more γ is taken to be greater.”


54   With this is connected the promise to prove later that the power of the

continuum is that of (II), as stated, of course in other words, in 1878. See the

Notes at the end of this book.


55      The  property  in  question  is:  A  “prime-number”  α  is  such  that  the

resolution α=βγ is only possible when β= I or β=α.


56   See the next section.


57   From the occurrence of this theorem on p. 484 of the Math. Ann., xlvi,

1895, which we now know (see the note on p. 204 below) to have been a

forestalling of the theorem that any aggregate can be well-ordered, we may

conclude that this latter theorem was used in this instance.


58   This, according to Cantor, is a consequence of “the unity of the All, to

which we ourselves belong,” and so, in pure mathematics, we need only pay

attention to the reality of our conceptions in the first sense, as stated in the

text.


59      This  is  evidently  Kirchhoff.  As  is  well  known,  Kirchhoff  proposed

(Vorlesungen über mathematische Physik, vol. i, Mechanik, Leipzig, 1874)

this. Cf. E. Mach in his prefaces to his Mechanics (3rd ed., Chicago and

London, 1907 ; Supplementary Volume, Chicago and London, 1915), and

Popular Scientific Lectures, 3rd ed., Chicago and London, 1898, pp. 236–

258.


60   Essays on Number, p. 11.


61   Cf. § VII, near the beginning.62   [In English there is an ambiguity.]


63   [See Section V of the Introduction. ]


64   In the original Italian edition (p. 27) this passage runs : “ Numeri le unità

dei quali si corrispondono univocamente e nel medesimo ordine, e di cui l’

uno non è parte o uguale ad una parte dell’ altro, sono uguali.”


65   [Veronese replied to this in Math. Ann., vol, xlvii, 1897, pp. 423–432. Cf.

Killing, ibid., vol, xlviii, 1897, pp. 425-432.]


66   This definition of “ well-ordered aggregates,” apart from the wording, is

identical with that which was introduced in vol. xxi of the Math. Ann., p. 548

(Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Mannichfaltig-keitslehre , p. 4). [See Section

VII of the Introduction.]


67   See the above proof of L.


68   [Cf. Section VII of the Introduction.]


69   [Here obviously it is Potenz and not Mächtigkeit.]


70   Pp. 519, 111–116. Cf. Whitehead, Amer. Journ. of Math., vol. xxiv,

1902, p. 378. For a more modern form of the doctrine, see Whitehead and

Russell, Principia Mathematica, vol. ii, Cambridge, 1912, pp. 4, 13.


71   Principles, pp. 262, 321; and Principia, vol. ii, pp. 330, 473-510.


72   Indeed, we have here to prove that any enumerable aggregate of any

enumerable aggregates gives an enumerable aggregate of the elements last

referred to. To prove that ℵ • ℵ = ℵ, it is not enough to prove the above
                                000

theorem for particular aggregates. And in the general case we have to pick

one element out of each of an infinity of classes, no element in each class

being distinguished from the others.


73   This argument was discovered in 1900 (see Monist, Jan. 1912).


74   Epimenides was a Cretan who said that all Cretans were liars. Obviouslyif his statement were true he was a liar. The remark of a man who says, “ I am

lying,” is even more analogous to Russell’s w.


75   Thus Schoenflies, in his Reports of 1908 and 1913, devotes an undue

amount of space to his “ solution ” of the paradoxes here referred to. This

“solution” really consists in saying that these paradoxes do not belong to

mathematics but to “philosophy.” It may be remarked that Schoenflies seems

never to have grasped the meaning and extent of Zermelo’s axiom, which

Russell has called the “multiplicative axiom.”


76   Just as in the proof that the multiplication of ℵ by itself gives ℵ, the
                                                              00

more general theorem here considered involves the multiplicative axiom.