
Scanned by Charles Keller with OmniPage Professional OCR software NOTE: The quality of this etext is below my usual standards!! 
THE  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  
EMOTIONS  IN  MAN  AND  
ANIMALS  

BY CHARLES DARWIN M.A., F.R.S., ETC. 
WITH PHOTOGRAPHIC AND OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS 
NEW YORK D. APPLETON AND COMPANY 1899 
Authorized Edition. 
CONTENTS. INTRODUCTION………………………………………………Pages 1-26 
CHAP. I—GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION. The three chief principles stated—The first principle—Serviceable actions become habitual in association with certain states of the mind, and are performed whether or not of service in each particular case— The force of habit—Inheritance— Associated habitual movements in man—Reflex actions—Passage of habits into reflex actions— Associated habitual movements in the lower animals— Concluding remarks …………27-49 
CHAP. II—GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION—continued. The Principle of Antithesis—Instances in the dog and cat—Origin of the principle— Conventional signs—The principle of antithesis has not arisen from opposite actions being consciously performed under opposite impulses ……….50-65 
CHAP. III—GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION—concluded. 
The principle of the direct action of the excited nervous system on the body, independently of the will and in part of habit—Change of colour in the hair— Trembling of the muscles—Modified secretions—Perspiration— Expression of extreme pain—Of rage, great joy, and terror—Contrast between the emotions which cause and do not cause expressive movements— Exciting and depressing states of the mind— Summary…………………………………….. 66-82 
CHAP. IV—MEANS OF EXPRESSION. IN ANIMALS. The emission of sounds— Vocal sounds—Sounds otherwise produced—Erection of the dermal appendages, hairs, feathers, &c., under the emotions of anger and terror—The drawing back of the ears as a preparation for fighting, and as an expression of anger— Erection of the ears and raising the head, a sign of attention 88-114 
CHAP. V.—SPECIAL EXPRESSIONS OF ANIMALS. The Dog, various expressive movements of—Cats—Horses—Ruminants—Monkeys, their expression of joy and affection—Of pain—Anger Astonishment and Terror Pages 115-145 
CHAP. VI.—SPECIAL EXPRESSIONS OF MAN: SUFFERING AND WEEPING. The screaming and weeping of infants—Form of features—Age at which weeping commences— The effects of habitual restraint on weeping —Sobbing—Cause of the contraction of the muscles round the eyes during screaming— Cause of the secretion of tears 146-175 
CHAP. VII.—LOW SPIRITS, ANXIETY, GRIEF, DEJECTION, DESPAIR. General effect of grief on the system—Obliquity of the eyebrows under suffering— On the cause of the obliquity of the eyebrows—On the depression of the corners of the mouth 176-195 
CHAP. VIII.—JOY, HIGH SPIRITS, LOVE, TENDER FEELINGS, DEVOTION. Laughter primarily the expression of joy—Ludicrous ideas— Movements of the features during laughter—Nature of the sound produced— The secretion of tears during loud laughter—Gradation from loud laughter to gentle smiling—High spirits—The expression of love— Tender feelings—Devotion 196-219 
CHAP. IX.—REFLECTION—MEDITATION—ILL—TEMPER— SULKINESS DETERMINATION. 
The act of frowning—Reflection with an effort or with the perception of something difficult or disagreeable—Abstracted meditation— Ill-temper—Moroseness—Obstinacy—Sulkiness and pouting— Decision or determination—The firm closure of the mouth 220-236 

CHAP. X.-HATRED AND ANGER. 
Hatred—Rage, effects of on the system—Uncovering of the teeth— Rage in the insane—Anger and indignation—As expressed by the various races of man—Sneering and defiance—The uncovering of the canine teeth on one side of the face 237-252 
CHAP. XI.—DISDAIN—CONTEMPT—DISGUST—GUILT—PRIDE, ETC.—HELPLESSNESS— PATIENCE—AFFIRMATION AND NEGATION. Contempt, scorn and disdain, variously expressed—Derisive Smile—Gestures expressive of contempt— Disgust—Guilt, deceit, pride, etc. —Helplessness or impotence— Patience—Obstinacy—Shrugging the shoulders common to most of the races of man—Signs of affirmation and negation 253-277 

CHAP. XII.—SURPRISE—ASTONISHMENT—FEAR—HORROR. 
Surprise, astonishment—Elevation of the eyebrows—Opening the mouth — Protrusion of the lips—Gestures accompanying surprise— Admiration Fear—Terror—Erection of the hair—Contraction of the platysma muscle—Dilatation of the pupils—horror—Conclusion. Pages 278­308 

CHAP. XIII.—SELF-ATTENTION—SHAME—SHYNESS—MODESTY: BLUSHING. 
Nature of a blush—Inheritance—The parts of the body most affected— Blushing in the various races of man—Accompanying gestures— Confusion of mind—Causes of blushing—Self-attention, the fundamental element— Shyness—Shame, from broken moral laws and conventional rules—Modesty —Theory of blushing—Recapitulation 309-346 
CHAP. XIV.—CONCLUDING REMARKS AND SUMMARY. 
The three leading principles which have determined the chief movements of expression—Their inheritance—On the part which the will and intention have played in the acquirement of various expressions— The instinctive recognition of expression—The bearing of our subject on the specific unity of the races of man—On the successive acquirement of various expressions by the progenitors of man— The importance of expression—Conclusion 347­

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 
FIG. PAGE 
1. 
Diagram of the muscles of the face, from Sir C. Bell 24 

2. 
" " " Henle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 

3. 
" " " " . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 4 Small dog watching a cat on a table 43 5 Dog approaching another dog with hostile intentions 52 


6. 
Dog in a humble and affectionate frame of mind 53 

7. 
Half-bred Shepherd Dog 54 

8. 
Dog caressing his master 55 

9. 
Cat, savage, and prepared to fight 58 

10. 
Cat in an affectionate frame of mind 59 

11. 
Sound-producing quills from the tail of the Porcupine 93 

12. 
Hen driving away a dog from her chickens……98 

13. 
Swan driving away an intruder……………..99 

14. 
Head of snarling dog…………………….117 

15. 
Cat terrified at a dog…………………..125 

16. 
Cynopithecus niger, in a placid condition….135 

17. 
The same, when pleased by being caressed…..135 

18. 
Chimpanzee disappointed and sulky…………139 

19. 
Photograph of an insane woman…………….296 20. Terror…………………………………299 


21. Horror and Agony………………………..306 
Plate I. to face page 147 Plate V. to face page 254. " II. " 178. " VI. " 264. " III. " 200. " VII. " 300. " IV. " 248. 
N. B.—Several of the figures in these seven Heliotype Plates have been reproduced from photographs, instead of from the original negatives; and they are in consequence somewhat indistinct. Nevertheless they are faithful copies, and are much superior for my purpose to any drawing, however carefully executed. 

ON THE EXPRESSION OF THE EMOTIONS IN MAN AND ANIMALS. 
INTRODUCTION. 
MANY works have been written on Expression, but a greater number on Physiognomy,—that is, on the recognition of character through the study of the permanent form of the features. With this latter subject I am not here concerned. The older treatises,[1] which I have consulted, have been of little or no service to me. The famous `Conferences'[2] of the painter Le Brun, published in 1667, is the best known ancient work, and contains some good remarks. Another somewhat old essay, namely, the `Discours,' delivered 1774-1782, by the well-known Dutch anatomist Camper,[3] can hardly be considered as having made any marked advance in the subject. The following works, on the contrary, deserve the fullest consideration. 
Sir Charles Bell, so illustrious for his discoveries in physiology, published in 1806 the first edition, and in 
[1] J. Parsons, in his paper in the Appendix to the `Philosophical Transactions' for 1746, p. 41, gives a list of forty-one old authors who have written on Expression. 
[2] Conferences sur l'expression des differents Caracteres des Passions.' Paris, 4to, 1667. I always quote from the republication of the `Conferences' in the edition of Lavater, by Moreau, which appeared in 1820, as given in vol. ix. p. 257. 
[3] `Discours par Pierre Camper sur le moyen de representer les diverses passions,' &c. 1792. 1844 the third edition of his `Anatomy and Philosophy of Expression.'[4] He may with justice be said, not only to have laid the foundations of the subject as a branch of science, but to have built up a noble structure. His work is in every way deeply interesting; it includes graphic descriptions of the various emotions, and is admirably illustrated. It is generally admitted that his service consists chiefly in having shown the intimate relation which exists between the movements of expression and those of respiration. One of the most important points, small as it may at first appear, is that the muscles round the eyes are involuntarily contracted during violent expiratory efforts, in order to protect these delicate organs from the pressure of the blood. This fact, which has been fully investigated for me with the greatest kindness by Professors Donders of Utrecht, throws, as we shall hereafter see, a flood of light on several of the most important expressions of the human countenance. The merits of Sir C. Bell's work have been undervalued or quite ignored by several foreign writers, but have been fully admitted by some, for instance by M. Lemoine,[5] who with great justice says:—"Le livre de Ch. Bell devrait etre medite par quiconque essaye de faire parler le visage de l'homme, par les philosophes aussi bien que par les artistes, car, sous une apparence plus legere et sous le pretexte de l'esthetique, c'est un des plus beaux monuments de la science des rapports du physique et du moral." 
[4] I always quote from the third edition, 1844, which was published after the death of Sir C. Bell, and contains his latest corrections. The first edition of 1806 is much inferior in merit, and does not include some of his more important views. 
[5] `De la Physionomie et de la Parole,' par Albert Lemoine, 1865, p. 101. 
From reasons which will presently be assigned, Sir C. Bell did not attempt to follow out his views as far as they might have been carried. He does not try to explain why different muscles are brought into action under different emotions; why, for instance, the inner ends of the eyebrows are raised, and the corners of the mouth depressed, by a person suffering from grief or anxiety. 
In 1807 M. Moreau edited an edition of Lavater on Physiognomy,[6] in which he incorporated several of his own essays, containing excellent descriptions of the movements of the facial muscles, together with many valuable remarks. He throws, however, very little light on the philosophy of the subject. For instance, M. Moreau, in speaking of the act of frowning, that is, of the contraction of the muscle called by French writers the soucilier (corrigator supercilii), remarks with truth:—"Cette action des sourciliers est un des symptomes les plus tranches de l'expression des affections penibles ou concentrees." He then adds that these muscles, from their attachment and position, are fitted "a resserrer, a concentrer les principaux traits de la face, comme il convient dans toutes ces passions vraiment oppressives ou profondes, dans ces affections dont le sentiment semble porter l'organisation a revenir sur elle-meme, a se contracter et a s'amoindrir, comme pour offrir moins de prise et de surface a des impressions redoutables ou importunes." He who thinks that remarks of this kind throw any light on the meaning or origin of the different expressions, takes a very different view of the subject to what I do. 
[6] `L'Art de connaitre les Hommes,' &c., par G. Lavater. The earliest edition of this work, referred to in the preface to the edition of 1820 in ten volumes, as containing the observations of M. Moreau, is said to have been published in 1807; and I have no doubt that this is correct, because the `Notice sur Lavater' at the commencement of volume i. is dated April 13, 1806. In some bibliographical works, however, the date of 1805—1809 is given, but it seems impossible that 1805 can be correct. Dr. Duchenne remarks (`Mecanisme de la Physionomie Humaine,'-8vo edit. 1862, p. 5, and `Archives Generales de Medecine,' Jan. et Fev. 1862) that M. Moreau "a compose pour son ouvrage un article important," &c., in the year 1805; and I find in volume i. of the edition of 1820 passages bearing the dates of December 12, 1805, and another January 5, 1806, besides that of April 13, 1806, above referred to. In consequence of some of these passages having thus been COMPOSED in 1805, Dr. Duchenne assigns to M. Moreau the priority over Sir C. Bell, whose work, as we have seen, was published in 1806. This is a very unusual manner of determining the priority of scientific works; but such questions are of extremely little importance in comparison with their relative merits. The passages above quoted from M. Moreau and from Le Brun are taken in this and all other cases from the edition of 1820 of Lavater, tom. iv. p. 228, and tom. ix. p. 279. " In the above passage there is but a slight, if any, advance in the philosophy of the subject, beyond that reached by the painter Le Brun, who, in 1667, in describing the expression of fright, says:—"Le sourcil qui est abaisse d'un cote et eleve de l'autre, fait voir que la partie elevee semble le vouloir joindre au cerveau pour le garantir du mal que l'ame apercoit, et le cote qui est abaisse et qui parait enfle, -nous fait trouver dans cet etat par les esprits qui viennent du cerveau en abondance, comme polir couvrir l'aine et la defendre du mal qu'elle craint; la bouche fort ouverte fait voir le saisissement du coeur, par le sang qui se retire vers lui, ce qui l'oblige, voulant respirer, a faire un effort qui est cause que la bouche s'ouvre extremement, et qui, lorsqu'il passe par les organes de la voix, forme un son qui n'est point articule; que si les muscles et les veines paraissent enfles, ce n'est que par les esprits que le cerveau envoie en ces parties-la." I have thought the foregoing sentences worth quoting, as specimens of the surprising nonsense which has been written on the subject. 
`The Physiology or Mechanism of Blushing,' by Dr. Burgess, appeared in 1839, and to this work I shall frequently refer in my thirteenth Chapter. 
In 1862 Dr. Duchenne published two editions, in folio and octavo, of his `Mecanisme de la Physionomie Humaine,' in which he analyses by means of electricity, and illustrates by magnificent photographs, the movements of the facial muscles. He has generously permitted me to copy as many of his photographs as I desired. His works have been spoken lightly of, or quite passed over, by some of his countrymen. It is possible that Dr. Duchenne may have exaggerated the importance of the contraction of single muscles in giving expression; for, owing to the intimate manner in which the muscles are connected, as may be seen in Henle's anatomical drawings[7]—the best I believe ever published it is difficult to believe in their separate action. Nevertheless, it is manifest that Dr. Duchenne clearly apprehended this and other sources of error, and as it is known that he was eminently successful in elucidating the physiology of the muscles of the hand by the aid of electricity, it is probable that he is generally in the right about the muscles of the face. In my opinion, Dr. Duchenne has greatly advanced the subject by his treatment of it. No one has more carefully studied the contraction of each separate muscle, and the consequent furrows produced on the skin. He has also, and this is a very important service, shown which muscles are least under the separate control of the will. He enters very little into theoretical considerations, and seldom attempts to explain why certain muscles and not others contract under the influence of certain emotions. A distinguished French anatomist, Pierre Gratiolet, gave a course of lectures on Expression at the Sorbonne, and his notes were published (1865) after his death, under the title of `De la Physionomie et des Mouvements d'Expression.' This is a very interesting work, full of valuable observations. His theory is rather complex, and, as far as it can be given in a single sentence (p. 65), is as follows:—"Il resulte, de tous les faits que j'ai rappeles, que les sens, l'imagination et la pensee ellememe, si elevee, si abstraite qu'on la suppose, ne peuvent s'exercer sans eveiller un sentiment correlatif, et que ce sentiment se traduit directement, sympathiquement, symboliquement ou metaphoriquement, dans toutes les spheres des organs exterieurs, qui la racontent tous, suivant leur mode d'action propre, comme si chacun d'eux avait ete directement affecte." 
[7] `Handbuch der Systematischen Anatomie des Menschen.' Band I. Dritte Abtheilung, 1858. 
Gratiolet appears to overlook inherited habit, and even to some extent habit in the individual; and therefore he fails, as it seems to me, to give the right explanation, or any explanation at all, of many gestures and expressions. As an illustration of what he calls symbolic movements, I will quote his remarks (p. 37), taken from M. Chevreul, on a man playing at billiards. "Si une bille devie legerement de la direction que le joueur pretend zlui imprimer, ne l'avez-vous pas vu cent fois la pousser du regard, de la tete et meme des epaules, comme si ces mouvements, purement symboliques, pouvaient rectifier son trajet? Des mouvements non moins significatifs se produisent quand la bille manque d'une impulsion suffisante. Et cliez les joueurs novices, ils sont quelquefois accuses au point d'eveiller le sourire sur les levres des spectateurs." Such movements, as it appeirs to me, may be attributed simply to habit. As often as a man has wished to move an object to one side, he has always pushed it to that side when forwards, he has pushed it forwards; and if he has wished to arrest it, he has pulled backwards. Therefore, when a man sees his ball travelling in a wrong direction, and he intensely wishes it to go in another direction, he cannot avoid, from long habit, unconsciously performing movements which in other cases he has found effectual. 
As an instance of sympathetic movements Gratiolet gives (p. 212) the following case:—"un jeune chien A oreilles droites, auquel son maitre presente de loin quelque viande appetissante, fixe avec ardeur ses yeux sur cet objet dont il suit tous les mouvements, et pendant que les yeux regardent, les deux oreilles se portent en avant comme si cet objet pouvait etre entendu." Here, instead of speaking of sympathy between the ears and eyes, it appears to me more simple to believe, that as dogs during many generations have, whilst intently looking at any object, pricked their ears in order to perceive any sound; and conversely have looked intently in the direction of a sound to which they may have listened, the movements of these organs have become firmly associated together through long-continued habit. 
Dr. Piderit published in 1859 an essay on Expression, which I have not seen, but in which, as he states, he forestalled Gratiolet in many of his views. In 1867 he published his `Wissenschaftliches System der Mimik und Physiognomik.' It is hardly possible to give in a few sentences a fair notion of his views; perhaps the two following sentences will tell as much as can be briefly told: "the muscular movements of expression are in part related to imaginary objects, and in part to imaginary sensorial impressions. In this proposition lies the key to the comprehension of all expressive muscular movements." (s. 25) Again, "Expressive movements manifest themselves chiefly in the numerous and mobile muscles of the face, partly because the nerves by which they are set into motion originate in the most immediate vicinity of the mind-organ, but partly also because these muscles serve to support the organs of sense." (s. 26.) If Dr. Piderit had studied Sir C. Bell's work, he would probably not have said (s. 101) that violent laughter causes a frown from partaking of the nature of pain; or that with infants (s. 103) the tears irritate the eyes, and thus excite the contraction of the surrounding in muscles. Many good remarks are scattered throughout this volume, to which I shall hereafter refer. 
Short discussions on Expression may be found in various works, which need not here be particularised. Mr. Bain, however, in two of his works has treated the subject at some length. He says,[8] "I look upon the expression so-called as part and parcel of the feeling. I believe it to be a general law of the mind that along with the fact of inward feeling or consciousness, there is a diffusive action or excitement over the bodily members." In another place he adds, "A very considerable number of the facts may be brought under the following principle: namely, that states of pleasure are connected with an increase, and states of pain with an abatement, of some, or all, of the vital functions." But the above law of the diffusive action of feelings seems too general to throw much light on special expressions. 
Mr. Herbert Spencer, in treating of the Feelings in his `Principles of Psychology' (1855), makes the following remarks:—"Fear, when strong, expresses itself in cries, in efforts to hide or escape, in palpitations and tremblings; and these are just the manifestations that would accompany an actual experience of the evil feared. The destructive passions are shown in a general tension of the muscular system, in gnashing of the teeth and protrusion of the claws, in dilated eyes and nostrils in growls; and these are weaker forms of the actions that accompany the killing of prey." Here we have, as I believe, the true theory of a large number of expressions; but the chief interest and difficulty of the subject lies in following out the wonderfully complex results. I infer that some one (but who he is I have not been able to ascertain) formerly advanced a nearly similar view, for Sir C. Bell says,[9] "It has been maintained that what are called the external signs of passion, are only the concomitants of those voluntary movements which the structure renders necessary." Mr. Spencer has also published[10] a valuable essay on the physiology of Laughter, in which he insists on "the general law that feeling passing a certain pitch, habitually vents itself in bodily action," and that "an overflow of nerve-force undirected by any motive, will manifestly take first the most habitual routes; and if these do not suffice, will next overflow into the less habitual ones." This law I believe to be of the highest importance in throwing light on our subject.` 
[8] 
`The Senses and the Intellect,' 2nd edit. 1864, pp. 96 and 288. The preface to the first edition of this work is dated June, 1855. See also the 2nd edition of Mr. Bain's work on the `Emotions and Will.' 

[9] `The Anatomy of Expression,' 3rd edit. p. 121. 
[10] `Essays, Scientific, Political, and Speculative,' Second Series, 1863, 

p. 
111. There is a discussion on Laughter in the First Series of Essays, which discussion seems to me of very inferior value. 


[11] Since the publication of the essay just referred to, Mr. Spencer has written another, on "Morals and Moral Sentiments," in the `Fortnightly Review,' April 1, 1871, p. 426. He has, also, now published his final conclusions in vol. ii. of the second edit. of the `Principles of Psychology,' 1872, p. 539. I may state, in order that I may not be accused of trespassing on Mr. Spencer's domain, that I announced in my `Descent of Man,' that I had then written a part of the present volume: my first MS. notes on the subject of expression bear the date of the year 1838. 
All the authors who have written on Expression, with the exception of Mr. Spencer—the great expounder of the principle of Evolution— appear to have been firmly convinced that species, man of course included, came into existence in their present condition. Sir C. Bell, being thus convinced, maintains that many of our facial muscles are "purely instrumental in expression;" or are "a special provision" for this sole object.[12] But the simple fact that the anthropoid apes possess the same facial muscles as we do,[13] renders it very improbable that these muscles in our case serve exclusively for expression; for no one, I presume, would be inclined to admit that monkeys have been endowed with special muscles solely for exhibiting their hideous grimaces. Distinct uses, independently of expression, can indeed be assigned with much probability for almost all the facial muscles. 
Sir C. Bell evidently wished to draw as broad a distinction as possible between man and the lower animals; and he consequently asserts that with "the lower creatures there is no expression but what may be referred, more or less plainly, to their acts of volition or necessary instincts." He further maintains that their faces "seem chiefly capable of expressing rage and fear." 
[14] But man himself cannot express love and humility by external signs, so plainly as does a dog, when with drooping ears, hanging lips, flexuous body, and wagging tail, he meets his beloved master. Nor can these movements in the dog be explained by acts of volition or necessary instincts, any more than the beaming eyes and smiling cheeks of a man when he meets an old friend. If Sir C. Bell had been questioned about the expression of affection in the dog, he would no doubt have answered that this animal had been created with special instincts, adapting him for association with man, and that all further enquiry on the subject was superfluous. 
[12] `Anatomy of Expression,' 3rd edit. pp. 98, 121, 131. 
[13] Professor Owen expressly states (Proc. Zoolog. Soc. 1830, p. 28) that this is the case with respect to the Orang, and specifies all the more important muscles which are well known to serve with man for the expression of his feelings. See, also, a description of several of the facial muscles in the Chimpanzee, by Prof. Macalister, in `Annals and Magazine of Natural History,' vol. vii. May, 1871, p. 342. 
[14] `Anatomy of Expression,' pp. 121, 138. 
Although Gratiolet emphatically denies[15] that any muscle has been developed solely for the sake of expression, he seems never to have reflected on the principle of evolution. He apparently looks at each species as a separate creation. So it is with the other writers on Expression. For instance, Dr. Duchenne, after speaking of the movements of the limbs, refers to those which give expression to the face, and remarks:[16] "Le createur n'a donc pas eu a se preoccuper ici des besoins de la mecanique; il a pu, selon sa sagesse, ou—que l'on me pardonne cette maniere de parler—par une divine fantaisie, mettre en action tel ou tel muscle, un seul ou plusieurs muscles a la fois, lorsqu'il a voulu que les signes caracteristiques des passions, meme les plus fugaces, lussent ecrits passagerement sur la face de l'homme. Ce langage de la physionomie une fois cree, il lui a suffi, pour le rendre universel et immuable, de donner a tout etre humain la faculte instinctive d'exprimer toujours ses sendments par la contraction des memes muscles." 
Many writers consider the whole subject of Expression as inexplicable. Thus the illustrious physiologist Muller, says,[17] "The completely different expression of the features in different passions shows that, according to the kind of feeling excited, entirely different groups of the fibres of the facial nerve are acted on. Of the cause of this we are quite ignorant." 
[15] `De la Physionomie,' pp. 12, 73. 
[16] `Mecanisme de la Physionomie Humaine,' 8vo edit. p. 31. 
[17] `Elements of Physiology,' English translation, vol. ii. p. 934. 
No doubt as long as man and all other animals are viewed as independent creations, an effectual stop is put to our natural desire to investigate as far as possible the causes of Expression. By this doctrine, anything and everything can be equally well explained; and it has proved as pernicious with respect to Expression as to every other branch of natural history. With mankind some expressions, such as the bristling of the hair under the influence of extreme terror, or the uncovering of the teeth under that of furious rage, can hardly be understood, except on the belief that man once existed in a much lower and animal-like condition. The community of certain expressions in distinct though allied species, as in the movements of the same facial muscles during laughter by man and by various monkeys, is rendered somewhat more intelligible, if we believe in their descent from a common progenitor. He who admits on general grounds that the structure and habits of all animals have been gradually evolved, will look at the whole subject of Expression in a new and interesting light. 
The study of Expression is difficult, owing to the movements being often extremely slight, and of a fleeting nature. A difference may be clearly perceived, and yet it may be impossible, at least I have found it so, to state in what the difference consists. When we witness any deep emotion, our sympathy is so strongly excited, that close observation is forgotten or rendered almost impossible; of which fact I have had many curious proofs. Our imagination is another and still more serious source of error; for if from the nature of the circumstances we expect to see any expression, we readily imagine its presence. Notwithstanding Dr. Duchenne's great experience, he for a long time fancied, as he states, that several muscles contracted under certain emotions, whereas he ultimately convinced himself that the movement was confined to a single muscle. 
In order to acquire as good a foundation as possible, and to ascertain, independently of common opinion, how far particular movements of the features and gestures are really expressive of certain states of the mind, I have found the following means the most serviceable. In the first place, to observe infants; for they exhibit many emotions, as Sir C. Bell remarks, "with extraordinary force;" whereas, in after life, some of our expressions "cease to have the pure and simple source from which they spring in infancy."[18] 
In the second place, it occurred to me that the insane ought to be studied, as they are liable to the strongest passions, and give uncontrolled vent to them. I had, myself, no opportunity of doing this, so I applied to Dr. Maudsley and received from him an introduction to Dr. J. Crichton Browne, who has charge of an immense asylum near Wakefield, and who, as I found, had already attended to the subject. This excellent observer has with unwearied kindness sent me copious notes and descriptions, with valuable suggestions on many points; and I can hardly over-estimate the value of his assistance. I owe also, to the kindness of Mr. Patrick Nicol, of the Sussex Lunatic Asylum, interesting statements on two or three points. 
Thirdly Dr. Duchenne galvanized, as we have already seen, certain muscles in the face of an old man, whose skin was little sensitive, and thus produced various expressions which were photographed on a large scale. It fortunately occurred to me to show several of the best plates, without a word of explanation, to above twenty educated persons of various ages and both sexes, asking them, in each case, by what emotion or feeling the old man was supposed to be agitated; and I recorded their answers in the words which they used. Several of the expressions were instantly recognised by almost everyone, though described in not exactly the same terms; and these may, I think, be relied on as truthful, and will hereafter be specified. On the other hand, the most widely different judgments were pronounced in regard to some of them. This exhibition was of use in another way, by convincing me how easily we may be misguided by our imagination; for when I first looked through Dr. Duchenne's photographs, reading at the same time the text, and thus learning what was intended, I was struck with admiration at the truthfulness of all, with only a few exceptions. Nevertheless, if I had examined them without any explanation, no doubt I should have been as much perplexed, in some cases, as other persons have been. 
[18] "Anatomy of Expression,' 3rd edit. p. 198. 
Fourthly, I had hoped to derive much aid from the great masters in painting and sculpture, who are such close observers. Accordingly, I have looked at photographs and engravings of many well-known works; but, with a few exceptions, have not thus profited. The reason no doubt is, that in works of art, beauty is the chief object; and strongly contracted facial muscles destroy beauty.[19] The story of the composition is generally told with wonderful force and truth by skilfully given accessories. 
[19] See remarks to this effect in Lessing's `Lacooon,' translated by W. Ross, 1836, p. 19. 
Fifthly, it seemed to me highly important to ascertain whether the same expressions and gestures prevail, as has often been asserted without much evidence, with all the races of mankind, especially with those who have associated but little with Europeans. Whenever the same movements of the features or body express the same emotions in several distinct races of man, we may infer with much probability, that such expressions are true ones,— that is, are innate or instinctive. Conventional expressions or gestures, acquired by the individual during early life, would probably have differed in the different races, in the same manner as do their languages. Accordingly I circulated, early in the year 1867, the following printed queries with a request, which has been fully responded to, that actual observations, and not memory, might be trusted. These queries were written after a considerable interval of time, during which my attention had been otherwise directed, and I can now see that they might have been greatly improved. To some of the later copies, I appended, in manuscript, a few additional remarks:— 
(1.) Is astonishment expressed by the eyes and mouth being opened wide, and by the eyebrows being raised? (2.) Does shame excite a blush when the colour of the skin allows it to be visible? and especially how low down the body does the blush extend? (3.) When a man is indignant or defiant does he frown, hold his body and head erect, square his shoulders and clench his fists? 
(4) When considering deeply on any subject, or trying to understand any puzzle, does he frown, or wrinkle the skin beneath the lower eyelids? 
(5.) When in low spirits, are the corners of the mouth depressed, and the inner corner of the eyebrows raised by that muscle which the French call the "Grief muscle"? The eyebrow in this state becomes slightly oblique, with a little swelling at the Inner end; and the forehead is transversely wrinkled in the middle part, but not across the whole breadth, as when the eyebrows are raised in surprise. (6.) When in good spirits do the eyes sparkle, with the skin a little wrinkled round and under them, and with the mouth a little drawn back at the corners? 
(7.) When a man sneers or snarls at another, is the corner of the upper lip over the canine or eye tooth raised on the side facing the man whom he addresses? 
(8) 
Can a dogged or obstinate expression be recognized, which is chiefly shown by the mouth being firmly closed, a lowering brow and a slight frown? 

(9.) Is contempt expressed by a slight protrusion of the lips and by turning up the nose, and with a slight expiration? 

(10) 
Is disgust shown by the lower lip being turned down, the upper lip slightly raised, with a sudden expiration, something like incipient vomiting, or like something spit out of the mouth? 


(11.) Is extreme fear expressed in the same general manner as with Europeans? 
(12.) Is laughter ever carried to such an extreme as to bring tears into the eyes? 
(13.) When a man wishes to show that he cannot prevent something being done, or cannot himself do something, does he shrug his shoulders, turn inwards his elbows, extend outwards his hands and open the palms; with the eyebrows raised? 
(14) Do the children when sulky, pout or greatly protrude the lips? (15.) Can guilty, or sly, or jealous expressions be recognized? though I know not how these can be defined. 
(16.) Is the head nodded vertically in affirmation, and shaken laterally in negation? 
Observations on natives who have had little communication with Europeans would be of course the most valuable, though those made on any natives would be of much interest to me. General remarks on expression are of comparatively little value; and memory is so deceptive that I earnestly beg it may not be trusted. A definite description of the countenance under any emotion or frame of mind, with a statement of the circumstances under which it occurred, would possess much value. 
To these queries I have received thirty-six answers from different 
observers, several of them missionaries or protectors of the aborigines, to all of whom I am deeply indebted for the great trouble which they have taken, and for the valuable aid thus received. I will specify their names, &c., towards the close of this chapter, so as not to interrupt my present remarks. The answers relate to several of the most distinct and savage races of man. In many instances, the circumstances have been recorded under which each expression was observed, and the expression itself described. In such cases, much confidence may be placed in the answers. When the answers have been simply yes or no, I have always received them with caution. It follows, from the information thus acquired, that the same state of mind is expressed throughout the world with remarkable uniformity; and this fact is in itself interesting as evidence of the close similarity in bodily structure and mental disposition of all the races, of mankind. 
Sixthly, and lastly, I have attended. as closely as I could, to the expression of the several passions in some of the commoner animals; and this I believe to be of paramount importance, not of course for deciding how far in man certain expressions are characteristic of certain states of mind, but as affording the safest basis for generalisation on the causes, or origin, of the various movements of Expression. In observing animals, we are not so likely to be biassed by our imagination; and we may feel safe that their expressions are not conventional. 
From the reasons above assigned, namely, the fleeting nature of some expressions (the changes in the features being often extremely slight); our sympathy being easily aroused when we behold any strong emotion, and our attention thus distracted; our imagination deceiving us, from knowing in a vague manner what to expect, though certainly few of us know what the exact changes in the countenance are; and lastly, even our long familiarity with the subject,—from all these causes combined, the observation of Expression is by no means easy, as many persons, whom I have asked to observe certain points, have soon discovered. Hence it is difficult to determine, with certainty, what are the movements of the features and of the body, which commonly characterize certain states of the mind. Nevertheless, some of the doubts and difficulties have, as I hope, been cleared away by the observation of infants,— of the insane,—of the different races of man,—of works of art,— and lastly, of the facial muscles under the action of galvanism, as effected by Dr. Duchenne. 
But there remains the much greater difficulty of understanding the cause or origin of the several expressions, and of judging whether any theoretical explanation is trustworthy. Besides, judging as well as we can by our reason, without the aid of any rules, which of two or more explanations is the most satisfactory, or are quite unsatisfactory, I see only one way of testing our conclusions. This is to observe whether the same principle by which one expression can, as it appears, be explained, is applicable in other allied cases; and especially, whether the same general principles can be applied with satisfactory results, both to man and the lower animals. This latter method, I am inclined to think, is the most serviceable of all. The difficulty of judging of the truth of any theoretical explanation, and of testing it by some distinct line of investigation, is the great drawback to that interest which the study seems well fitted to excite. 
Finally, with respect to my own observations, I may state that they were commenced in the year 1838; and from that time to the present day, I have occasionally attended to the subject. At the above date, I was already inclined to believe in the principle of evolution, or of the derivation of species from other and lower forms. Consequently, when I read Sir C. Bell's great work, his view, that man had been created with certain muscles specially adapted for the expression of his feelings, struck me as unsatisfactory. It seemed probable that the habit of expressing our feelings by certain movements, though now rendered innate, had been in some manner gradually acquired. But to discover how such habits had been acquired was perplexing in no small degree. The whole subject had to be viewed under a new aspect, and each expression demanded a rational explanation. This belief led me to attempt the present work, however imperfectly it may have been executed. ———— 
I will now give the names of the gentlemen to whom, as I have said, I am deeply indebted for information in regard to the expressions exhibited by various races of man, and I will specify some of the circumstances under which the observations were in each case made. Owing to the great kindness and powerful influence of Mr. Wilson, of Hayes Place, Kent, I have received from Australia no less than thirteen sets of answers to my queries. This has been particularly fortunate, as the Australian aborigines rank amongst the most distinct of all the races of man. It will be seen that the observations have been chiefly made in the south, in the outlying parts of the colony of Victoria; but some excellent answers have been received from the north. 
Mr. Dyson Lacy has given me in detail some valuable observations, made several hundred miles in the interior of Queensland. To Mr. R. Brough Smyth, of Melbourne, I am much indebted for observations made by himself, and for sending me several of the following letters, namely:—From the Rev. Mr. Hagenauer, of Lake Wellington, a missionary in Gippsland, Victoria, who has had much experience with the natives. From Mr. Samuel Wilson, a landowner, residing at Langerenong, Wimmera, Victoria. From the Rev. George Taplin, superintendent of the native Industrial Settlement at Port Macleay. From Mr. Archibald G. Lang, of Coranderik, Victoria, a teacher at a school where aborigines, old and young, are collected from all parts of the colony. From Mr. H. B. Lane, of Belfast, Victoria, a police magistrate and warden, whose observations, as I am assured, are highly trustworthy. From Mr. Templeton Bunnett, of Echuca, whose station is on the borders of the colony of Victoria, and who has thus been able to observe many aborigines who have had little intercourse with white men. He compared his observations with those made by two other gentlemen long resident in the neighbourhood. Also from Mr. J. Bulmer, a missionary in a remote part of Gippsland, Victoria. 
I am also indebted to the distinguished botanist, Dr. Ferdinand Muller, of Victoria, for some observations made by himself, and for sending me others made by Mrs. Green, as well as for some of the foregoing letters. 
In regard to the Maoris of New Zealand, the Rev. J. W. Stack has answered only a few of my queries; but the answers have been remarkably full, clear, and distinct, with the circumstances recorded under which the observations were made. 
The Rajah Brooke has given me some information with respect to the Dyaks of Borneo. 
Respecting the Malays, I have been highly successful; for Mr. F. Geach (to whom I was introduced by Mr. Wallace), during his residence as a mining engineer in the interior of Malacca, observed many natives, who had never before associated with white men. He wrote me two long letters with admirable and detailed observations on their expression. He likewise observed the Chinese immigrants in the Malay archipelago. 
The well-known naturalist, H. M. Consul, Mr. Swinhoe, also observed for me the Chinese in their native country; and he made inquiries from others whom he could trust. 
In India Mr. H. Erskine, whilst residing in his official capacity in the Admednugur District in the Bombay Presidency, attended to the expression of the inhabitants, but found much difficulty in arriving at any safe conclusions, owing to their habitual concealment of all emotions in the presence of Europeans. He also obtained information for me from Mr. West, the Judge in Canara, and he consulted some intelligent native gentlemen on certain points. In Calcutta Mr. J. Scott, curator of the Botanic Gardens, carefully observed the various tribes of men therein employed during a considerable period, and no one has sent me such full and valuable details. The habit of accurate observation, gained by his botanical studies, has been brought to bear on our present subject. For Ceylon I am much indebted to the Rev. S. O. Glenie for answers to some of my queries. 
Turning to Africa, I have been unfortunate with respect to the negroes, though Mr. Winwood Reade aided me as far as lay in his power. It would have been comparatively easy to have obtained information in regard to the negro slaves in America; but as they have long associated with white men, such observations would have possessed little value. In the southern parts of the continent Mrs. Barber observed the Kafirs and Fingoes, and sent me many distinct answers. Mr. J. P. Mansel Weale also made some observations on the natives, and procured for me a curious document, namely, the opinion, written in English, of Christian Gaika, brother of the Chief Sandilli, on the expressions of his fellow-countrymen. In the northern regions of Africa Captain Speedy, who long resided with the Abyssinians, answered my queries partly from memory and partly from observations made on the son of King Theodore, who was then under his charge. Professor and Mrs. Asa Gray attended to some points in the expressions of the natives, as observed by them whilst ascending the Nile. 
On the great American continent Mr. Bridges, a catechist residing with the Fuegians, answered some few questions about their expression, addressed to him many years ago. In the northern half of the continent Dr. Rothrock attended to the expressions of the wild Atnah and Espyox tribes on the Nasse River, in North-Western America. Mr. Washington Matthews Assistant-Surgeon in the United States Army, also observed with special care (after having seen my queries, as printed in the `Smithsonian Report') some of the wildest tribes in the Western parts of the United States, namely, the Tetons, Grosventres, Mandans, and Assinaboines; and his answers have proved of the highest value. 
Lastly, besides these special sources of information, I have collected some few facts incidentally given in books of travels.———— 
As I shall often have to refer, more especially in the latter part of this volume, to the muscles of the human face, I have had a diagram (fig. 1) copied and reduced from Sir C. Bell's work, and two others, with more accurate details (figs. 2 and 3), from Herde's well-known `Handbuch der Systematischen Anatomie des Menschen.' The same letters refer to the same muscles in all three figures, but the names are given of only the more important ones to which I shall have to allude. The facial muscles blend much together, and, as I am informed, hardly appear on a dissected face so distinct as they are here represented. Some writers consider that these muscles consist of nineteen pairs, with one unpaired;[20] but others make the number much larger, amounting even to fifty-five, according to Moreau. They are, as is admitted by everyone who has written on the subject, very variable in structure; and Moreau remarks that they are hardly alike in half-a­dozen subjects.[21] They are also variable in function. Thus the power of uncovering the canine tooth on one side differs much in different persons. The power of raising the wings of the nostrils is also, according to Dr. Piderit, 
[22] variable in a remarkable degree; and other such cases could be given. 
[20] Mr. Partridge in Todd's `Cyclopaedia of Anatomy and Physiology,' vol. ii. p. 227. 
[21] `La Physionomie,' par G. Lavater, tom. iv. 1820, p. 274. On the number of the facial muscles, see vol. iv. pp. 209-211. 
[22] " `Mimik und Physiognomik,' 1867, s. 91. 
Finally, I must have the pleasure of expressing my obligations to Mr. Rejlander for the trouble which he has taken in photographing for me various expressions and gestures. I am also indebted to Herr Kindermann, of Hamburg, for the loan of some excellent negatives of crying infants; and to Dr. Wallich for a charming one of a smiling girl. I have already expressed my obligations to Dr. Duchenne for generously permitting me to have some of his large photographs copied and reduced. All these photographs have been printed by the Heliotype process, and the accuracy of the copy is thus guaranteed. These plates are referred to by Roman numerals. 
I am also greatly indebted to Mr. T. W. Wood for the extreme pains which he has taken in drawing from life the expressions of various animals. A distinguished artist, Mr. Riviere, has had the kindness to give me two drawings of dogs—one in a hostile and the other in a humble and caressing frame of mind. Mr. A. May has also given me two similar sketches of dogs. Mr. Cooper has taken much care in cutting the blocks. Some of the photographs and drawings, namely, those by Mr. May, and those by Mr. Wolf of the Cynopithecus, were first reproduced by Mr. Cooper on wood by means of photography, and then engraved: by this means almost complete fidelity is ensured. 
CHAPTER I. 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION. 
The three chief principles stated—The first principle—Serviceable actions become habitual in association with certain states of the mind, and are performed whether or not of service in each particular case— The force of habit—Inheritance—Associated habitual movements in man— Reflex actions—Passage of habits into reflex actions—Associated habitual movements in the lower animals—Concluding remarks. 
I WILL begin by giving the three Principles, which appear to me to account for most of the expressions and gestures involuntarily used by man and the lower animals, under the influence of various emotions and sensations.[1] I arrived, however, at these three Principles only at the close of my observations. They will be discussed in the present and two following chapters in a general manner. Facts observed both with man and the lower animals will here be made use of; but the latter facts are preferable, as less likely to deceive us. In the fourth and fifth chapters, I will describe the special expressions of some of the lower animals; and in the succeeding chapters those of man. Everyone will thus be able to judge for himself, how far my three principles throw light on the theory of the subject. It appears to me that so many expressions are thus explained in a fairly satisfactory manner, that probably all will hereafter be found to come under the same or closely analogous heads. I need hardly premise that movements or changes in any part of the body,— as the wagging of a dog's tail, the drawing back of a horse's ears, the shrugging of a man's shoulders, or the dilatation of the capillary vessels of the skin,—may all equally well serve for expression. The three Principles are as follows. 
[1] 
Mr. Herbert Spencer (`Essays,' Second Series, 1863, p. 138) has drawn a clear distinction between emotions and sensations, the latter being "generated in our corporeal framework." He classes as Feelings both emotions and-sensations. 

I. 
The principle of serviceable associated Habits.—Certain complex actions are of direct or indirect service under certain states of the mind, in order to relieve or gratify certain sensations, desires, &c.; and whenever the same state of mind is induced, however feebly, there is a tendency through the force of habit and association for the same movements to be performed, though they may not then be of the least use. Some actions ordinarily associated through habit with certain states of the mind may be partially repressed through the will, and in such cases the muscles which are least under the separate control of the will are the most liable still to act, causing movements which we recognize as expressive. In certain other cases the checking of one habitual movement requires other slight movements; and these are likewise expressive. 


II. The principle of Antithesis.—Certain states of the mind lead to certain habitual actions, which are of service, as under our first principle. Now when a directly opposite state of mind is induced, there is a strong and involuntary tendency to the performance of movements of a directly opposite nature, though these are of no use; and such movements are in some cases highly expressive. 
III. The principle of actions due to the constitution of the Nervous System, independently from the first of the Will, and independently to a certain extent of Habit.—-When the sensorium is strongly excited, nerve-force is generated in excess, and is transmitted in certain definite directions, depending on the connection of the nerve-cells, and partly on habit: or the supply of nerve-force may, as it appears, be interrupted. Effects are thus produced which we recognize as expressive. This third principle may, for the sake of brevity, be called that of the direct action of the nervous system. 
With respect to our first Principle, it is notorious how powerful is the force of habit. The most complex and difficult movements can in time be performed without the least effort or consciousness. It is not positively known how it comes that habit is so efficient in facilitating complex movements; but physiologists admit[2] "that the conducting power of the nervous fibres increases with the frequency of their excitement." This applies to the nerves of motion and sensation, as well as to those connected with the act of thinking. That some physical change is produced in the nerve-cells or nerves which are habitually used can hardly be doubted, for otherwise it is impossible to understand how the tendency to certain acquired movements is inherited. That they are inherited we see with horses in certain transmitted paces, such as cantering and ambling, which are not natural to them,— in the pointing of young pointers and the setting of young setters— in the peculiar manner of flight of certain breeds of the pigeon, &c. We have analogous cases with mankind in the inheritance of tricks or unusual gestures, to which we shall presently recur. To those who admit the gradual evolution of species, a most striking instance of the perfection with which the most difficult consensual movements can be transmitted, is afforded by the humming-bird Sphinx-moth (Macroglossa); for this moth, shortly after its emergence from the cocoon, as shown by the bloom on its unruffled scales, may be seen poised stationary in the air, with its long hair-like proboscis uncurled and inserted into the minute orifices of flowers; and no one, I believe, has ever seen this moth learning to perform its difficult task, which requires such unerring aim. 
[2] Muller, `Elements of Physiology,' Eng. translat. vol. ii. p. 939. See also Mr. H. Spencer's interesting speculations on the same subject, and on the genesis of nerves, in his `Principles of Biology,' vol. ii. p. 346; and in his `Principles of Psychology,' 2nd edit. pp. 511-557. 
When there exists an inherited or instinctive tendency to the performance of an action, or an inherited taste for certain kinds of food, some degree of habit in the individual is often or generally requisite. We find this in the paces of the horse, and to a certain extent in the pointing of dogs; although some young dogs point excellently the first time they are taken out, yet they often associate the proper inherited attitude with a wrong odour, and even with eyesight. I have heard it asserted that if a calf be allowed to suck its mother only once, it is much more difficult afterwards to rear it by hand.[3] Caterpillars which have been fed on the leaves of one kind of tree, have been known to perish from hunger rather than to eat the leaves of another tree, although this afforded them their proper food, under a state of nature;[4] and so it is in many other cases. 
[3] A remark to much the same effect was made long ago by Hippocrates and by the illustrious Harvey; for both assert that a young animal forgets in the course of a few days the art of sucking, and cannot without some difficulty again acquire it. I give these assertions on the authority of Dr. Darwin, `Zoonomia,' 1794, vol. i. p. 140. 
The power of Association is admitted by everyone. Mr. Bain remarks, that "actions, sensations and states of feeling, occurring together or in close succession, tend to grow together, or cohere, in such a way that when any one of them is afterwards presented to the mind, the others are apt to be brought up in idea."[5] It is so important for our purpose fully to recognize that actions readily become associated with other actions and with various states of the mind, that I will give a good many instances, in the first place relating to man, and afterwards to the lower animals. Some of the instances are of a very trifling nature, but they are as good for our purpose as more important habits. It is known to everyone how difficult, or even impossible it is, without repeated trials, to move the limbs in certain opposed directions which have never been practised. Analogous cases occur with sensations, as in the common experiment of rolling a marble beneath the tips of two crossed fingers, when it feels exactly like two marbles. Everyone protects himself when falling to the ground by extending his arms, and as Professor Alison has remarked, few can resist acting thus, when voluntarily falling on a soft bed. A man when going out of doors puts on his gloves quite unconsciously; and this may seem an extremely simple operation, but he who has taught a child to put on gloves, knows that this is by no means the case. 
[4] See for my authorities, and for various analogous facts, `The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' 1868, vol. ii. p. 304. 
[5] `The Senses and the Intellect,' 2nd edit. 1864, p. 332. Prof. Huxley remarks (`Elementary Lessons in Physiology,' 5th edit. 1872, p. 306), "It may be laid down as a rule, that, if any two mental states be called up together, or in succession, with due frequency and vividness, the subsequent production of the one of them will suffice to call up the other, and that whether we desire it or not." 
When our minds are much affected, so are the movements of our bodies; but here another principle besides habit, namely the undirected overflow of nerve-force, partially comes into play. Norfolk, in speaking of Cardinal Wolsey, says— 
"Some strange commotion Is in his brain; he bites his lip and starts; Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground, Then, lays his finger on his temple: straight, Springs out into fast gait; then, stops again, Strikes his breast hard; and anon, he casts His eye against the moon: in most strange postures We have seen him set himself."—Hen. VIII., act 3, sc. 2. 
A vulgar man often scratches his head when perplexed in mind; and I believe that he acts thus from habit, as if he experienced a slightly uncomfortable bodily sensation, namely, the itching of his head, to which he is particularly liable, and which he thus relieves. Another man rubs his eyes when perplexed, or gives a little cough when embarrassed, acting in either case as if he felt a slightly uncomfortable sensation in his eyes or windpipe. [6] 
From the continued use of the eyes, these organs are especially liable to be acted on through association under various states of the mind, although there is manifestly nothing to be seen. A man, as Gratiolet remarks, who vehemently rejects a proposition, will almost certainly shut his eyes or turn away his face; but if he accepts the proposition, he will nod his head in affirmation and open his eyes widely. The man acts in this latter case as if he clearly saw the thing, and in the former case as if he did not or would not see it. I have noticed that persons in describing a horrid sight often shut their eyes momentarily and firmly, or shake their heads, as if not to see or to drive away something disagreeable; and I have caught myself, when thinking in the dark of a horrid spectacle, closing my eyes firmly. In looking suddenly at any object, or in looking all around, everyone raises his eyebrows, so that the eyes may be quickly and widely opened; and Duchenne remarks that[7] a person in trying to remember something often raises his eyebrows, as if to see it. A Hindoo gentleman made exactly the same remark to Mr. Erskine in regard to his countrymen. I noticed a young lady earnestly trying to recollect a painter's name, and she first looked to one corner of the ceiling and then to the opposite corner, arching the one eyebrow on that side; although, of course, there was nothing to be seen there. 
[6] Gratiolet (`De la Physionomie,' p. 324), in his discussion on this subject, gives many analogous instances. See p. 42, on the opening and shutting of the eyes. Engel is quoted (p. 323) on the changed paces of a man, as his thoughts change. 
In most of the foregoing cases, we can understand how the associated movements were acquired through habit; but with some individuals, certain strange gestures or tricks have arisen in association with certain states of the mind, owing to wholly inexplicable causes, and are undoubtedly inherited. I have elsewhere given one instance from my own observation of an extraordinary and complex gesture, associated with pleasurable feelings, which was transmitted from a father to his daughter, as well as some other analogous facts.[8] 
[7] `Mecanisme de la Physionomie Humaine,' 1862, p. 17. 
[8] `The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication,' vol. ii. p. 
6. The inheritance of habitual gestures is so important for us, that I gladly avail myself of Mr. F. Galton's permission to give in his own words the following remarkable case:—"The following account of a habit occurring in individuals of three consecutive generations {footnote continues:} is of peculiar interest, because it occurs only during sound sleep, and therefore cannot be due to imitation, but must be altogether natural. The particulars are perfectly trustworthy, for I have enquired fully into them, and speak from abundant and independent evidence. A gentleman of considerable position was found by his wife to have the curious trick, when he lay fast asleep on his back in bed, of raising his right arm slowly in front of his face, up to his forehead, and then dropping it with a jerk, so that the wrist fell heavily on the bridge of his nose. The trick did not occur every night, but occasionally, and was independent of any ascertained cause. Sometimes it was repeated incessantly for an hour or more. The gentleman's nose was prominent, and its bridge often became sore from the blows which it received. At one time an awkward sore was produced, that was long in healing, on account of the recurrence, night after night, of the blows which first caused it. His wife had to remove the button from the wrist of his night-gown as it made severe scratches, and some means were attempted of tying his arm. 
"Many years after his death, his son married a lady who had never heard of the family incident. She, however, observed precisely the same peculiarity in her husband; but his nose, from not being particularly prominent, has never as yet suffered from the blows. The trick does not occur when he is half-asleep, as, for example, when dozing in his arm-chair, but the moment he is fast asleep it is apt to begin. It is, as with his father, intermittent; sometimes ceasing for many nights, and sometimes almost incessant during a part of every night. It is performed, as it was by his father, with his right hand. 
"One of his children, a girl, has inherited the same trick. She performs it, likewise, with the right hand, but in a slightly modified form; for, after raising the arm, she does not allow the wrist to drop upon the bridge of the nose, but the palm of the half-closed hand falls over and down the nose, striking it rather rapidly. It is also very intermittent with this child, not occurring for periods of some months, but sometimes occurring almost incessantly." {end of long footnote} 
Another curious instance of an odd inherited movement, associated with the wish to obtain an object, will be given in the course of this volume. 
There are other actions which are commonly performed under certain circumstances, independently of habit, and which seem to be due to imitation or some sort of sympathy. Thus persons cutting anything with a pair of scissors may be seen to move their jaws simultaneously with the blades of the scissors. Children learning to write often twist about their tongues as their fingers move, in a ridiculous fashion. When a public singer suddenly becomes a little hoarse, many of those present may be heard, as I have been assured by a gentleman on whom I can rely, to clear their throats; but here habit probably comes into play, as we clear our own throats under similar circumstances. I have also been told that at leaping matches, as the performer makes his spring, many of the spectators, generally men and boys, move their feet; but here again habit probably comes into play, for it is very doubtful whether women would thus act. 
Reflex actions—Reflex actions, in the strict sense of the term, are due to the excitement of a peripheral nerve, which transmits its influence to certain nerve-cells, and these in their turn excite certain muscles or glands into action; and all this may take place without any sensation or consciousness on our part, though often thus accompanied. As many reflex actions are highly expressive, the subject must here be noticed at some little length. We shall also see that some of them graduate into, and can hardly be distinguished from actions which have arisen through habit? Coughing and sneezing are familiar instances of reflex actions. With infants the first act of respiration is often a sneeze, although this requires the co-ordinated movement of numerous muscles. Respiration is partly voluntary, but mainly reflex, and is performed in the most natural and best manner without the interference of the will. A vast number of complex movements are reflex. As good an instance as can be given is the often-quoted one of a decapitated frog, which cannot of course feel, and cannot consciously perform, any movement. Yet if a drop of acid be placed on the lower surface of the thigh of a frog in this state, it will rub off the drop with the upper surface of the foot of the same leg. If this foot be cut off, it cannot thus act. "After some fruitless efforts, therefore, it gives up trying in that way, seems restless, as though, says Pfluger, it was seeking some other way, and at last it makes use of the foot of the other leg and succeeds in rubbing off the acid. Notably we have here not merely contractions of muscles, but combined and harmonized contractions in due sequence for a special purpose. These are actions that have all the appearance of being guided by intelligence and instigated by will in an animal, the recognized organ of whose intelligence and will has been removed."[10] 
[9] Prof. Huxley remarks (`Elementary Physiology,' 5th edit. p. 305) that reflex actions proper to the spinal cord are NATURAL; but, by the help of the brain, that is through habit, an infinity of ARTIFICIAL reflex actions may be acquired. Virchow admits (`Sammlung wissenschaft. Vortrage,' &c., "Ueber das Ruckeninark," 1871, ss. 24, 31) that some reflex actions can hardly be distinguished from instincts; and, of the latter, it may be added, some cannot be distinguished from inherited habits. 
We see the difference between reflex and voluntary movements in very young children not being able to perform, as I am informed by Sir Henry Holland, certain acts somewhat analogous to those of sneezing and coughing, namely, in their not being able to blow their noses (i. e. to compress the nose and blow violently through the passage), and in their not being able to clear their throats of phlegm. They have to learn to perform these acts, yet they are performed by us, when a little older, almost as easily as reflex actions. Sneezing and coughing, however, can be controlled by the will only partially or not at all; whilst the clearing the throat and blowing the nose are completely under our command. 
[10] "Dr. Maudsley, `Body and Mind,' 1870, p. 8. 
When we are conscious of the presence of an irritating particle in our nostrils or windpipe—that is, when the same sensory nerve-cells are excited, as in the case of sneezing and coughing— we can voluntarily expel the particle by forcibly driving air through these passages; but we cannot do this with nearly the same force, rapidity, and precision, as by a reflex action. In this latter case the sensory nerve-cells apparently excite the motor nerve-cells without any waste of power by first communicating with the cerebral hemispheres—the seat of our consciousness and volition. In all cases there seems to exist a profound antagonism between the same movements, as directed by the will and by a reflex stimulant, in the force with which they are performed and in the facility with which they are excited. As Claude Bernard asserts, "L'influence du cerveau tend donc a entraver les mouvements reflexes, a limiter leur force et leur etendue."[11] 
The conscious wish to perform a reflex action sometimes stops or interrupts its performance, though the proper sensory nerves may be stimulated. For instance, many years ago I laid a small wager with a dozen young men that they would not sneeze if they took snuff, although they all declared that they invariably did so; accordingly they all took a pinch, but from wishing much to succeed, not one sneezed, though their eyes watered, and all, without exception, had to pay me the wager. Sir H. Holland remarks[12] that attention paid to the act of swallowing interferes with the proper movements; from which it probably follows, at least in part, that some persons find it so difficult to swallow a pill. 
[11] "See the very interesting discussion on the whole subject by Claude Bernard, `Tissus Vivants,' 1866, p. 353-356. 
[12] `Chapters on Mental Physiology,' 1858, p. 85. 
Another familiar instance of a reflex action is the involuntary closing of the eyelids when the surface of the eye is touched. A similar winking movement is caused when a blow is directed towards the face; but this is an habitual and not a strictly reflex action, as the stimulus is conveyed through the mind and not by the excitement of a peripheral nerve. The whole body and head are generally at the same time drawn suddenly backwards. These latter movements, however, can be prevented, if the danger does not appear to the imagination imminent; but our reason telling us that there is no danger does not suffice. I may mention a trifling fact, illustrating this point, and which at the time amused me. I put my face close to the thick glass-plate in front of a puff-adder in the Zoological Gardens, with the firm determination of not starting back if the snake struck at me; but, as soon as the blow was struck, my resolution went for nothing, and I jumped a yard or two backwards with astonishing rapidity. My will and reason were powerless against the imagination of a danger which had never been experienced. 
The violence of a start seems to depend partly on the vividness of the imagination, and partly on the condition, either habitual or temporary, of the nervous system. He who will attend to the starting of his horse, when tired and fresh, will perceive how perfect is the gradation from a mere glance at some unexpected object, with a momentary doubt whether it is dangerous, to a jump so rapid and violent, that the animal probably could not voluntarily whirl round in so rapid a manner. The nervous system of a fresh and highly-fed horse sends its order to the motory system so quickly, that no time is allowed for him to consider whether or not the danger is real. After one violent start, when he is excited and the blood flows freely through his brain, he is very apt to start again; and so it is, as I have noticed, with young infants. 
A start from a sudden noise, when the stimulus is conveyed through the auditory nerves, is always accompanied in grown-up persons by the winking of the eyelids.[13] I observed, however, that though my infants started at sudden sounds, when under a fortnight old, they certainly did not always wink their eyes, and I believe never did so. The start of an older infant apparently represents a vague catching hold of something to prevent falling. I shook a pasteboard box close before the eyes of one of my infants, when 114 days old, and it did not in the least wink; but when I put a few comfits into the box, holding it in the same position as before, and rattled them, the child blinked its eyes violently every time, and started a little. It was obviously impossible that a carefully-guarded infant could have learnt by experience that a rattling sound near its eyes indicated danger to them. But such experience will have been slowly gained at a later age during a long series of generations; and from what we know of inheritance, there is nothing improbable in the transmission of a habit to the offspring at an earlier age than that at which it was first acquired by the parents. 
From the foregoing remarks it seems probable that some actions, which were at first performed consciously, have become through habit and association converted into reflex actions, and are now so firmly fixed and inherited, that they are performed, even when not of the least use,[14] as often as the same causes arise, which originally excited them in us through the volition. In such cases the sensory nerve-cells excite the motor cells, without first communicating with those cells on which our consciousness and volition depend. It is probable that sneezing and coughing were originally acquired by the habit of expelling, as violently as possible, any irritating particle from the sensitive air-passages. As far as time is concerned, there has been more than enough for these habits to have become innate or converted into reflex actions; for they are common to most or all of the higher quadrupeds, and must therefore have been first acquired at a very remote period. Why the act of clearing the throat is not a reflex action, and has to be learnt by our children, I cannot pretend to say; but we can see why blowing the nose on a handkerchief has to be learnt. 
[13] Muller remarks (`Elements of Physiology,' Eng. tr. vol. ii. p. 1311) on starting being always accompanied by the closure of the eyelids. 
[14] Dr. Maudsley remarks (`Body and Mind,' p. 10) that "reflex movements which commonly effect a useful end may, under the changed circumstances of disease, do great mischief, becoming even the occasion of violent suffering and of a most painful death." 
It is scarcely credible that the movements of a headless frog, when it wipes off a drop of acid or other object from its thigh, and which movements are so well coordinated for a special purpose, were not at first performed voluntarily, being afterwards rendered easy through long-continued habit so as at last to be performed unconsciously, or independently of the cerebral hemispheres. 
So again it appears probable that starting was originally acquired by the habit of jumping away as quickly as possible from danger, whenever any of our senses gave us warning. Starting, as we have seen, is accompanied by the blinking of the eyelids so as to protect the eyes, the most tender and sensitive organs of the body; and it is, I believe, always accompanied by a sudden and forcible inspiration, which is the natural preparation for any violent effort. But when a man or horse starts, his heart beats wildly against his ribs, and here it may be truly said we have an organ which has never been under the control of the will, partaking in the general reflex movements of the body. To this point, however, I shall return in a future chapter. 
The contraction of the iris, when the retina is stimulated by a bright light, is another instance of a movement, which it appears cannot possibly have been at first voluntarily performed and then fixed by habit; for the iris is not known to be under the conscious control of the will in any animal. In such cases some explanation, quite distinct from habit, will have to be discovered. The radiation of nerve-force from strongly-excited nerve-cells to other connected cells, as in the case of a bright light on the retina causing a sneeze, may perhaps aid us in understanding how some reflex actions originated. A radiation of nerve-force of this kind, if it caused a movement tending to lessen the primary irritation, as in the case of the contraction of the iris preventing too much light from falling on the retina, might afterwards have been taken advantage of and modified for this special purpose. 
It further deserves notice that reflex actions are in all probability liable to slight variations, as are all corporeal structures and instincts; and any variations which were beneficial and of sufficient importance, would tend to be preserved and inherited. Thus reflex actions, when once gained for one purpose, might afterwards be modified independently of the will or habit, so as to serve for some distinct purpose. Such cases would be parallel with those which, as we have every reason to believe, have occurred with many instincts; for although some instincts have been developed simply through long-continued and inherited habit, other highly complex ones have been developed through the preservation of variations of pre-existing instincts— that is, through natural selection. 
I have discussed at some little length, though as I am well aware, in a very imperfect manner, the acquirement of reflex actions, because they are often brought into play in connection with movements expressive of our emotions; and it was necessary to show that at least some of them might have been Erst acquired through the will in order to satisfy a desire, or to relieve a disagreeable sensation. 
Associated habitual movements in the lower animals.— I have already given in the case of Man several instances of movements associated with various states of the mind or body, which are now purposeless, but which were originally of use, and are still of use under certain circumstances. As this subject is very important for us, I will here give a considerable number of analogous facts, with reference to animals; although many of them are of a very trifling nature. My object is to show that certain movements were originally performed for a definite end, and that, under nearly the same circumstances, they are still pertinaciously performed through habit when not of the least use. That the tendency in most of the following cases is inherited, we may infer from such actions being performed in the same manner by all the individuals, young and old, of he same species. We shall also see that they are excited by the most diversified, often circuitous, and sometimes mistaken associations. 
Dogs, when they wish to go to sleep on a carpet or other hard surface, generally turn round and round and scratch the ground with their fore-paws in a senseless manner, as if they intended to trample down the grass and scoop out a hollow, as no doubt their wild parents did, when they lived on open grassy plains or in the woods. Jackals, fennecs, and other allied animals in the Zoological Gardens, treat their straw in this manner; but it is a rather odd circumstance that the keepers, after observing for some months, have never seen the wolves thus behave. A semi-idiotic dog—and an animal in this condition would be particularly liable to follow a senseless habit—was observed by a friend to turn completely round on a carpet thirteen times before going to sleep. 
Many carnivorous animals, as they crawl towards their prey and prepare to rush or spring on it, lower their heads and crouch, partly, as it would appear, to hide themselves, and partly to get ready for their rush; and this habit in an exaggerated form has become hereditary in our pointers and setters. Now I have noticed scores of times that when two strange dogs meet on an open road, the one which first sees the other, though at the distance of one or two hundred yards, after the first glance always lowers its bead, generally crouches a little, or even lies down; that is, he takes the proper attitude for concealing himself and {illust. caption = for making a rush or FIG. 4.—Small dog watching a cat on a spring, although the road table. From a photograph taken is quite open and The distance Mr. Rejlander.} great. Again, dogs of all kinds when intently watching and slowly approaching their prey, frequently keep one of their fore-legs doubled up for a long time, ready for the next cautious step; and this is eminently characteristic of the pointer. But from habit they behave in exactly the same manner whenever their attention is aroused (fig. 4). I have seen a dog at the foot of a high wall, listening attentively to a sound on the opposite side, with one leg doubled up; and in this case there could have been no intention of making a cautious approach. 
Dogs after voiding their excrement often make with all four feet a few scratches backwards, even on a bare stone pavement, as if for the purpose of covering up their excrement with earth, in nearly the same manner as do cats. Wolves and jackals behave in the Zoological Gardens in exactly the same manner, yet, as I am assured by the keepers, neither wolves, jackals, nor foxes, when they have the means of doing so, ever cover up their excrement, any more than do dogs. All these animals, however, bury superfluous food. Hence, if we rightly understand the meaning of the above cat-like habit, of which there can be little doubt, we have a purposeless remnant of an habitual movement, which was originally followed by some remote progenitor of the dog-genus for a definite purpose, and which has been retained for a prodigious length of time. 
Dogs and jackals[15] take much pleasure in rolling and rubbing their necks and backs on carrion. The odour seems delightful to them, though dogs at least do not eat carrion. Mr. Bartlett has observed wolves for me, and has given them carrion, but has never seen them roll on it. I have heard it remarked, and I believe it to be true, that the larger dogs, which are probably descended from wolves, do not so often roll in carrion as do smaller dogs, which are probably descended from jackals. When a piece of brown biscuit is offered to a terrier of mine and she is not hungry (and I have heard of similar instances), she first tosses it about and worries it, as if it were a rat or other prey; she then repeatedly rolls on it precisely as if it were a piece of carrion, and at last eats it. It would appear that an imaginary relish has to be given to the distasteful morsel; and to effect this the dog acts in his habitual manner, as if the biscuit was a live animal or smelt like carrion, though he knows better than we do that this is not the case. I have seen this same terrier act in the same manner after killing a little bird or mouse. 
[15] See Mr. F. H. Salvin's account of a tame jackal in `Land and Water,' October, 1869. 
Dogs scratch themselves by a rapid movement of one of their hind-feet; and when their backs are rubbed with a stick, so strong is the habit, that they cannot help rapidly scratching the air or the ground in a useless and ludicrous manner. The terrier just alluded to, when thus scratched with a stick, will sometimes show her delight by another habitual movement, namely, by licking the air as if it were my hand. 
Horses scratch themselves by nibbling those parts of their bodies which they can reach with their teeth; but more commonly one horse shows another where he wants to be scratched, and they then nibble each other. A friend whose attention I had called to the subject, observed that when he rubbed his horse's neck, the animal protruded his head, uncovered his teeth, and moved his jaws, exactly as if nibbling another horse's neck, for he could never have nibbled his own neck. If a horse is much tickled, as when curry-combed, his wish to bite something becomes so intolerably strong, that he will clatter his teeth together, and though not vicious, bite his groom. At the same time from habit he closely depresses his ears, so as to protect them from being bitten, as if he were fighting with another horse. 
A horse when eager to start on a journey makes the nearest approach which he can to the habitual movement of progression by pawing the ground. Now when horses in their stalls are about to be fed and are eager for their corn, they paw the pavement or the straw. Two of my horses thus behave when they see or hear the corn given to their neighbours. But here we have what may almost be called a true expression, as pawing the ground is universally recognized as a sign of eagerness. 
Cats cover up their excrements of both kinds with earth; and my grandfather[17]{sic} saw a kitten scraping ashes over a spoonful of pure water spilt on the hearth; so that here an habitual or instinctive action was falsely excited, not by a previous act or by odour, but by eyesight. It is well known that cats dislike wetting their feet, owing, it is probable, to their having aboriginally inhabited the dry country of Egypt; and when they wet their feet they shake them violently. My daughter poured some water into a glass close to the head of a kitten; and it immediately shook its feet in the usual manner; so that here we have an habitual movement falsely excited by an associated sound instead of by the sense of touch. 
Kittens, puppies, young pigs and probably many other young animals, alternately push with their forefeet against the mammary glands of their mothers, to excite a freer secretion of milk, or to make it flow. Now it is very common with young cats, and not at all rare with old cats of the common and Persian breeds (believed by some naturalists to be specifically extinct), when comfortably lying on a warm shawl or other soft substance, to pound it quietly and alternately with their fore-feet; their toes being spread out and claws slightly protruded, precisely as when sucking their mother. That it is the same movement is clearly shown by their often at the same time taking a bit of the shawl into their mouths and sucking it; generally closing their eyes and purring from delight. This curious movement is commonly excited only in association with the sensation of a warm soft surface; but I have seen an old cat, when pleased by having its back scratched, pounding the air with its feet in the same manner; so that this action has almost become the expression of a pleasurable sensation. 
[16]"Dr. Darwin, `Zoonomia,' 1794, vol. i. p. 160. I find that the fact of cats protruding their feet when pleased is also noticed (p. 151) in this work. 
Having referred to the act of sucking, I may add that this complex movement, as well as the alternate protrusion of the fore-feet, are reflex actions; for they are performed if a finger moistened with milk is placed in the mouth of a puppy, the front part of whose brain has been removed.[17] It has recently been stated in France, that the action of sucking is excited solely through the sense of smell, so that if the olfactory nerves of a puppy are destroyed, it never sucks. In like manner the wonderful power which a chicken possesses only a few hours after being hatched, of picking up small particles of food, seems to be started into action through the sense of hearing; for with chickens hatched by artificial heat, a good observer found that "making a noise with the finger-nail against a board, in imitation of the hen-mother, first taught them to peck at their meat."[18] 
[17] Carpenter, `Principles of Comparative Physiology,' 1854, p. 690, and Muller's `Elements of Physiology,' Eng. translat. vol. ii. p. 936. 
[18] Mowbray on `Poultry,' 6th edit. 1830, p. 54. 
I will give only one other instance of an habitual and purposeless movement. The Sheldrake (Tadorna) feeds on the sands left uncovered by the tide, and when a worm-cast is discovered, "it begins patting the ground with its feet, dancing as it were, over the hole;" and this makes the worm come to the surface. Now Mr. St. John says, that when his tame Sheldrakes "came to ask for food, they patted the ground in an impatient and rapid manner."[19] This therefore may almost be considered as their expression of hunger. Mr. Bartlett informs me that the Flamingo and the Kagu (Rhinochetus jubatus) when anxious to be fed, beat the ground with their feet in the same odd manner. So again Kingfishers, when they catch a fish, always beat it until it is killed; and in the Zoological Gardens they always beat the raw meat, with which they are sometimes fed, before devouring it. 
We have now, I think, sufficiently shown the truth of our first Principle, namely, that when any sensation, desire, dislike, &c., has led during a long series of generations to some voluntary movement, then a tendency to the performance of a similar movement will almost certainly be excited, whenever the same, or any analogous or associated sensation &c., although very weak, is experienced; notwithstanding that the movement in this case may not be of the least use. Such habitual movements are often, or generally inherited; and they then differ but little from reflex actions. When we treat of the special expressions of man, the latter part of our first Principle, as given at the commencement of this chapter, will be seen to hold good; namely, that when movements, associated through habit with certain states of the mind, are partially repressed by the will, the strictly involuntary muscles, as well as those which are least under the separate control of the will, are liable still to act; and their action is often highly expressive. Conversely, when the will is temporarily or permanently weakened, the voluntary muscles fail before the involuntary. It is a fact familiar to pathologists, as Sir C. Bell remarks,[20] "that when debility arises from affection of the brain, the influence is greatest on those muscles which are, in their natural condition, most under the command of the will." We shall, also, in our future chapters, consider another proposition included in our first Principle; namely, that the checking of one habitual movement sometimes requires other slight movements; these latter serving as a means of expression. 
[19] See the account given by this excellent observer in `Wild Sports of the Highlands,' 1846, p. 142. 
[20] `Philosophical Translations,' 1823, p. 182. 

CHAPTER II. 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION—continued. 
The Principle of Antithesis—Instances in the dog and cat— Origin of the principle—Conventional signs—The principle of antithesis has not arisen from opposite actions being consciously performed under opposite impulses. 
WE will now consider our second Principle, that of Antithesis. Certain states of the mind lead, as we have seen in the last chapter, to certain habitual movements which were primarily, or may still be, of service; and we shall find that when a directly opposite state of mind is induced, there is a strong and involuntary tendency to the performance of movements of a directly opposite nature, though these have never been of any service. A few striking instances of antithesis will be given, when we treat of the special expressions of man; but as, in these cases, we are particularly liable to confound conventional or artificial gestures and expressions with those which are innate or universal, and which alone deserve to rank as true expressions, I will in the present chapter almost confine myself to the lower animals. 
When a dog approaches a strange dog or man in a savage or hostile frame of mind be walks upright and very stiffly; his head is slightly raised, or not much lowered; the tail is held erect, and quite rigid; the hairs bristle, especially along the neck and back; the pricked ears are directed forwards, and the eyes have a fixed stare: (see figs. 5 and 7). These actions, as will hereafter be explained, follow from the dog's intention to attack his enemy, and are thus to a large extent intelligible. As he prepares to spring with a savage growl on his enemy, the canine teeth are uncovered, and the ears are pressed close backwards on the head; but with these latter actions, we are not here concerned. Let us now suppose that the dog suddenly discovers that the man he is approaching, is not a stranger, but his master; and let it be observed how completely and instantaneously his whole bearing is reversed. Instead of walking upright, the body sinks downwards or even crouches, and is thrown into flexuous movements; his tail, instead of being held stiff and upright, is lowered and wagged from side to side; his hair instantly becomes smooth; his ears are depressed and drawn backwards, but not closely to the head; and his lips hang loosely. From the drawing back of the ears, the eyelids become elongated, and the eyes no longer appear round and staring. It should be added that the animal is at such times in an excited condition from joy; and nerve-force will be generated in excess, which naturally leads to action of some kind. Not one of the above movements, so clearly expressive of affection, are of the least direct service to the animal. They are explicable, as far as I can see, solely from being in complete opposition or antithesis to the attitude and movements which, from intelligible causes, are assumed when a dog intends to fight, and which consequently are expressive of anger. I request the reader to look at the four accompanying sketches, which have been given in order to recall vividly the appearance of a dog under these two states of mind. It is, however, not a little difficult to represent affection in a dog, whilst caressing his master and wagging his tail, as the essence of 
<p 52-55> the expression lies in the continuous flexuous movements. 
We will now turn to the cat. When this animal is threatened by a dog, it arches its back in a surprising manner, erects its hair, opens its mouth and spits. But we are not here concerned with this well-known attitude, expressive of terror combined with anger; we are concerned only with that of rage or anger. This is not often seen, but may be observed when two cats are fighting together; and I have seen it well exhibited by a savage cat whilst plagued by a boy. The attitude is almost exactly the same as that of a tiger disturbed and growling over its food, which every one must have beheld in menageries. The animal assumes a crouching position, with the body extended; and the whole tail, or the tip alone, is lashed or curled from side to side. The hair is not in the least erect. Thus far, the attitude and movements are nearly the same as when the animal is prepared to spring on its prey, and when, no doubt, it feels savage. But when preparing to fight, there is this difference, that the ears are closely pressed backwards; the mouth is partially opened, showing the teeth; the fore feet are occasionally struck out with protruded claws; and the animal occasionally utters a fierce growl. (See figs. 9 and 10.) All, or almost all these actions naturally follow (as hereafter to be explained), from the cat's manner and intention of attacking its enemy. 
Let us now look at a cat in a directly opposite frame of mind, whilst feeling affectionate and caressing her master; and mark how opposite is her attitude in every respect. She now stands upright with her back slightly arched, which makes the hair appear rather rough, but it does not bristle; her tail, instead of being extended and lashed from side to side, is held quite still and perpendicularly upwards; her ears are erect and pointed; her mouth is closed; and she rubs against her master with a purr instead of a growl. Let it further be observed how widely different is the whole bearing of an affectionate cat from that of a dog, when with his body crouching and flexuous, his tail lowered and wagging, and ears depressed, he caresses his master. This contrast in the attitudes and movements of these two carnivorous animals, under the same pleased and affectionate frame of mind, can be explained, as it appears to me, solely by their movements standing in complete antithesis to those which are naturally assumed, when these animals feel savage and are prepared either to fight or to seize their prey. 
In these cases of the dog and cat, there is every reason to believe that the gestures both of hostility and affection are innate or inherited; for they are almost identically the same in the different races of the species, and in all the individuals of the same race, both young and old. 
I will here give one other instance of antithesis in expression. I formerly possessed a large dog, who, like every other dog, was much pleased to go out walking. He showed his pleasure by trotting gravely before me with high steps, head much raised, moderately erected ears, and tail carried aloft but not stiffly. Not far from my house a path branches off to the right, leading to the hot-house, which I used often to visit for a few moments, to look at my experimental plants. This was always a great disappointment to the dog, as he did not know whether I should continue my walk; and the instantaneous and complete change of expression which came over him as soon as my body swerved in the least towards the path (and I sometimes tried this as an experiment) was laughable. His look of dejection was known to every member of the family, and was called his hot-house face. This consisted in the head drooping much, the whole body sinking a little and remaining motionless; the ears and tail falling suddenly down, but the tail was by no means wagged. With the falling of the ears and of his great chaps, the eyes became much changed in appearance, and I fancied that they looked less bright. His aspect was that of piteous, hopeless dejection; and it was, as I have said, laughable, as the cause was so slight. Every detail in his attitude was in complete opposition to his former joyful yet dignified bearing; and can be explained, as it appears to me, in no other way, except through the principle of antithesis. Had not the change been so instantaneous, I should have attributed it to his lowered spirits affecting, as in the case of man, the nervous system and circulation, and consequently the tone of his whole muscular frame; and this may have been in part the cause. 
We will now consider how the principle of antithesis in expression has arisen. With social animals, the power of intercommunication between the members of the same community,—and with other species, between the opposite sexes, as well as between the young and the old,— is of the highest importance to them. This is generally effected by means of the voice, but it is certain that gestures and expressions are to a certain extent mutually intelligible. Man not only uses inarticulate cries, gestures, and expressions, but has invented articulate language; if, indeed, the word INVENTED can be applied to a process, completed by innumerable steps, half-consciously made. Any one who has watched monkeys will not doubt that they perfectly understand each other's gestures and expression, and to a large extent, as Rengger asserts,[1] those of man. An animal when going to attack another, or when afraid of another, often makes itself appear terrible, by erecting its hair, thus increasing the apparent bulk of its body, by showing its teeth, or brandishing its horns, or by uttering fierce sounds. 
As the power of intercommunication is certainly of high service to many animals, there is no a priori improbability in the supposition, that gestures manifestly of an opposite nature to those by which certain feelings are already expressed, should at first have been voluntarily employed under the influence of an opposite state of feeling. The fact of the gestures being now innate, would be no valid objection to the belief that they were at first intentional; for if practised during many generations, they would probably at last be inherited. Nevertheless it is more than doubtful, as we shall immediately see, whether any of the cases which come under our present head of antithesis, have thus originated. 
With conventional signs which are not innate, such as those used by the deaf and dumb and by savages, the principle of opposition or antithesis has been partially brought into play. The Cistercian monks thought it sinful to speak, and as they could not avoid holding some communication, they invented a gesture language, in which the principle of opposition seems to have been employed.[2] Dr. Scott, of the Exeter Deaf and Dumb Institution, writes to me that "opposites are greatly used in teaching the deaf and dumb, who have a lively sense of them." Nevertheless I have been surprised how few unequivocal instances can be adduced. This depends partly on all the signs having commonly had some natural origin; and partly on the practice of the deaf and dumb and of savages to contract their signs as much as possible for the sake of rapidity?[3] Hence their natural source or origin often becomes doubtful or is completely lost; as is likewise the case with articulate language. 
[1] `Naturgeschichte der Saugethiere von Paraguay,' 1830, s. 55. 
[2] Mr. Tylor gives an account of the Cistercian gesture-language in his `Early History of Mankind' (2nd edit. 1870, p. 40), and makes some remarks on the principle of opposition in gestures. 
[3] See on this subject Dr. W. R. Scott's interesting work, `The Deaf and Dumb,' 2nd edit. 1870, p. 12. He says, "This contracting of natural gestures into much shorter gestures than the natural expression requires, is very common amongst the deaf and dumb. This contracted gesture is frequently so shortened as nearly to lose all semblance of the natural one, but to the deaf and dumb who use it, it still has the force of the original expression." 
Many signs, moreover, which plainly stand in opposition to each other, appear to have had on both sides a significant origin. This seems to hold good with the signs used by the deal and dumb for light and darkness, for strength and weakness, &c. In a future chapter I shall endeavour to show that the opposite gestures of affirmation and negation, namely, vertically nodding and laterally shaking the head, have both probably had a natural beginning. The waving of the hand from right to left, which is used as a negative by some savages, may have been invented in imitation of shaking the head; but whether the opposite movement of waving the hand in a straight line from the face, which is used in affirmation, has arisen through antithesis or in some quite distinct manner, is doubtful. 
If we now turn to the gestures which are innate or common to all the individuals of the same species, and which come under the present head of antithesis, it is extremely doubtful, whether any of them were at first deliberately invented and consciously performed. With mankind the best instance of a gesture standing in direct opposition to other movements, naturally assumed under an opposite frame of mind, is that of shrugging the shoulders. This expresses impotence or an apology,—something which cannot be done, or cannot be avoided. The gesture is sometimes used consciously and voluntarily, but it is extremely improbable that it was at first deliberately invented, and afterwards fixed by habit; for not only do young children sometimes shrug their shoulders under the above states of mind, but the movement is accompanied, as will be shown in a future chapter, by various subordinate movements, which not one man in a thousand is aware of, unless he has specially attended to the subject. 
Dogs when approaching a strange dog, may find it useful to show by their movements that they are friendly, and do not wish to fight. When two young dogs in play are growling and biting each other's faces and legs, it is obvious that they mutually understand each other's gestures and manners. There seems, indeed, some degree of instinctive knowledge in puppies and kittens, that they must not use their sharp little teeth or claws too freely in their play, though this sometimes happens and a squeal is the result; otherwise they would often injure each other's eyes. When my terrier bites my hand in play, often snarling at the same time, if he bites too hard and I say GENTLY, GENTLY, he goes on biting, but answers me by a few wags of the tail, which seems to say "Never mind, it is all fun." Although dogs do thus express, and may wish to express, to other dogs and to man, that they are in a friendly state of mind, it is incredible that they could ever have deliberately thought of drawing back and depressing their ears, instead of holding them erect,—of lowering and wagging their tails, instead of keeping them stiff and upright, &c., because they knew that these movements stood in direct opposition to those assumed under an opposite and savage frame of mind. 
Again, when a cat, or rather when some early progenitor of the species, from feeling affectionate first slightly arched its back, held its tail perpendicularly upwards and pricked its ears, can it be believed that the animal consciously wished thus to show that its frame of mind was directly the reverse of that, when from being ready to fight or to spring on its prey, it assumed a crouching attitude, curled its tail from side to side and depressed its ears? Even still less can I believe that my dog voluntarily put on his dejected attitude and "hot-house face," which formed so complete a contrast to his previous cheerful attitude and whole bearing. It cannot be supposed that he knew that I should understand his expression, and that he could thus soften my heart and make me give up visiting the hot-house. 
Hence for the development of the movements which come under the present head, some other principle, distinct from the will and consciousness, must have intervened. This principle appears to be that every movement which we have voluntarily performed throughout our lives has required the action of certain muscles; and when we have performed a directly opposite movement, an opposite set of muscles has been habitually brought into play, 
— as in turning to the right or to the left, in pushing away or pulling an object towards us, and in lifting or lowering a weight. So strongly are our intentions and movements associated together, that if we eagerly wish an object to move in any direction, we can hardly avoid moving our bodies in the same direction, although we may be perfectly aware that this can have no influence. A good illustration of this fact has already been given in the Introduction, namely, in the grotesque movements of a young and eager billiard-player, whilst watching the course of his ball. A man or child in a passion, if he tells any one in a loud voice to begone, generally moves his arm as if to push him away, although the offender may not be standing near, and although there may be not the least need to explain by a gesture what is meant. On the other hand, if we eagerly desire some one to approach us closely, we act as if pulling him towards us; and so in innumerable other instances. 
As the performance of ordinary movements of an opposite kind, under opposite impulses of the will, has become habitual in us and in the lower animals, so when actions of one kind have become firmly associated with any sensation or emotion, it appears natural that actions of a directly opposite kind, though of no use, should be unconsciously performed through habit and association, under the influence of a directly opposite sensation or emotion. On this principle alone can I understand how the gestures and expressions which come under the present head of antithesis have originated. If indeed they are serviceable to man or to any other animal, in aid of inarticulate cries or language, they will likewise be voluntarily employed, and the habit will thus be strengthened. But whether or not of service as a means of communication, the tendency to perform opposite movements under opposite sensations or emotions would, if we may judge by analogy, become hereditary through long practice; and there cannot be a doubt that several expressive movements due to the principle of antithesis are inherited. 

CHAPTER III. 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION—concluded. 
The principle of direct action of the excited nervous system on the body, independently of the will and in part of habit— Change of colour in the hair —Trembling of the muscles— Modified secretions—Perspiration— Expression of extreme pain— Of rage, great joy, and terror—Contrast between the emotions which cause and do not cause expressive movements— Exciting and depressing states of the mind—Summary. 
WE now come to our third Principle, namely, that certain actions which we recognize as expressive of certain states of the mind, are the direct result of the constitution of the nervous system, and have been from the first independent of the will, and, to a large extent, of habit. When the sensorium is strongly excited nerve-force is generated in excess, and is transmitted in certain directions, dependent on the connection of the nerve-cells, and, as far as the muscular system is concerned, on the nature of the movements which have been habitually practised. Or the supply of nerve-force may, as it appears, be interrupted. Of course every movement which we make is determined by the constitution of the nervous system; but actions performed in obedience to the will, or through habit, or through the principle of antithesis, are here as far as possible excluded. Our present subject is very obscure, but, from its importance, must be discussed at some little length; and it is always advisable to perceive clearly our ignorance. 
The most striking case, though a rare and abnormal one, which can be adduced of the direct influence of the nervous system, when strongly affected, on the body, is the loss of colour in the hair, which has occasionally been observed after extreme terror or grief. One authentic instance has been recorded, in the case of a man brought out for execution in India, in which the change of colour was so rapid that it was perceptible to the eye.[1] 
Another good case is that of the trembling of the muscles, which is common to man and to many, or most, of the lower animals. Trembling is of no service, often of much disservice, and cannot have been at first acquired through the will, and then rendered habitual in association with any emotion. I am assured by an eminent authority that young children do not tremble, but go into convulsions under the circumstances which would induce excessive trembling in adults. Trembling is excited in different individuals in very different degrees. and by the most diversified causes,—by cold to the surface, before fever-fits, although the temperature of the body is then above the normal standard; in blood-poisoning, delirium tremens, and other diseases; by general failure of power in old age; by exhaustion after excessive fatigue; locally from severe injuries, such as burns; and, in an especial manner, by the passage of a catheter. Of all emotions, fear notoriously is the most apt to induce trembling; but so do occasionally great anger and joy. I remember once seeing a boy who had just shot his first snipe on the wing, and his hands 
[1] See the interesting cases collected by M. G. Pouchet in the `Revue des Deux Mondes,' January 1, 1872, p. 79. An instance was also brought some years ago before the British Association at Belfast. trembled to such a degree from delight, that he could not for some time reload his gun; and I have heard of an exactly similar case with an Australian savage, to whom a gun had been lent. Fine music, from the vague emotions thus excited, causes a shiver to run down the backs of some persons. There seems to be very little in common in the above several physical causes and emotions to account for trembling; and Sir J. Paget, to whom I am indebted for several of the above statements, informs me that the subject is a very obscure one. As trembling is sometimes caused by rage, long before exhaustion can have set in, and as it sometimes accompanies great joy, it would appear that any strong excitement of the nervous system interrupts the steady flow of nerve-force to the muscles.[2] 
The manner in which the secretions of the alimentary canal and of certain glands—as the liver, kidneys, or mammae are affected by strong emotions, is another excellent instance of the direct action of the sensorium on these organs, independently of the will or of any serviceable associated habit. There is the greatest difference in different persons in the parts which are thus affected, and in the degree of their affection. 
The heart, which goes on uninterruptedly beating night and day in so wonderful a manner, is extremely sensitive to external stimulants. The great physiologist, Claude Bernard,[3] has shown bow the least excitement of a sensitive nerve reacts on the heart; even when a nerve is touched so slightly that no pain can possibly be felt by the animal under experiment. Hence when the mind is strongly excited, we might expect that it would instantly affect in a direct manner the heart; and this is universally acknowledged and felt to be the case. Claude Bernard also repeatedly insists, and this deserves especial notice, that when the heart is affected it reacts on the brain; and the state of the brain again reacts through the pneumo-gastric nerve on the heart; so that under any excitement there will be much mutual action and reaction between these, the two most important organs of the body. 
[2] Muller remarks (`Elements of Physiology,' Eng. translat. vol. ii. p. 
934) that when the feelings are very intense, "all the spinal nerves become affected to the extent of imperfect paralysis, or the excitement of trembling of the whole body." 
[3] `Lecons sur les Prop. des Tissus Vivants,' 1866, pp. 457-466. 
The vaso-motor system, which regulates the diameter of the small arteries, is directly acted on by the sensorium, as we see when a man blushes from shame; but in this latter case the checked transmission of nerve-force to the vessels of the face can, I think, be partly explained in a curious manner through habit. We shall also be able to throw some light, though very little, on the involuntary erection of the hair under the emotions of terror and rage. The secretion of tears depends, no doubt, on the connection of certain nerve-cells; but here again we can trace some few of the steps by which the flow of nerve-force through the requisite channels has become habitual under certain emotions. 
A brief consideration of the outward signs of some of the stronger sensations and emotions will best serve to show us, although vaguely, in how complex a manner the principle under consideration of the direct action of the excited nervous system of the body, is combined with the principle of habitually associated, serviceable movements. 
When animals suffer from an agony of pain, they generally writhe about with frightful contortions; and those which habitually use their voices utter piercing cries or groans. Almost every muscle of the body is brought into strong action. With man the mouth may be closely compressed, or more commonly the lips are retracted, with the teeth clenched or ground together. There is said to be "gnashing of teeth" in hell; and I have plainly heard the grinding of the molar teeth of a cow which was suffering acutely from inflammation of the bowels. The female hippopotamus in the Zoological Gardens, when she produced her young, suffered greatly; she incessantly walked about, or rolled on her sides, opening and closing her jaws, and clattering her teeth together.[4] With man the eyes stare wildly as in horrified astonishment, or the brows are heavily contracted. Perspiration bathes the body, and drops trickle down the face. The circulation and respiration are much affected. Hence the nostrils are generally dilated and often quiver; or the breath may be held until the blood stagnates in the purple face. If the agony be severe and prolonged, these signs all change; utter prostration follows, with fainting or convulsions. 
A sensitive nerve when irritated transmits some influence to the nerve-cell, whence it proceeds; and this transmits its influence, first to the corresponding nerve-cell on the opposite side of the body, and then upwards and downwards along the cerebro-spinal column to other nerve-cells, to a greater or less extent, according to the strength of the excitement; so that, ultimately, the whole nervous system maybe affected.[5] This involuntary transmission of nerve-force may or may not be accompanied by consciousness. Why the irritation of a nerve-cell should generate or liberate nerve-force is not known; but that this is the case seems to be the conclusion arrived at by all the greatest physiologists, such as Muller, Virchow, Bernard, &c.[6] As Mr. Herbert Spencer remarks, it may be received as an "unquestionable truth that, at any moment, the existing quantity of liberated nerve-force, which in an inscrutable way produces in us the state we call feeling, MUST expend itself in some direction—MUST generate an equivalent manifestation of force somewhere;" so that, when the cerebro­spinal system is highly excited and nerve-force is liberated in excess, it may be expended in intense sensations, active thought, violent movements, or increased activity of the glands.[7] Mr. Spencer further maintains that an "overflow of nerve-force, undirected by any motive, will manifestly take the most habitual routes; and, if these do not suffice, will next overflow into the less habitual ones." Consequently the facial and respiratory muscles, which are the most used, will be apt to be first brought into action; then those of the upper extremities, next those of the lower, and finally those of the whole body.[8] 
[4] Mr. Bartlett, "Notes on the Birth of a Hippopotamus," Proc. Zoolog. Soc. 1871, p. 255. 
[5] See, on this subject, Claude Bernard, `Tissus Vivants,' 1866, pp. 316, 337, 358. Virchow expresses himself to almost exactly the same effect in his essay "Ueber das Ruckenmark" (Sammlung wissenschaft. Vortrage, 1871, s. 28). 
An emotion may be very strong, but it will have little tendency to induce movements of any kind, if it has not commonly led to voluntary action for its relief or gratification; and when movements are excited, their nature is, to a large extent, determined by those which have often and voluntarily been performed for some definite end under the same emotion. Great pain urges all animals, and has urged them during endless generations, to make the most violent and diversified efforts to escape from the cause of suffering. Even when a limb or other separate part of the body is hurt, we often see a tendency to shake it, as if to shake off the cause, though this may obviously be impossible. Thus a habit of exerting with the utmost force all the muscles will have been established, whenever great suffering is experienced. As the muscles of the chest and vocal organs are habitually used, these will be particularly liable to be acted on, and loud, harsh screams or cries will be uttered. But the advantage derived from outcries has here probably come into play in an important manner; for the young of most animals, when in distress or danger, call loudly to their parents for aid, as do the members of the same community for mutual aid. 
[6] Muller (`Elements of Physiology,' Eng. translat. vol. ii. p. 932) in speaking of the nerves, says, "any sudden change of condition of whatever kind sets the nervous principle into action." See Virchow and Bernard on the same subject in passages in the two works referred to in my last foot-note. 
[7] H. Spencer, `Essays, Scientific, Political,' &c., Second Series, 1863, pp. 109, 111. 
[8] Sir H. Holland, in speaking (`Medical Notes and Reflexions,' 1839, p. 
328) of that curious state of body called the fidgets, remarks that it seems due to "an accumulation of some cause of irritation which requires muscular action for its relief." 
Another principle, namely, the internal consciousness that the power or capacity of the nervous system is limited, will have strengthened, though in a subordinate degree, the tendency to violent action under extreme suffering. A man cannot think deeply and exert his utmost muscular force. As Hippocrates long ago observed, if two pains are felt at the same time, the severer one dulls the other. Martyrs, in the ecstasy of their religious fervour have often, as it would appear, been insensible to the most horrid tortures. Sailors who are going to be flogged sometimes take a piece of lead into their mouths, in order to bite it with their utmost force, and thus to bear the pain. Parturient women prepare to exert their muscles to the utmost in order to relieve their sufferings. 
We thus see that the undirected radiation of nerve-force from the nerve-cells which are first affected—the long-continued habit of attempting by struggling to escape from the cause of suffering— and the consciousness that voluntary muscular exertion relieves pain, have all probably concurred in giving a tendency to the most violent, almost convulsive, movements under extreme suffering; and such movements, including those of the vocal organs, are universally recognized as highly expressive of this condition. 
As the mere touching of a sensitive nerve reacts in a direct manner on the heart, severe pain will obviously react on it in like manner, but far more energetically. Nevertheless, even in this case, we must not overlook the indirect effects of habit on the heart, as we shall see when we consider the signs of rage. 
When a man suffers from an agony of pain, the perspiration often trickles down his face; and I have been assured by a veterinary surgeon that he has frequently seen drops falling from the belly and running down the inside of the thighs of horses, and from the bodies of cattle, when thus suffering. He has observed this, when there has been no struggling which would account for the perspiration. The whole body of the female hippopotamus, before alluded to, was covered with red-coloured perspiration whilst giving birth to her young. So it is with extreme fear; the same veterinary has often seen horses sweating from this cause; as has Mr. Bartlett with the rhinoceros; and with man it is a well-known symptom. The cause of perspiration bursting forth in these cases is quite obscure; but it is thought by some physiologists to be connected with the failing power of the capillary circulation; and we know that the vasomotor system, which regulates the capillary circulation, is much influenced by the mind. With respect to the movements of certain muscles of the face under great suffering, as well as from other emotions, these will be best considered when we treat of the special expressions of man and of the lower animals. 
We will now turn to the characteristic symptoms of Rage. Under this powerful emotion the action of the heart is much accelerated,[9] or it may be much disturbed. The face reddens, or it becomes purple from the impeded return of the blood, or may turn deadly pale. The respiration is laboured, the chest heaves, and the dilated nostrils quiver. The whole body often trembles. The voice is affected. The teeth are clenched or ground together, and the muscular system is commonly stimulated to violent, almost frantic action. But the gestures of a man in this state usually differ from the purposeless writhings and struggles of one suffering from an agony of pain; for they represent more or less plainly the act of striking or fighting with an enemy. 
All these signs of rage are probably in large part, and some of them appear to be wholly, due to the direct action of the excited sensorium. But animals of all kinds, and their progenitors before them, when attacked or threatened by an enemy, have exerted their utmost powers in fighting and in defending themselves. Unless an animal does thus act, or has the intention, or at least the desire, to attack its enemy, it cannot properly be said to be enraged. An inherited habit of muscular exertion will thus have been gained in association with rage; and this will directly or indirectly affect various organs, in nearly the same manner as does great bodily suffering. 
[9] I am much indebted to Mr. A. H. Garrod for having informed me of 
M. Lorain's work on the pulse, in which a sphygmogram of a woman in a rage is given; and this shows much difference in the rate and other characters from that of the same woman in her ordinary state. 
The heart no doubt will likewise be affected in a direct manner; but it will also in all probability be affected through habit; and all the more so from not being under the control of the will. We know that any great exertion which we voluntarily make, affects the heart, through mechanical and other principles which need not here be considered; and it was shown in the first chapter that nerve-force flows readily through habitually used channels,— through the nerves of voluntary or involuntary movement, and through those of sensation. Thus even a moderate amount of exertion will tend to act on the heart; and on the principle of association, of which so many instances have been given, we may feel nearly sure that any sensation or emotion, as great pain or rage, which has habitually led to much muscular action, will immediately influence the flow of nerve-force to the heart, although there may not be at the time any muscular exertion. 
The heart, as I have said, will be all the more readily affected through habitual associations, as it is not under moderately angry, or even when enrage his body, but he cannot prevent his hear perhaps give a few heaves, and his nost respiration are only in part voluntary. face which are least obedient to the will and passing emotion. The glands again and a man suffering from grief may com prevent the tears from coming into his e is placed before him, may not show his he cannot check the secretion of saliva. 
Under a transport of Joy or of vivid P various purposeless movements, and to see this in our young children, in their l jumping for joy; in the bounding and walk with his master; and in the friskin open field. Joy quickens the circulation again reacts on the whole body. The increased heart-action may be attributed the sensorium,[10] and to the consequen Spencer insists, of nerve-force. It des anticipation of a pleasure, and not it purposeless and extravagant movements various sounds. We see this in our ch pleasure or treat; and dogs, which have b 
[10] How powerfully intense joy e reacts on the body, is well shown in the Dr. J. Crichton Browne (`Medical Mirro man of strongly nervous temperament, fortune had been bequeathed him, first soon in the highest spirits, but flushed a with a friend for the sake of tranquillisin his gait, uproariously laughing, yet irri and singing loudly in the public streets. had not touched any spirituous liquor, t 















































































































































































































This 
etext 
was 
prepared 
by 
Sue 
Asscher 
<asschers@aia.net.au> 



THE 
DESCENT 
OF 
MAN 


AND 


SELECTION 
IN 
RELATION 
TO 
SEX 


Works 
by 
Charles 
Darwin, 
F.R.S. 


Life 
and 
Letters 
of 
Charles 
Darwin. 
With 
an 
Autobiographical 
Chapter. 
Edited 
by 
Francis 
Darwin. 
Portraits. 
3 
volumes 
36s. 
Popular 
Edition. 
Condensed 
in 
1 
volume 
7s 
6d. 


Naturalist's 
Journal 
of 
Researches 
into 
the 
Natural 
History 
and 
Geology 
of 
Countries 
Visited 
during 
a 
Voyage 
Round 
the 
World. 
With 
100 
Illustrations 
by 
Pritchett. 
21s. 
Popular 
Edition. 
Woodcuts. 
3s 
6d. 
Cheaper 
Edition, 
2s. 
6d. 
net. 


Origin 
of 
Species 
by 
means 
of 
Natural 
Selection; 
or, 
The 
Preservation 
of 
Favoured 
Races 
in 
the 
Struggle 
for 
Life. 
Large 
Type 
Edition, 
2 
volumes 
12s. 
Popular 
Edition, 
6s. 
Cheaper 
Edition 
with 
Portrait, 
2s. 
6d. 


Various 
Contrivances 
by 
which 
Orchids 
are 
Fertilized 
by 
Insects. 
Woodcuts. 
7s. 
6d. 


Variation 
of 
Animals 
and 
Plants 
under 
Domestication. 
Illustrations. 
15s. 


Descent 
of 
Man, 
and 
Selection 
in 
relation 
to 
Sex. 
Illustrations. 
Large 
Type 
Edition, 
2 
volumes 
15s. 
Popular 
Edition, 
7s 
6d. 
Cheaper 
Edition, 
2s. 
6d. 
net. 


Expression 
of 
the 
Emotions 
in 
Man 
and 
Animals. 
Illustrations. 
12s. 


Insectivorous 
Plants. 
Illustrations. 
9s. 


Movements 
and 
Habits 
of 
Climbing 
Plants. 
Woodcuts. 
6s. 


Cross 
and 
Self-Fertilization 
in 
the 
Vegetable 
Kingdom. 
Illustrations. 
9s. 



Different 
Forms 
of 
Flowers 
on 
Plants 
of 
the 
Same 
Species. 
Illustrations. 
7s. 
6d. 


Formation 
of 
Vegetable 
Mould 
through 
the 
Action 
of 
Worms. 
Woodcuts. 
6s. 


The 
above 
works 
are 
Published 
by 
John 
Murray. 


Structure 
and 
Distribution 
of 
Coral 
Reefs. 
Smith, 
Elder, 
& 
Co. 


Geological 
Observations 
on 
Volcanic 
Islands 
and 
Parts 
of 
South 
America. 
Smith, 
Elder, 
& 
Co. 


Monograph 
of 
the 
Cirripedia. 
Illustrations. 
2 
volumes. 
8vo. 
Ray 
Society. 


Monograph 
of 
the 
Fossil 
Lepadidae, 
or 
Pedunculated 
Cirripedes 
of 
Great 
Britain. 
Palaeontographical 
Society. 


Monograph 
of 
the 
Fossil 
Balanidae 
and 
Verrucidae 
of 
Great 
Britain. 
Palaeontographical 
Society. 



THE 
DESCENT 
OF 
MAN 


AND 


SELECTION 
IN 
RELATION 
TO 
SEX 


BY 


CHARLES 
DARWIN, 
M.A., 
F.R.S. 


Uniform 
with 
this 
Volume 


The 
Origin 
of 
Species, 
by 
means 
of 
Natural 
Selection; 
or, 
The 
Preservation 
of 
Favoured 
Races 
in 
the 
Struggle 
for 
Life. 
Popular 
Edition, 
with 
a 
Photogravure 
Portrait. 
Large 
Crown 
8vo. 
2s. 
6d. 
net. 


A 
Naturalist's 
Voyage. 
Journal 
of 
Researches 
into 
the 
Natural 
History 
and 
Geology 
of 
the 
Countries 
visited 
during 
the 
Voyage 
of 
H.M.S. 
"Beagle" 
round 
the 
World, 
under 
the 
Command 
of 
Capt. 
Fitz 
Roy, 
R.N. 
Popular 
Edition, 
with 
many 
Illustrations. 
Large 
Crown 
8vo. 
2s. 
6d. 
net. 


PREFACE 
TO 
THE 
SECOND 
EDITION. 


During 
the 
successive 
reprints 
of 
the 
first 
edition 
of 
this 
work, 
published 
in 
1871, 
I 
was 
able 
to 
introduce 
several 
important 
corrections; 
and 
now 
that 
more 
time 
has 
elapsed, 
I 
have 
endeavoured 
to 
profit 
by 
the 
fiery 
ordeal 
through 
which 
the 
book 
has 
passed, 
and 
have 
taken 
advantage 
of 
all 
the 
criticisms 
which 
seem 
to 
me 
sound. 
I 
am 
also 
greatly 
indebted 
to 
a 
large 
number 
of 
correspondents 
for 
the 
communication 
of 
a 
surprising 
number 
of 
new 
facts 
and 
remarks. 
These 
have 
been 
so 
numerous, 
that 
I 
have 
been 
able 
to 
use 
only 
the 
more 
important 
ones; 
and 
of 
these, 
as 
well 
as 
of 
the 
more 
important 
corrections, 
I 
will 
append 
a 
list. 
Some 
new 
illustrations 
have 
been 
introduced, 
and 
four 
of 
the 
old 
drawings 
have 
been 
replaced 
by 
better 
ones, 



done 
from 
life 
by 
Mr. 
T.W. 
Wood. 
I 
must 
especially 
call 
attention 
to 
some 
observations 
which 
I 
owe 
to 
the 
kindness 
of 
Prof. 
Huxley 
(given 
as 
a 
supplement 
at 
the 
end 
of 
Part 
I.), 
on 
the 
nature 
of 
the 
differences 
between 
the 
brains 
of 
man 
and 
the 
higher 
apes. 
I 
have 
been 
particularly 
glad 
to 
give 
these 
observations, 
because 
during 
the 
last 
few 
years 
several 
memoirs 
on 
the 
subject 
have 
appeared 
on 
the 
Continent, 
and 
their 
importance 
has 
been, 
in 
some 
cases, 
greatly 
exaggerated 
by 
popular 
writers. 


I 
may 
take 
this 
opportunity 
of 
remarking 
that 
my 
critics 
frequently 
assume 
that 
I 
attribute 
all 
changes 
of 
corporeal 
structure 
and 
mental 
power 
exclusively 
to 
the 
natural 
selection 
of 
such 
variations 
as 
are 
often 
called 
spontaneous; 
whereas, 
even 
in 
the 
first 
edition 
of 
the 
'Origin 
of 
Species,' 
I 
distinctly 
stated 
that 
great 
weight 
must 
be 
attributed 
to 
the 
inherited 
effects 
of 
use 
and 
disuse, 
with 
respect 
both 
to 
the 
body 
and 
mind. 
I 
also 
attributed 
some 
amount 
of 
modification 
to 
the 
direct 
and 
prolonged 
action 
of 
changed 
conditions 
of 
life. 
Some 
allowance, 
too, 
must 
be 
made 
for 
occasional 
reversions 
of 
structure; 
nor 
must 
we 
forget 
what 
I 
have 
called 
"correlated" 
growth, 
meaning, 
thereby, 
that 
various 
parts 
of 
the 
organisation 
are 
in 
some 
unknown 
manner 
so 
connected, 
that 
when 
one 
part 
varies, 
so 
do 
others; 
and 
if 
variations 
in 
the 
one 
are 
accumulated 
by 
selection, 
other 
parts 
will 
be 
modified. 
Again, 
it 
has 
been 
said 
by 
several 
critics, 
that 
when 
I 
found 
that 
many 
details 
of 
structure 
in 
man 
could 
not 
be 
explained 
through 
natural 
selection, 
I 
invented 
sexual 
selection; 
I 
gave, 
however, 
a 
tolerably 
clear 
sketch 
of 
this 
principle 
in 
the 
first 
edition 
of 
the 
'Origin 
of 
Species,' 
and 
I 
there 
stated 
that 
it 
was 
applicable 
to 
man. 
This 
subject 
of 
sexual 
selection 
has 
been 
treated 
at 
full 
length 
in 
the 
present 
work, 
simply 
because 
an 
opportunity 
was 
here 
first 
afforded 
me. 
I 
have 
been 
struck 
with 
the 
likeness 
of 
many 
of 
the 
half-favourable 
criticisms 
on 
sexual 
selection, 
with 
those 
which 
appeared 
at 
first 
on 
natural 
selection; 
such 
as, 
that 
it 
would 
explain 
some 
few 
details, 
but 
certainly 
was 
not 
applicable 
to 
the 
extent 
to 
which 
I 
have 
employed 
it. 
My 
conviction 
of 
the 
power 
of 
sexual 
selection 
remains 
unshaken; 
but 
it 
is 
probable, 
or 
almost 
certain, 
that 
several 
of 
my 
conclusions 
will 
hereafter 
be 
found 
erroneous; 
this 
can 
hardly 
fail 
to 
be 
the 
case 
in 
the 
first 
treatment 
of 
a 
subject. 
When 
naturalists 
have 
become 
familiar 
with 
the 
idea 
of 
sexual 
selection, 
it 
will, 
as 
I 
believe, 
be 
much 
more 
largely 
accepted; 
and 
it 
has 
already 
been 
fully 
and 
favourably 
received 
by 
several 
capable 
judges. 


DOWN, 
BECKENHAM, 
KENT, 
September, 
1874. 



First 
Edition 
February 
24, 
1871. 
Second 
Edition 
September, 
1874. 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


PART 
I. 
THE 
DESCENT 
OR 
ORIGIN 
OF 
MAN. 


CHAPTER 
I. 


The 
Evidence 
of 
the 
Descent 
of 
Man 
from 
some 
Lower 
Form. 


Nature 
of 
the 
evidence 
bearing 
on 
the 
origin 
of 
man—Homologous 
structures 
in 
man 
and 
the 
lower 
animals—Miscellaneous 
points 
of 
correspondence— 
Development—Rudimentary 
structures, 
muscles, 
sense-
organs, 
hair, 
bones, 
reproductive 
organs, 
etc.—The 
bearing 
of 
these 
three 
great 
classes 
of 
facts 
on 
the 
origin 
of 
man. 


CHAPTER 
II. 


On 
the 
Manner 
of 
Development 
of 
Man 
from 
some 
Lower 
Form. 
Variability 
of 
body 
and 
mind 
in 
man—Inheritance—Causes 
of 
variability 


— 
Laws 
of 
variation 
the 
same 
in 
man 
as 
in 
the 
lower 
animals—Direct 
action 
of 
the 
conditions 
of 
life—Effects 
of 
the 
increased 
use 
and 
disuse 
of 
parts— 
Arrested 
development—Reversion—Correlated 
variation—Rate 
of 
increase 
— 
Checks 
to 
increase—Natural 
selection—Man 
the 
most 
dominant 
animal 
in 
the 
world—Importance 
of 
his 
corporeal 
structure—The 
causes 
which 
have 
led 
to 
his 
becoming 
erect—Consequent 
changes 
of 
structure—Decrease 
in 
size 
of 
the 
canine 
teeth—Increased 
size 
and 
altered 
shape 
of 
the 
skull— 
Nakedness 
—Absence 
of 
a 
tail—Defenceless 
condition 
of 
man. 
CHAPTER 
III. 



Comparison 
of 
the 
Mental 
Powers 
of 
Man 
and 
the 
Lower 
Animals. 


The 
difference 
in 
mental 
power 
between 
the 
highest 
ape 
and 
the 
lowest 
savage, 
immense—Certain 
instincts 
in 
common—The 
emotions—Curiosity 


— 
Imitation—Attention—Memory—Imagination—Reason—Progressive 
improvement 
—Tools 
and 
weapons 
used 
by 
animals—Abstraction, 
Self-
consciousness— 
Language—Sense 
of 
beauty—Belief 
in 
God, 
spiritual 
agencies, 
superstitions. 
CHAPTER 
IV. 


Comparison 
of 
the 
Mental 
Powers 
of 
Man 
and 
the 
Lower 
Animals— 
continued. 


The 
moral 
sense—Fundamental 
proposition—The 
qualities 
of 
social 
animals— 
Origin 
of 
sociability—Struggle 
between 
opposed 
instincts—Man 
a 
social 
animal—The 
more 
enduring 
social 
instincts 
conquer 
other 
less 
persistent 
instincts—The 
social 
virtues 
alone 
regarded 
by 
savages—The 
self-
regarding 
virtues 
acquired 
at 
a 
later 
stage 
of 
development—The 
importance 
of 
the 
judgment 
of 
the 
members 
of 
the 
same 
community 
on 
conduct— 
Transmission 
of 
moral 
tendencies—Summary. 


CHAPTER 
V. 


On 
the 
Development 
of 
the 
Intellectual 
and 
Moral 
Faculties 
during 
Primeval 
and 
Civilised 
times. 


Advancement 
of 
the 
intellectual 
powers 
through 
natural 
selection— 
Importance 
of 
imitation—Social 
and 
moral 
faculties—Their 
development 
within 
the 
limits 
of 
the 
same 
tribe—Natural 
selection 
as 
affecting 
civilised 
nations—Evidence 
that 
civilised 
nations 
were 
once 
barbarous. 


CHAPTER 
VI. 


On 
the 
Affinities 
and 
Genealogy 
of 
Man. 


Position 
of 
man 
in 
the 
animal 
series—The 
natural 
system 
genealogical— 
Adaptive 
characters 
of 
slight 
value—Various 
small 
points 
of 
resemblance 



between 
man 
and 
the 
Quadrumana—Rank 
of 
man 
in 
the 
natural 
system— 
Birthplace 
and 
antiquity 
of 
man—Absence 
of 
fossil 
connecting-links—Lower 
stages 
in 
the 
genealogy 
of 
man, 
as 
inferred 
firstly 
from 
his 
affinities 
and 
secondly 
from 
his 
structure—Early 
androgynous 
condition 
of 
the 
Vertebrata 
—Conclusion. 


CHAPTER 
VII. 


On 
the 
Races 
of 
Man. 


The 
nature 
and 
value 
of 
specific 
characters—Application 
to 
the 
races 
of 
man—Arguments 
in 
favour 
of, 
and 
opposed 
to, 
ranking 
the 
so-called 
races 
of 
man 
as 
distinct 
species—Sub-species—Monogenists 
and 
polygenists— 
Convergence 
of 
character—Numerous 
points 
of 
resemblance 
in 
body 
and 
mind 
between 
the 
most 
distinct 
races 
of 
man—The 
state 
of 
man 
when 
he 
first 
spread 
over 
the 
earth—Each 
race 
not 
descended 
from 
a 
single 
pair—The 
extinction 
of 
races—The 
formation 
of 
races—The 
effects 
of 
crossing— 
Slight 
influence 
of 
the 
direct 
action 
of 
the 
conditions 
of 
life—Slight 
or 
no 
influence 
of 
natural 
selection—Sexual 
selection. 


PART 
II. 
SEXUAL 
SELECTION. 


CHAPTER 
VIII. 


Principles 
of 
Sexual 
Selection. 


Secondary 
sexual 
characters—Sexual 
selection—Manner 
of 
action— 
Excess 
of 
males—Polygamy—The 
male 
alone 
generally 
modified 
through 
sexual 
selection—Eagerness 
of 
the 
male—Variability 
of 
the 
male—Choice 
exerted 
by 
the 
female—Sexual 
compared 
with 
natural 
selection—Inheritance 
at 
corresponding 
periods 
of 
life, 
at 
corresponding 
seasons 
of 
the 
year, 
and 
as 
limited 
by 
sex—Relations 
between 
the 
several 
forms 
of 
inheritance—Causes 
why 
one 
sex 
and 
the 
young 
are 
not 
modified 
through 
sexual 
selection— 
Supplement 
on 
the 
proportional 
numbers 
of 
the 
two 
sexes 
throughout 
the 
animal 
kingdom— 
The 
proportion 
of 
the 
sexes 
in 
relation 
to 
natural 
selection. 



CHAPTER 
IX. 


Secondary 
Sexual 
Characters 
in 
the 
Lower 
Classes 
of 
the 
Animal 
Kingdom. 


These 
characters 
are 
absent 
in 
the 
lowest 
classes—Brilliant 
colours— 
Mollusca—Annelids—Crustacea, 
secondary 
sexual 
characters 
strongly 
developed; 
dimorphism; 
colour; 
characters 
not 
acquired 
before 
maturity— 
Spiders, 
sexual 
colours 
of; 
stridulation 
by 
the 
males—Myriapoda. 


CHAPTER 
X. 


Secondary 
Sexual 
Characters 
of 
Insects. 


Diversified 
structures 
possessed 
by 
the 
males 
for 
seizing 
the 
females— 
Differences 
between 
the 
sexes, 
of 
which 
the 
meaning 
is 
not 
understood— 
Difference 
in 
size 
between 
the 
sexes—Thysanura—Diptera—Hemiptera— 
Homoptera, 
musical 
powers 
possessed 
by 
the 
males 
alone—Orthoptera, 
musical 
instruments 
of 
the 
males, 
much 
diversified 
in 
structure; 
pugnacity; 
colours—Neuroptera, 
sexual 
differences 
in 
colour—Hymenoptera, 
pugnacity 
and 
odours—Coleoptera, 
colours; 
furnished 
with 
great 
horns, 
apparently 
as 
an 
ornament; 
battles; 
stridulating 
organs 
generally 
common 
to 
both 
sexes. 


CHAPTER 
XI. 


Insects, 
continued.—Order 
Lepidoptera. 


(Butterflies 
and 
Moths.) 


Courtship 
of 
Butterflies—Battles—Ticking 
noise—Colours 
common 
to 
both 
sexes, 
or 
more 
brilliant 
in 
the 
males—Examples—Not 
due 
to 
the 
direct 
action 
of 
the 
conditions 
of 
life—Colours 
adapted 
for 
protection—Colours 
of 
moths—Display—Perceptive 
powers 
of 
the 
Lepidoptera—Variability— 
Causes 
of 
the 
difference 
in 
colour 
between 
the 
males 
and 
females—Mimicry, 
female 
butterflies 
more 
brilliantly 
coloured 
than 
the 
males—Bright 
colours 
of 
caterpillars—Summary 
and 
concluding 
remarks 
on 
the 
secondary 
sexual 
character 
of 
insects—Birds 
and 
insects 
compared. 



CHAPTER 
XII. 


Secondary 
Sexual 
Characters 
of 
Fishes, 
Amphibians, 
and 
Reptiles. 


Fishes: 
Courtship 
and 
battles 
of 
the 
males—Larger 
size 
of 
the 
females— 
Males, 
bright 
colours 
and 
ornamental 
appendages; 
other 
strange 
characters— 
Colours 
and 
appendages 
acquired 
by 
the 
males 
during 
the 
breeding-season 
alone—Fishes 
with 
both 
sexes 
brilliantly 
coloured—Protective 
colours—The 
less 
conspicuous 
colours 
of 
the 
female 
cannot 
be 
accounted 
for 
on 
the 
principle 
of 
protection—Male 
fishes 
building 
nests, 
and 
taking 
charge 
of 
the 
ova 
and 
young. 
AMPHIBIANS: 
Differences 
in 
structure 
and 
colour 
between 
the 
sexes—Vocal 
organs. 
REPTILES: 
Chelonians—Crocodiles— 
Snakes, 
colours 
in 
some 
cases 
protective—Lizards, 
battles 
of—Ornamental 
appendages—Strange 
differences 
in 
structure 
between 
the 
sexes—Colours— 
Sexual 
differences 
almost 
as 
great 
as 
with 
birds. 


CHAPTER 
XIII. 


Secondary 
Sexual 
Characters 
of 
Birds. 


Sexual 
differences—Law 
of 
battle—Special 
weapons—Vocal 
organs— 
Instrumental 
music—Love-antics 
and 
dances—Decorations, 
permanent 
and 
seasonal—Double 
and 
single 
annual 
moults—Display 
of 
ornaments 
by 
the 
males. 


CHAPTER 
XIV. 


Birds—continued. 


Choice 
exerted 
by 
the 
female—Length 
of 
courtship—Unpaired 
birds— 
Mental 
qualities 
and 
taste 
for 
the 
beautiful—Preference 
or 
antipathy 
shewn 
by 
the 
female 
for 
particular 
males—Variability 
of 
birds—Variations 
sometimes 
abrupt—Laws 
of 
variation—Formation 
of 
ocelli—Gradations 
of 
character— 
Case 
of 
Peacock, 
Argus 
pheasant, 
and 
Urosticte. 


CHAPTER 
XV. 



Birds—continued. 


Discussion 
as 
to 
why 
the 
males 
alone 
of 
some 
species, 
and 
both 
sexes 
of 
others 
are 
brightly 
coloured—On 
sexually-limited 
inheritance, 
as 
applied 
to 
various 
structures 
and 
to 
brightly-coloured 
plumage—Nidification 
in 
relation 
to 
colour—Loss 
of 
nuptial 
plumage 
during 
the 
winter. 


CHAPTER 
XVI. 


Birds—concluded. 


The 
immature 
plumage 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
character 
of 
the 
plumage 
in 
both 
sexes 
when 
adult—Six 
classes 
of 
cases—Sexual 
differences 
between 
the 
males 
of 
closely-allied 
or 
representative 
species—The 
female 
assuming 
the 
characters 
of 
the 
male—Plumage 
of 
the 
young 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
summer 
and 
winter 
plumage 
of 
the 
adults—On 
the 
increase 
of 
beauty 
in 
the 
birds 
of 
the 
world—Protective 
colouring—Conspicuously 
coloured 
birds—Novelty 
appreciated—Summary 
of 
the 
four 
chapters 
on 
birds. 


CHAPTER 
XVII. 


Secondary 
Sexual 
Characters 
of 
Mammals. 


The 
law 
of 
battle—Special 
weapons, 
confined 
to 
the 
males—Cause 
of 
absence 
of 
weapons 
in 
the 
female—Weapons 
common 
to 
both 
sexes, 
yet 
primarily 
acquired 
by 
the 
male—Other 
uses 
of 
such 
weapons—Their 
high 
importance— 
Greater 
size 
of 
the 
male—Means 
of 
defence—On 
the 
preference 
shewn 
by 
either 
sex 
in 
the 
pairing 
of 
quadrupeds. 


CHAPTER 
XVIII. 


Secondary 
Sexual 
Characters 
of 
Mammals—continued. 


Voice—Remarkable 
sexual 
peculiarities 
in 
seals—Odour—Development 
of 
the 
hair—Colour 
of 
the 
hair 
and 
skin—Anomalous 
case 
of 
the 
female 
being 
more 
ornamented 
than 
the 
male—Colour 
and 
ornaments 
due 
to 
sexual 
selection— 
Colour 
acquired 
for 
the 
sake 
of 
protection—Colour, 
though 
common 
to 
both 
sexes, 
often 
due 
to 
sexual 
selection—On 
the 
disappearance 



of 
spots 
and 
stripes 
in 
adult 
quadrupeds—On 
the 
colours 
and 
ornaments 
of 
the 
Quadrumana—Summary. 


PART 
III. 
SEXUAL 
SELECTION 
IN 
RELATION 
TO 
MAN, 
AND 
CONCLUSION. 


CHAPTER 
XIX. 


Secondary 
Sexual 
Characters 
of 
Man. 


Differences 
between 
man 
and 
woman—Causes 
of 
such 
differences, 
and 
of 
certain 
characters 
common 
to 
both 
sexes—Law 
of 
battle—Differences 
in 
mental 
powers, 
and 
voice—On 
the 
influence 
of 
beauty 
in 
determining 
the 
marriages 
of 
mankind—Attention 
paid 
by 
savages 
to 
ornaments—Their 
ideas 
of 
beauty 
in 
women—The 
tendency 
to 
exaggerate 
each 
natural 
peculiarity. 


CHAPTER 
XX. 


Secondary 
Sexual 
Characters 
of 
Man—continued. 


On 
the 
effects 
of 
the 
continued 
selection 
of 
women 
according 
to 
a 
different 
standard 
of 
beauty 
in 
each 
race—On 
the 
causes 
which 
interfere 
with 
sexual 
selection 
in 
civilised 
and 
savage 
nations—Conditions 
favourable 
to 
sexual 
selection 
during 
primeval 
times—On 
the 
manner 
of 
action 
of 
sexual 
selection 
with 
mankind—On 
the 
women 
in 
savage 
tribes 
having 
some 
power 
to 
choose 
their 
husbands—Absence 
of 
hair 
on 
the 
body, 
and 
development 
of 
the 
beard—Colour 
of 
the 
skin—Summary. 


CHAPTER 
XXI. 


General 
Summary 
and 
Conclusion. 


Main 
conclusion 
that 
man 
is 
descended 
from 
some 
lower 
form—Manner 
of 
development—Genealogy 
of 
man—Intellectual 
and 
moral 
faculties— 
Sexual 
selection—Concluding 
remarks. 



SUPPLEMENTAL 
NOTE. 


INDEX. 


THE 
DESCENT 
OF 
MAN; 
AND 
SELECTION 
IN 
RELATION 
TO 
SEX. 


… 


INTRODUCTION. 


The 
nature 
of 
the 
following 
work 
will 
be 
best 
understood 
by 
a 
brief 
account 
of 
how 
it 
came 
to 
be 
written. 
During 
many 
years 
I 
collected 
notes 
on 
the 
origin 
or 
descent 
of 
man, 
without 
any 
intention 
of 
publishing 
on 
the 
subject, 
but 
rather 
with 
the 
determination 
not 
to 
publish, 
as 
I 
thought 
that 
I 
should 
thus 
only 
add 
to 
the 
prejudices 
against 
my 
views. 
It 
seemed 
to 
me 
sufficient 
to 
indicate, 
in 
the 
first 
edition 
of 
my 
'Origin 
of 
Species,' 
that 
by 
this 
work 
"light 
would 
be 
thrown 
on 
the 
origin 
of 
man 
and 
his 
history;" 
and 
this 
implies 
that 
man 
must 
be 
included 
with 
other 
organic 
beings 
in 
any 
general 
conclusion 
respecting 
his 
manner 
of 
appearance 
on 
this 
earth. 
Now 
the 
case 
wears 
a 
wholly 
different 
aspect. 
When 
a 
naturalist 
like 
Carl 
Vogt 
ventures 
to 
say 
in 
his 
address 
as 
President 
of 
the 
National 
Institution 
of 
Geneva 
(1869), 
"personne, 
en 
Europe 
au 
moins, 
n'ose 
plus 
soutenir 
la 
creation 
independante 
et 
de 
toutes 
pieces, 
des 
especes," 
it 
is 
manifest 
that 
at 
least 
a 
large 
number 
of 
naturalists 
must 
admit 
that 
species 
are 
the 
modified 
descendants 
of 
other 
species; 
and 
this 
especially 
holds 
good 
with 
the 
younger 
and 
rising 
naturalists. 
The 
greater 
number 
accept 
the 
agency 
of 
natural 
selection; 
though 
some 
urge, 
whether 
with 
justice 
the 
future 
must 
decide, 
that 
I 
have 
greatly 
overrated 
its 
importance. 
Of 
the 
older 
and 
honoured 
chiefs 
in 
natural 
science, 
many 
unfortunately 
are 
still 
opposed 
to 
evolution 
in 
every 
form. 


In 
consequence 
of 
the 
views 
now 
adopted 
by 
most 
naturalists, 
and 
which 
will 
ultimately, 
as 
in 
every 
other 
case, 
be 
followed 
by 
others 
who 
are 
not 
scientific, 
I 
have 
been 
led 
to 
put 
together 
my 
notes, 
so 
as 
to 
see 
how 
far 
the 
general 
conclusions 
arrived 
at 
in 
my 
former 
works 
were 
applicable 
to 
man. 



This 
seemed 
all 
the 
more 
desirable, 
as 
I 
had 
never 
deliberately 
applied 
these 
views 
to 
a 
species 
taken 
singly. 
When 
we 
confine 
our 
attention 
to 
any 
one 
form, 
we 
are 
deprived 
of 
the 
weighty 
arguments 
derived 
from 
the 
nature 
of 
the 
affinities 
which 
connect 
together 
whole 
groups 
of 
organisms—their 
geographical 
distribution 
in 
past 
and 
present 
times, 
and 
their 
geological 
succession. 
The 
homological 
structure, 
embryological 
development, 
and 
rudimentary 
organs 
of 
a 
species 
remain 
to 
be 
considered, 
whether 
it 
be 
man 
or 
any 
other 
animal, 
to 
which 
our 
attention 
may 
be 
directed; 
but 
these 
great 
classes 
of 
facts 
afford, 
as 
it 
appears 
to 
me, 
ample 
and 
conclusive 
evidence 
in 
favour 
of 
the 
principle 
of 
gradual 
evolution. 
The 
strong 
support 
derived 
from 
the 
other 
arguments 
should, 
however, 
always 
be 
kept 
before 
the 
mind. 


The 
sole 
object 
of 
this 
work 
is 
to 
consider, 
firstly, 
whether 
man, 
like 
every 
other 
species, 
is 
descended 
from 
some 
pre-existing 
form; 
secondly, 
the 
manner 
of 
his 
development; 
and 
thirdly, 
the 
value 
of 
the 
differences 
between 
the 
so-called 
races 
of 
man. 
As 
I 
shall 
confine 
myself 
to 
these 
points, 
it 
will 
not 
be 
necessary 
to 
describe 
in 
detail 
the 
differences 
between 
the 
several 
races—an 
enormous 
subject 
which 
has 
been 
fully 
described 
in 
many 
valuable 
works. 
The 
high 
antiquity 
of 
man 
has 
recently 
been 
demonstrated 
by 
the 
labours 
of 
a 
host 
of 
eminent 
men, 
beginning 
with 
M. 
Boucher 
de 
Perthes; 
and 
this 
is 
the 
indispensable 
basis 
for 
understanding 
his 
origin. 
I 
shall, 
therefore, 
take 
this 
conclusion 
for 
granted, 
and 
may 
refer 
my 
readers 
to 
the 
admirable 
treatises 
of 
Sir 
Charles 
Lyell, 
Sir 
John 
Lubbock, 
and 
others. 
Nor 
shall 
I 
have 
occasion 
to 
do 
more 
than 
to 
allude 
to 
the 
amount 
of 
difference 
between 
man 
and 
the 
anthropomorphous 
apes; 
for 
Prof. 
Huxley, 
in 
the 
opinion 
of 
most 
competent 
judges, 
has 
conclusively 
shewn 
that 
in 
every 
visible 
character 
man 
differs 
less 
from 
the 
higher 
apes, 
than 
these 
do 
from 
the 
lower 
members 
of 
the 
same 
order 
of 
Primates. 


This 
work 
contains 
hardly 
any 
original 
facts 
in 
regard 
to 
man; 
but 
as 
the 
conclusions 
at 
which 
I 
arrived, 
after 
drawing 
up 
a 
rough 
draft, 
appeared 
to 
me 
interesting, 
I 
thought 
that 
they 
might 
interest 
others. 
It 
has 
often 
and 
confidently 
been 
asserted, 
that 
man's 
origin 
can 
never 
be 
known: 
but 
ignorance 
more 
frequently 
begets 
confidence 
than 
does 
knowledge: 
it 
is 
those 
who 
know 
little, 
and 
not 
those 
who 
know 
much, 
who 
so 
positively 
assert 
that 
this 
or 
that 
problem 
will 
never 
be 
solved 
by 
science. 
The 
conclusion 
that 
man 
is 
the 
co-descendant 
with 
other 
species 
of 
some 
ancient, 
lower, 
and 
extinct 
form, 
is 
not 
in 
any 
degree 
new. 
Lamarck 
long 
ago 
came 
to 
this 
conclusion, 
which 
has 
lately 
been 
maintained 
by 
several 
eminent 
naturalists 
and 



philosophers; 
for 
instance, 
by 
Wallace, 
Huxley, 
Lyell, 
Vogt, 
Lubbock, 
Buchner, 
Rolle, 
etc. 
(1. 
As 
the 
works 
of 
the 
first-named 
authors 
are 
so 
well 
known, 
I 
need 
not 
give 
the 
titles; 
but 
as 
those 
of 
the 
latter 
are 
less 
well 
known 
in 
England, 
I 
will 
give 
them:—'Sechs 
Vorlesungen 
uber 
die 
Darwin'sche 
Theorie:' 
zweite 
Auflage, 
1868, 
von 
Dr 
L. 
Buchner; 
translated 
into 
French 
under 
the 
title 
'Conferences 
sur 
la 
Theorie 
Darwinienne,' 
1869. 
'Der 
Mensch 
im 
Lichte 
der 
Darwin'sche 
Lehre,' 
1865, 
von 
Dr. 
F. 
Rolle. 
I 
will 
not 
attempt 
to 
give 
references 
to 
all 
the 
authors 
who 
have 
taken 
the 
same 
side 
of 
the 
question. 
Thus 
G. 
Canestrini 
has 
published 
('Annuario 
della 
Soc. 
d. 
Nat.,' 
Modena, 
1867, 
page 
81) 
a 
very 
curious 
paper 
on 
rudimentary 
characters, 
as 
bearing 
on 
the 
origin 
of 
man. 
Another 
work 
has 
(1869) 
been 
published 
by 
Dr. 
Francesco 
Barrago, 
bearing 
in 
Italian 
the 
title 
of 
"Man, 
made 
in 
the 
image 
of 
God, 
was 
also 
made 
in 
the 
image 
of 
the 
ape."), 
and 
especially 
by 
Haeckel. 
This 
last 
naturalist, 
besides 
his 
great 
work, 
'Generelle 
Morphologie' 
(1866), 
has 
recently 
(1868, 
with 
a 
second 
edition 
in 
1870), 
published 
his 
'Naturliche 
Schopfungsgeschichte,' 
in 
which 
he 
fully 
discusses 
the 
genealogy 
of 
man. 
If 
this 
work 
had 
appeared 
before 
my 
essay 
had 
been 
written, 
I 
should 
probably 
never 
have 
completed 
it. 
Almost 
all 
the 
conclusions 
at 
which 
I 
have 
arrived 
I 
find 
confirmed 
by 
this 
naturalist, 
whose 
knowledge 
on 
many 
points 
is 
much 
fuller 
than 
mine. 
Wherever 
I 
have 
added 
any 
fact 
or 
view 
from 
Prof. 
Haeckel's 
writings, 
I 
give 
his 
authority 
in 
the 
text; 
other 
statements 
I 
leave 
as 
they 
originally 
stood 
in 
my 
manuscript, 
occasionally 
giving 
in 
the 
foot-notes 
references 
to 
his 
works, 
as 
a 
confirmation 
of 
the 
more 
doubtful 
or 
interesting 
points. 


During 
many 
years 
it 
has 
seemed 
to 
me 
highly 
probable 
that 
sexual 
selection 
has 
played 
an 
important 
part 
in 
differentiating 
the 
races 
of 
man; 
but 
in 
my 
'Origin 
of 
Species' 
(first 
edition, 
page 
199) 
I 
contented 
myself 
by 
merely 
alluding 
to 
this 
belief. 
When 
I 
came 
to 
apply 
this 
view 
to 
man, 
I 
found 
it 
indispensable 
to 
treat 
the 
whole 
subject 
in 
full 
detail. 
(2. 
Prof. 
Haeckel 
was 
the 
only 
author 
who, 
at 
the 
time 
when 
this 
work 
first 
appeared, 
had 
discussed 
the 
subject 
of 
sexual 
selection, 
and 
had 
seen 
its 
full 
importance, 
since 
the 
publication 
of 
the 
'Origin'; 
and 
this 
he 
did 
in 
a 
very 
able 
manner 
in 
his 
various 
works.) 
Consequently 
the 
second 
part 
of 
the 
present 
work, 
treating 
of 
sexual 
selection, 
has 
extended 
to 
an 
inordinate 
length, 
compared 
with 
the 
first 
part; 
but 
this 
could 
not 
be 
avoided. 


I 
had 
intended 
adding 
to 
the 
present 
volumes 
an 
essay 
on 
the 
expression 
of 
the 
various 
emotions 
by 
man 
and 
the 
lower 
animals. 
My 
attention 
was 



called 
to 
this 
subject 
many 
years 
ago 
by 
Sir 
Charles 
Bell's 
admirable 
work. 
This 
illustrious 
anatomist 
maintains 
that 
man 
is 
endowed 
with 
certain 
muscles 
solely 
for 
the 
sake 
of 
expressing 
his 
emotions. 
As 
this 
view 
is 
obviously 
opposed 
to 
the 
belief 
that 
man 
is 
descended 
from 
some 
other 
and 
lower 
form, 
it 
was 
necessary 
for 
me 
to 
consider 
it. 
I 
likewise 
wished 
to 
ascertain 
how 
far 
the 
emotions 
are 
expressed 
in 
the 
same 
manner 
by 
the 
different 
races 
of 
man. 
But 
owing 
to 
the 
length 
of 
the 
present 
work, 
I 
have 
thought 
it 
better 
to 
reserve 
my 
essay 
for 
separate 
publication. 


PART 
I. 
THE 
DESCENT 
OR 
ORIGIN 
OF 
MAN. 


CHAPTER 
I. 


THE 
EVIDENCE 
OF 
THE 
DESCENT 
OF 
MAN 
FROM 
SOME 
LOWER 
FORM. 


Nature 
of 
the 
evidence 
bearing 
on 
the 
origin 
of 
man—Homologous 
structures 
in 
man 
and 
the 
lower 
animals—Miscellaneous 
points 
of 
correspondence— 
Development—Rudimentary 
structures, 
muscles, 
sense-
organs, 
hair, 
bones, 
reproductive 
organs, 
etc.—The 
bearing 
of 
these 
three 
great 
classes 
of 
facts 
on 
the 
origin 
of 
man. 


He 
who 
wishes 
to 
decide 
whether 
man 
is 
the 
modified 
descendant 
of 
some 
pre-existing 
form, 
would 
probably 
first 
enquire 
whether 
man 
varies, 
however 
slightly, 
in 
bodily 
structure 
and 
in 
mental 
faculties; 
and 
if 
so, 
whether 
the 
variations 
are 
transmitted 
to 
his 
offspring 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
laws 
which 
prevail 
with 
the 
lower 
animals. 
Again, 
are 
the 
variations 
the 
result, 
as 
far 
as 
our 
ignorance 
permits 
us 
to 
judge, 
of 
the 
same 
general 
causes, 
and 
are 
they 
governed 
by 
the 
same 
general 
laws, 
as 
in 
the 
case 
of 
other 
organisms; 
for 
instance, 
by 
correlation, 
the 
inherited 
effects 
of 
use 
and 
disuse, 
etc.? 
Is 
man 
subject 
to 
similar 
malconformations, 
the 
result 
of 
arrested 
development, 
of 
reduplication 
of 
parts, 
etc., 
and 
does 
he 
display 
in 
any 
of 
his 
anomalies 
reversion 
to 
some 
former 
and 
ancient 
type 
of 
structure? 
It 
might 
also 
naturally 
be 
enquired 
whether 
man, 
like 
so 
many 
other 
animals, 
has 
given 
rise 
to 
varieties 
and 
sub-races, 
differing 
but 
slightly 
from 
each 
other, 
or 
to 
races 
differing 
so 
much 
that 
they 
must 
be 
classed 
as 
doubtful 
species? 
How 
are 
such 
races 
distributed 
over 
the 
world; 
and 
how, 
when 
crossed, 
do 
they 
react 
on 
each 
other 
in 
the 
first 
and 
succeeding 
generations? 
And 
so 
with 



many 
other 
points. 


The 
enquirer 
would 
next 
come 
to 
the 
important 
point, 
whether 
man 
tends 
to 
increase 
at 
so 
rapid 
a 
rate, 
as 
to 
lead 
to 
occasional 
severe 
struggles 
for 
existence; 
and 
consequently 
to 
beneficial 
variations, 
whether 
in 
body 
or 
mind, 
being 
preserved, 
and 
injurious 
ones 
eliminated. 
Do 
the 
races 
or 
species 
of 
men, 
whichever 
term 
may 
be 
applied, 
encroach 
on 
and 
replace 
one 
another, 
so 
that 
some 
finally 
become 
extinct? 
We 
shall 
see 
that 
all 
these 
questions, 
as 
indeed 
is 
obvious 
in 
respect 
to 
most 
of 
them, 
must 
be 
answered 
in 
the 
affirmative, 
in 
the 
same 
manner 
as 
with 
the 
lower 
animals. 
But 
the 
several 
considerations 
just 
referred 
to 
may 
be 
conveniently 
deferred 
for 
a 
time: 
and 
we 
will 
first 
see 
how 
far 
the 
bodily 
structure 
of 
man 
shews 
traces, 
more 
or 
less 
plain, 
of 
his 
descent 
from 
some 
lower 
form. 
In 
succeeding 
chapters 
the 
mental 
powers 
of 
man, 
in 
comparison 
with 
those 
of 
the 
lower 
animals, 
will 
be 
considered. 


THE 
BODILY 
STRUCTURE 
OF 
MAN. 


It 
is 
notorious 
that 
man 
is 
constructed 
on 
the 
same 
general 
type 
or 
model 
as 
other 
mammals. 
All 
the 
bones 
in 
his 
skeleton 
can 
be 
compared 
with 
corresponding 
bones 
in 
a 
monkey, 
bat, 
or 
seal. 
So 
it 
is 
with 
his 
muscles, 
nerves, 
blood-vessels 
and 
internal 
viscera. 
The 
brain, 
the 
most 
important 
of 
all 
the 
organs, 
follows 
the 
same 
law, 
as 
shewn 
by 
Huxley 
and 
other 
anatomists. 
Bischoff 
(1. 
'Grosshirnwindungen 
des 
Menschen,' 
1868, 
s. 
96. 
The 
conclusions 
of 
this 
author, 
as 
well 
as 
those 
of 
Gratiolet 
and 
Aeby, 
concerning 
the 
brain, 
will 
be 
discussed 
by 
Prof. 
Huxley 
in 
the 
Appendix 
alluded 
to 
in 
the 
Preface 
to 
this 
edition.), 
who 
is 
a 
hostile 
witness, 
admits 
that 
every 
chief 
fissure 
and 
fold 
in 
the 
brain 
of 
man 
has 
its 
analogy 
in 
that 
of 
the 
orang; 
but 
he 
adds 
that 
at 
no 
period 
of 
development 
do 
their 
brains 
perfectly 
agree; 
nor 
could 
perfect 
agreement 
be 
expected, 
for 
otherwise 
their 
mental 
powers 
would 
have 
been 
the 
same. 
Vulpian 
(2. 
'Lec. 
sur 
la 
Phys.' 
1866, 
page 
890, 
as 
quoted 
by 
M. 
Dally, 
'L'Ordre 
des 
Primates 
et 
le 
Transformisme,' 
1868, 
page 
29.), 
remarks: 
"Les 
differences 
reelles 
qui 
existent 
entre 
l'encephale 
de 
l'homme 
et 
celui 
des 
singes 
superieurs, 
sont 
bien 
minimes. 
Il 
ne 
faut 
pas 
se 
faire 
d'illusions 
a 
cet 
egard. 
L'homme 
est 
bien 
plus 
pres 
des 
singes 
anthropomorphes 
par 
les 
caracteres 
anatomiques 
de 
son 
cerveau 
que 
ceux-ci 
ne 
le 
sont 
non 
seulement 
des 
autres 
mammiferes, 
mais 
meme 
de 
certains 
quadrumanes, 
des 
guenons 
et 
des 
macaques." 
But 
it 
would 
be 



superfluous 
here 
to 
give 
further 
details 
on 
the 
correspondence 
between 
man 
and 
the 
higher 
mammals 
in 
the 
structure 
of 
the 
brain 
and 
all 
other 
parts 
of 
the 
body. 


It 
may, 
however, 
be 
worth 
while 
to 
specify 
a 
few 
points, 
not 
directly 
or 
obviously 
connected 
with 
structure, 
by 
which 
this 
correspondence 
or 
relationship 
is 
well 
shewn. 


Man 
is 
liable 
to 
receive 
from 
the 
lower 
animals, 
and 
to 
communicate 
to 
them, 
certain 
diseases, 
as 
hydrophobia, 
variola, 
the 
glanders, 
syphilis, 
cholera, 
herpes, 
etc. 
(3. 
Dr. 
W. 
Lauder 
Lindsay 
has 
treated 
this 
subject 
at 
some 
length 
in 
the 
'Journal 
of 
Mental 
Science,' 
July 
1871; 
and 
in 
the 
'Edinburgh 
Veterinary 
Review,' 
July 
1858.); 
and 
this 
fact 
proves 
the 
close 
similarity 
(4. 
A 
Reviewer 
has 
criticised 
('British 
Quarterly 
Review,' 
Oct. 
1st, 
1871, 
page 
472) 
what 
I 
have 
here 
said 
with 
much 
severity 
and 
contempt; 
but 
as 
I 
do 
not 
use 
the 
term 
identity, 
I 
cannot 
see 
that 
I 
am 
greatly 
in 
error. 
There 
appears 
to 
me 
a 
strong 
analogy 
between 
the 
same 
infection 
or 
contagion 
producing 
the 
same 
result, 
or 
one 
closely 
similar, 
in 
two 
distinct 
animals, 
and 
the 
testing 
of 
two 
distinct 
fluids 
by 
the 
same 
chemical 
reagent.) 
of 
their 
tissues 
and 
blood, 
both 
in 
minute 
structure 
and 
composition, 
far 
more 
plainly 
than 
does 
their 
comparison 
under 
the 
best 
microscope, 
or 
by 
the 
aid 
of 
the 
best 
chemical 
analysis. 
Monkeys 
are 
liable 
to 
many 
of 
the 
same 
noncontagious 
diseases 
as 
we 
are; 
thus 
Rengger 
(5. 
'Naturgeschichte 
der 
Saugethiere 
von 
Paraguay,' 
1830, 
s. 
50.), 
who 
carefully 
observed 
for 
a 
long 
time 
the 
Cebus 
Azarae 
in 
its 
native 
land, 
found 
it 
liable 
to 
catarrh, 
with 
the 
usual 
symptoms, 
and 
which, 
when 
often 
recurrent, 
led 
to 
consumption. 
These 
monkeys 
suffered 
also 
from 
apoplexy, 
inflammation 
of 
the 
bowels, 
and 
cataract 
in 
the 
eye. 
The 
younger 
ones 
when 
shedding 
their 
milk-teeth 
often 
died 
from 
fever. 
Medicines 
produced 
the 
same 
effect 
on 
them 
as 
on 
us. 
Many 
kinds 
of 
monkeys 
have 
a 
strong 
taste 
for 
tea, 
coffee, 
and 
spiritous 
liquors: 
they 
will 
also, 
as 
I 
have 
myself 
seen, 
smoke 
tobacco 
with 
pleasure. 
(6. 
The 
same 
tastes 
are 
common 
to 
some 
animals 
much 
lower 
in 
the 
scale. 
Mr. 
A. 
Nichols 
informs 
me 
that 
he 
kept 
in 
Queensland, 
in 
Australia, 
three 
individuals 
of 
the 
Phaseolarctus 
cinereus; 
and 
that, 
without 
having 
been 
taught 
in 
any 
way, 
they 
acquired 
a 
strong 
taste 
for 
rum, 
and 
for 
smoking 
tobacco.) 
Brehm 
asserts 
that 
the 
natives 
of 
north-eastern 
Africa 
catch 
the 
wild 
baboons 
by 
exposing 
vessels 
with 
strong 
beer, 
by 
which 
they 
are 
made 
drunk. 
He 
has 
seen 
some 
of 
these 
animals, 
which 
he 
kept 
in 
confinement, 
in 
this 
state; 
and 
he 
gives 
a 
laughable 
account 
of 
their 
behaviour 
and 
strange 



grimaces. 
On 
the 
following 
morning 
they 
were 
very 
cross 
and 
dismal; 
they 
held 
their 
aching 
heads 
with 
both 
hands, 
and 
wore 
a 
most 
pitiable 
expression: 
when 
beer 
or 
wine 
was 
offered 
them, 
they 
turned 
away 
with 
disgust, 
but 
relished 
the 
juice 
of 
lemons. 
(7. 
Brehm, 
'Thierleben,' 
B. 
i. 
1864, 
s. 
75, 
86. 
On 
the 
Ateles, 
s. 
105. 
For 
other 
analogous 
statements, 
see 
s. 
25, 
107.) 
An 
American 
monkey, 
an 
Ateles, 
after 
getting 
drunk 
on 
brandy, 
would 
never 
touch 
it 
again, 
and 
thus 
was 
wiser 
than 
many 
men. 
These 
trifling 
facts 
prove 
how 
similar 
the 
nerves 
of 
taste 
must 
be 
in 
monkeys 
and 
man, 
and 
how 
similarly 
their 
whole 
nervous 
system 
is 
affected. 


Man 
is 
infested 
with 
internal 
parasites, 
sometimes 
causing 
fatal 
effects; 
and 
is 
plagued 
by 
external 
parasites, 
all 
of 
which 
belong 
to 
the 
same 
genera 
or 
families 
as 
those 
infesting 
other 
mammals, 
and 
in 
the 
case 
of 
scabies 
to 
the 
same 
species. 
(8. 
Dr. 
W. 
Lauder 
Lindsay, 
'Edinburgh 
Vet. 
Review,' 
July 
1858, 
page 
13.) 
Man 
is 
subject, 
like 
other 
mammals, 
birds, 
and 
even 
insects 


(9. 
With 
respect 
to 
insects 
see 
Dr. 
Laycock, 
"On 
a 
General 
Law 
of 
Vital 
Periodicity," 
'British 
Association,' 
1842. 
Dr. 
Macculloch, 
'Silliman's 
North 
American 
Journal 
of 
Science,' 
vol. 
XVII. 
page 
305, 
has 
seen 
a 
dog 
suffering 
from 
tertian 
ague. 
Hereafter 
I 
shall 
return 
to 
this 
subject.), 
to 
that 
mysterious 
law, 
which 
causes 
certain 
normal 
processes, 
such 
as 
gestation, 
as 
well 
as 
the 
maturation 
and 
duration 
of 
various 
diseases, 
to 
follow 
lunar 
periods. 
His 
wounds 
are 
repaired 
by 
the 
same 
process 
of 
healing; 
and 
the 
stumps 
left 
after 
the 
amputation 
of 
his 
limbs, 
especially 
during 
an 
early 
embryonic 
period, 
occasionally 
possess 
some 
power 
of 
regeneration, 
as 
in 
the 
lowest 
animals. 
(10. 
I 
have 
given 
the 
evidence 
on 
this 
head 
in 
my 
'Variation 
of 
Animals 
and 
Plants 
under 
Domestication,' 
vol. 
ii. 
page 
15, 
and 
more 
could 
be 
added.) 
The 
whole 
process 
of 
that 
most 
important 
function, 
the 
reproduction 
of 
the 
species, 
is 
strikingly 
the 
same 
in 
all 
mammals, 
from 
the 
first 
act 
of 
courtship 
by 
the 
male 
(11. 
Mares 
e 
diversis 
generibus 
Quadrumanorum 
sine 
dubio 
dignoscunt 
feminas 
humanas 
a 
maribus. 
Primum, 
credo, 
odoratu, 
postea 
aspectu. 
Mr. 
Youatt, 
qui 
diu 
in 
Hortis 
Zoologicis 
(Bestiariis) 
medicus 
animalium 
erat, 
vir 
in 
rebus 
observandis 
cautus 
et 
sagax, 
hoc 
mihi 
certissime 
probavit, 
et 
curatores 
ejusdem 
loci 
et 
alii 
e 
ministris 
confirmaverunt. 
Sir 
Andrew 
Smith 
et 
Brehm 
notabant 
idem 
in 
Cynocephalo. 
Illustrissimus 
Cuvier 
etiam 
narrat 
multa 
de 
hac 
re, 
qua 
ut 
opinor, 
nihil 
turpius 
potest 
indicari 
inter 
omnia 
hominibus 
et 
Quadrumanis 
communia. 
Narrat 
enim 
Cynocephalum 
quendam 
in 
furorem 
incidere 
aspectu 
feminarum 
aliquarem, 
sed 
nequaquam 
accendi 
tanto 
furore 
ab 
omnibus. 
Semper 
eligebat 
juniores, 
et 
dignoscebat 
in 



turba, 
et 
advocabat 
voce 
gestuque.), 
to 
the 
birth 
and 
nurturing 
of 
the 
young. 
Monkeys 
are 
born 
in 
almost 
as 
helpless 
a 
condition 
as 
our 
own 
infants; 
and 
in 
certain 
genera 
the 
young 
differ 
fully 
as 
much 
in 
appearance 
from 
the 
adults, 
as 
do 
our 
children 
from 
their 
full-grown 
parents. 
(12. 
This 
remark 
is 
made 
with 
respect 
to 
Cynocephalus 
and 
the 
anthropomorphous 
apes 
by 
Geoffroy 
Saint-Hilaire 
and 
F. 
Cuvier, 
'Histoire 
Nat. 
des 
Mammiferes,' 
tom. 
i. 
1824.) 
It 
has 
been 
urged 
by 
some 
writers, 
as 
an 
important 
distinction, 
that 
with 
man 
the 
young 
arrive 
at 
maturity 
at 
a 
much 
later 
age 
than 
with 
any 
other 
animal: 
but 
if 
we 
look 
to 
the 
races 
of 
mankind 
which 
inhabit 
tropical 
countries 
the 
difference 
is 
not 
great, 
for 
the 
orang 
is 
believed 
not 
to 
be 
adult 
till 
the 
age 
of 
from 
ten 
to 
fifteen 
years. 
(13. 
Huxley, 
'Man's 
Place 
in 
Nature,' 
1863, 
p. 
34.) 
Man 
differs 
from 
woman 
in 
size, 
bodily 
strength, 
hairiness, 
etc., 
as 
well 
as 
in 
mind, 
in 
the 
same 
manner 
as 
do 
the 
two 
sexes 
of 
many 
mammals. 
So 
that 
the 
correspondence 
in 
general 
structure, 
in 
the 
minute 
structure 
of 
the 
tissues, 
in 
chemical 
composition 
and 
in 
constitution, 
between 
man 
and 
the 
higher 
animals, 
especially 
the 
anthropomorphous 
apes, 
is 
extremely 
close. 


EMBRYONIC 
DEVELOPMENT. 


[Fig. 
1. 
Shows 
a 
human 
embryo, 
from 
Ecker, 
and 
a 
dog 
embryo, 
from 
Bischoff. 
Labelled 
in 
each 
are: 


a. 
Fore-brain, 
cerebral 
hemispheres, 
etc. 
b. 
Mid-brain, 
corpora 
quadrigemina. 
c. 
Hind-brain, 
cerebellum, 
medulla 
oblongata. 
d. 
Eye. 
e. 
Ear. 
f. 
First 
visceral 
arch. 
g. 
Second 
visceral 
arch. 
H. 
Vertebral 
columns 
and 
muscles 
in 
process 
of 
development. 
i. 
Anterior 
extremities. 
K. 
Posterior 
extremities. 
L. 
Tail 
or 
os 
coccyx.] 
Man 
is 
developed 
from 
an 
ovule, 
about 
the 
125th 
of 
an 
inch 
in 
diameter, 
which 
differs 
in 
no 
respect 
from 
the 
ovules 
of 
other 
animals. 
The 
embryo 
itself 
at 
a 
very 
early 
period 
can 
hardly 
be 
distinguished 
from 
that 
of 
other 
members 
of 
the 
vertebrate 
kingdom. 
At 
this 
period 
the 
arteries 
run 
in 
arch-
like 
branches, 
as 
if 
to 
carry 
the 
blood 
to 
branchiae 
which 
are 
not 
present 
in 
the 
higher 
Vertebrata, 
though 
the 
slits 
on 
the 
sides 
of 
the 
neck 
still 
remain 
(see 
f, 
g, 
fig. 
1), 
marking 
their 
former 
position. 
At 
a 
somewhat 
later 
period, 
when 
the 
extremities 
are 
developed, 
"the 
feet 
of 
lizards 
and 
mammals," 
as 
the 
illustrious 
Von 
Baer 
remarks, 
"the 
wings 
and 
feet 
of 
birds, 
no 
less 
than 
the 
hands 
and 
feet 
of 
man, 
all 
arise 
from 
the 
same 
fundamental 
form." 
It 
is, 
says 
Prof. 
Huxley 
(14. 
'Man's 
Place 
in 
Nature,' 
1863, 
p. 
67.), 
"quite 
in 
the 
later 



stages 
of 
development 
that 
the 
young 
human 
being 
presents 
marked 
differences 
from 
the 
young 
ape, 
while 
the 
latter 
departs 
as 
much 
from 
the 
dog 
in 
its 
developments, 
as 
the 
man 
does. 
Startling 
as 
this 
last 
assertion 
may 
appear 
to 
be, 
it 
is 
demonstrably 
true." 


As 
some 
of 
my 
readers 
may 
never 
have 
seen 
a 
drawing 
of 
an 
embryo, 
I 
have 
given 
one 
of 
man 
and 
another 
of 
a 
dog, 
at 
about 
the 
same 
early 
stage 
of 
development, 
carefully 
copied 
from 
two 
works 
of 
undoubted 
accuracy. 
(15. 
The 
human 
embryo 
(upper 
fig.) 
is 
from 
Ecker, 
'Icones 
Phys.,' 
1851-1859, 
tab. 


xxx. 
fig. 
2. 
This 
embryo 
was 
ten 
lines 
in 
length, 
so 
that 
the 
drawing 
is 
much 
magnified. 
The 
embryo 
of 
the 
dog 
is 
from 
Bischoff, 
'Entwicklungsgeschichte 
des 
Hunde-Eies,' 
1845, 
tab. 
xi. 
fig. 
42B. 
This 
drawing 
is 
five 
times 
magnified, 
the 
embryo 
being 
twenty-five 
days 
old. 
The 
internal 
viscera 
have 
been 
omitted, 
and 
the 
uterine 
appendages 
in 
both 
drawings 
removed. 
I 
was 
directed 
to 
these 
figures 
by 
Prof. 
Huxley, 
from 
whose 
work, 
'Man's 
Place 
in 
Nature,' 
the 
idea 
of 
giving 
them 
was 
taken. 
Haeckel 
has 
also 
given 
analogous 
drawings 
in 
his 
'Schopfungsgeschichte.') 
After 
the 
foregoing 
statements 
made 
by 
such 
high 
authorities, 
it 
would 
be 
superfluous 
on 
my 
part 
to 
give 
a 
number 
of 
borrowed 
details, 
shewing 
that 
the 
embryo 
of 
man 
closely 
resembles 
that 
of 
other 
mammals. 
It 
may, 
however, 
be 
added, 
that 
the 
human 
embryo 
likewise 
resembles 
certain 
low 
forms 
when 
adult 
in 
various 
points 
of 
structure. 
For 
instance, 
the 
heart 
at 
first 
exists 
as 
a 
simple 
pulsating 
vessel; 
the 
excreta 
are 
voided 
through 
a 
cloacal 
passage; 
and 
the 
os 
coccyx 
projects 
like 
a 
true 
tail, 
"extending 
considerably 
beyond 
the 
rudimentary 
legs." 
(16. 
Prof. 
Wyman 
in 
'Proceedings 
of 
the 
American 
Academy 
of 
Sciences,' 
vol. 
iv. 
1860, 
p. 
17.) 
In 
the 
embryos 
of 
all 
air-breathing 
vertebrates, 
certain 
glands, 
called 
the 
corpora 
Wolffiana, 
correspond 
with, 
and 
act 
like 
the 
kidneys 
of 
mature 
fishes. 
(17. 
Owen, 
'Anatomy 
of 
Vertebrates,' 
vol. 
i. 
p. 
533.) 
Even 
at 
a 
later 
embryonic 
period, 
some 
striking 
resemblances 
between 
man 
and 
the 
lower 
animals 
may 
be 
observed. 
Bischoff 
says 
that 
"the 
convolutions 
of 
the 
brain 
in 
a 
human 
foetus 
at 
the 
end 
of 
the 
seventh 
month 
reach 
about 
the 
same 
stage 
of 
development 
as 
in 
a 
baboon 
when 
adult." 
(18. 
'Die 
Grosshirnwindungen 
des 
Menschen,' 
1868, 


s. 
95.) 
The 
great 
toe, 
as 
Professor 
Owen 
remarks 
(19. 
'Anatomy 
of 
Vertebrates,' 
vol. 
ii. 
p. 
553.), 
"which 
forms 
the 
fulcrum 
when 
standing 
or 
walking, 
is 
perhaps 
the 
most 
characteristic 
peculiarity 
in 
the 
human 
structure;" 
but 
in 
an 
embryo, 
about 
an 
inch 
in 
length, 
Prof. 
Wyman 
(20. 
'Proc. 
Soc. 
Nat. 
Hist.' 
Boston, 
1863, 
vol. 
ix. 
p. 
185.) 
found 
"that 
the 
great 
toe 
was 

shorter 
than 
the 
others; 
and, 
instead 
of 
being 
parallel 
to 
them, 
projected 
at 
an 
angle 
from 
the 
side 
of 
the 
foot, 
thus 
corresponding 
with 
the 
permanent 
condition 
of 
this 
part 
in 
the 
quadrumana." 
I 
will 
conclude 
with 
a 
quotation 
from 
Huxley 
(21. 
'Man's 
Place 
in 
Nature,' 
p. 
65.) 
who 
after 
asking, 
does 
man 
originate 
in 
a 
different 
way 
from 
a 
dog, 
bird, 
frog 
or 
fish? 
says, 
"the 
reply 
is 
not 
doubtful 
for 
a 
moment; 
without 
question, 
the 
mode 
of 
origin, 
and 
the 
early 
stages 
of 
the 
development 
of 
man, 
are 
identical 
with 
those 
of 
the 
animals 
immediately 
below 
him 
in 
the 
scale: 
without 
a 
doubt 
in 
these 
respects, 
he 
is 
far 
nearer 
to 
apes 
than 
the 
apes 
are 
to 
the 
dog." 


RUDIMENTS. 


This 
subject, 
though 
not 
intrinsically 
more 
important 
than 
the 
two 
last, 
will 
for 
several 
reasons 
be 
treated 
here 
more 
fully. 
(22. 
I 
had 
written 
a 
rough 
copy 
of 
this 
chapter 
before 
reading 
a 
valuable 
paper, 
"Caratteri 
rudimentali 
in 
ordine 
all' 
origine 
dell' 
uomo" 
('Annuario 
della 
Soc. 
d. 
Naturalisti,' 
Modena, 
1867, 
p. 
81), 
by 
G. 
Canestrini, 
to 
which 
paper 
I 
am 
considerably 
indebted. 
Haeckel 
has 
given 
admirable 
discussions 
on 
this 
whole 
subject, 
under 
the 
title 
of 
Dysteleology, 
in 
his 
'Generelle 
Morphologie' 
and 
'Schopfungsgeschichte.') 
Not 
one 
of 
the 
higher 
animals 
can 
be 
named 
which 
does 
not 
bear 
some 
part 
in 
a 
rudimentary 
condition; 
and 
man 
forms 
no 
exception 
to 
the 
rule. 
Rudimentary 
organs 
must 
be 
distinguished 
from 
those 
that 
are 
nascent; 
though 
in 
some 
cases 
the 
distinction 
is 
not 
easy. 
The 
former 
are 
either 
absolutely 
useless, 
such 
as 
the 
mammae 
of 
male 
quadrupeds, 
or 
the 
incisor 
teeth 
of 
ruminants 
which 
never 
cut 
through 
the 
gums; 
or 
they 
are 
of 
such 
slight 
service 
to 
their 
present 
possessors, 
that 
we 
can 
hardly 
suppose 
that 
they 
were 
developed 
under 
the 
conditions 
which 
now 
exist. 
Organs 
in 
this 
latter 
state 
are 
not 
strictly 
rudimentary, 
but 
they 
are 
tending 
in 
this 
direction. 
Nascent 
organs, 
on 
the 
other 
hand, 
though 
not 
fully 
developed, 
are 
of 
high 
service 
to 
their 
possessors, 
and 
are 
capable 
of 
further 
development. 
Rudimentary 
organs 
are 
eminently 
variable; 
and 
this 
is 
partly 
intelligible, 
as 
they 
are 
useless, 
or 
nearly 
useless, 
and 
consequently 
are 
no 
longer 
subjected 
to 
natural 
selection. 
They 
often 
become 
wholly 
suppressed. 
When 
this 
occurs, 
they 
are 
nevertheless 
liable 
to 
occasional 
reappearance 
through 
reversion— 
a 
circumstance 
well 
worthy 
of 
attention. 


The 
chief 
agents 
in 
causing 
organs 
to 
become 
rudimentary 
seem 
to 
have 
been 
disuse 
at 
that 
period 
of 
life 
when 
the 
organ 
is 
chiefly 
used 
(and 
this 
is 



generally 
during 
maturity), 
and 
also 
inheritance 
at 
a 
corresponding 
period 
of 
life. 
The 
term 
"disuse" 
does 
not 
relate 
merely 
to 
the 
lessened 
action 
of 
muscles, 
but 
includes 
a 
diminished 
flow 
of 
blood 
to 
a 
part 
or 
organ, 
from 
being 
subjected 
to 
fewer 
alternations 
of 
pressure, 
or 
from 
becoming 
in 
any 
way 
less 
habitually 
active. 
Rudiments, 
however, 
may 
occur 
in 
one 
sex 
of 
those 
parts 
which 
are 
normally 
present 
in 
the 
other 
sex; 
and 
such 
rudiments, 
as 
we 
shall 
hereafter 
see, 
have 
often 
originated 
in 
a 
way 
distinct 
from 
those 
here 
referred 
to. 
In 
some 
cases, 
organs 
have 
been 
reduced 
by 
means 
of 
natural 
selection, 
from 
having 
become 
injurious 
to 
the 
species 
under 
changed 
habits 
of 
life. 
The 
process 
of 
reduction 
is 
probably 
often 
aided 
through 
the 
two 
principles 
of 
compensation 
and 
economy 
of 
growth; 
but 
the 
later 
stages 
of 
reduction, 
after 
disuse 
has 
done 
all 
that 
can 
fairly 
be 
attributed 
to 
it, 
and 
when 
the 
saving 
to 
be 
effected 
by 
the 
economy 
of 
growth 
would 
be 
very 
small 
(23. 
Some 
good 
criticisms 
on 
this 
subject 
have 
been 
given 
by 
Messrs. 
Murie 
and 
Mivart, 
in 
'Transact. 
Zoological 
Society,' 
1869, 
vol. 
vii. 
p. 
92.), 
are 
difficult 
to 
understand. 
The 
final 
and 
complete 
suppression 
of 
a 
part, 
already 
useless 
and 
much 
reduced 
in 
size, 
in 
which 
case 
neither 
compensation 
nor 
economy 
can 
come 
into 
play, 
is 
perhaps 
intelligible 
by 
the 
aid 
of 
the 
hypothesis 
of 
pangenesis. 
But 
as 
the 
whole 
subject 
of 
rudimentary 
organs 
has 
been 
discussed 
and 
illustrated 
in 
my 
former 
works 
(24. 
'Variation 
of 
Animals 
and 
Plants 
under 
Domestication,' 
vol. 
ii 
pp. 
317 
and 
397. 
See 
also 
'Origin 
of 
Species,' 
5th 
Edition 
p. 
535.), 
I 
need 
here 
say 
no 
more 
on 
this 
head. 


Rudiments 
of 
various 
muscles 
have 
been 
observed 
in 
many 
parts 
of 
the 
human 
body 
(25. 
For 
instance, 
M. 
Richard 
('Annales 
des 
Sciences 
Nat.,' 
3rd 
series, 
Zoolog. 
1852, 
tom. 
xviii. 
p. 
13) 
describes 
and 
figures 
rudiments 
of 
what 
he 
calls 
the 
"muscle 
pedieux 
de 
la 
main," 
which 
he 
says 
is 
sometimes 
"infiniment 
petit." 
Another 
muscle, 
called 
"le 
tibial 
posterieur," 
is 
generally 
quite 
absent 
in 
the 
hand, 
but 
appears 
from 
time 
to 
time 
in 
a 
more 
or 
less 
rudimentary 
condition.); 
and 
not 
a 
few 
muscles, 
which 
are 
regularly 
present 
in 
some 
of 
the 
lower 
animals 
can 
occasionally 
be 
detected 
in 
man 
in 
a 
greatly 
reduced 
condition. 
Every 
one 
must 
have 
noticed 
the 
power 
which 
many 
animals, 
especially 
horses, 
possess 
of 
moving 
or 
twitching 
their 
skin; 
and 
this 
is 
effected 
by 
the 
panniculus 
carnosus. 
Remnants 
of 
this 
muscle 
in 
an 
efficient 
state 
are 
found 
in 
various 
parts 
of 
our 
bodies; 
for 
instance, 
the 
muscle 
on 
the 
forehead, 
by 
which 
the 
eyebrows 
are 
raised. 
The 
platysma 
myoides, 
which 
is 
well 
developed 
on 
the 
neck, 
belongs 
to 
this 
system. 
Prof. 
Turner, 
of 
Edinburgh, 
has 
occasionally 
detected, 
as 
he 
informs 
me, 
muscular 



fasciculi 
in 
five 
different 
situations, 
namely 
in 
the 
axillae, 
near 
the 
scapulae, 
etc., 
all 
of 
which 
must 
be 
referred 
to 
the 
system 
of 
the 
panniculus. 
He 
has 
also 
shewn 
(26. 
Prof. 
W. 
Turner, 
'Proceedings 
of 
the 
Royal 
Society 
of 
Edinburgh,' 
1866-67, 
p. 
65.) 
that 
the 
musculus 
sternalis 
or 
sternalis 
brutorum, 
which 
is 
not 
an 
extension 
of 
the 
rectus 
abdominalis, 
but 
is 
closely 
allied 
to 
the 
panniculus, 
occurred 
in 
the 
proportion 
of 
about 
three 
per 
cent. 
in 
upwards 
of 
600 
bodies: 
he 
adds, 
that 
this 
muscle 
affords 
"an 
excellent 
illustration 
of 
the 
statement 
that 
occasional 
and 
rudimentary 
structures 
are 
especially 
liable 
to 
variation 
in 
arrangement." 


Some 
few 
persons 
have 
the 
power 
of 
contracting 
the 
superficial 
muscles 
on 
their 
scalps; 
and 
these 
muscles 
are 
in 
a 
variable 
and 
partially 
rudimentary 
condition. 
M. 
A. 
de 
Candolle 
has 
communicated 
to 
me 
a 
curious 
instance 
of 
the 
long-continued 
persistence 
or 
inheritance 
of 
this 
power, 
as 
well 
as 
of 
its 
unusual 
development. 
He 
knows 
a 
family, 
in 
which 
one 
member, 
the 
present 
head 
of 
the 
family, 
could, 
when 
a 
youth, 
pitch 
several 
heavy 
books 
from 
his 
head 
by 
the 
movement 
of 
the 
scalp 
alone; 
and 
he 
won 
wagers 
by 
performing 
this 
feat. 
His 
father, 
uncle, 
grandfather, 
and 
his 
three 
children 
possess 
the 
same 
power 
to 
the 
same 
unusual 
degree. 
This 
family 
became 
divided 
eight 
generations 
ago 
into 
two 
branches; 
so 
that 
the 
head 
of 
the 
above-mentioned 
branch 
is 
cousin 
in 
the 
seventh 
degree 
to 
the 
head 
of 
the 
other 
branch. 
This 
distant 
cousin 
resides 
in 
another 
part 
of 
France; 
and 
on 
being 
asked 
whether 
he 
possessed 
the 
same 
faculty, 
immediately 
exhibited 
his 
power. 
This 
case 
offers 
a 
good 
illustration 
how 
persistent 
may 
be 
the 
transmission 
of 
an 
absolutely 
useless 
faculty, 
probably 
derived 
from 
our 
remote 
semi-human 
progenitors; 
since 
many 
monkeys 
have, 
and 
frequently 
use 
the 
power, 
of 
largely 
moving 
their 
scalps 
up 
and 
down. 
(27. 
See 
my 
'Expression 
of 
the 
Emotions 
in 
Man 
and 
Animals,' 
1872, 
p. 
144.) 


The 
extrinsic 
muscles 
which 
serve 
to 
move 
the 
external 
ear, 
and 
the 
intrinsic 
muscles 
which 
move 
the 
different 
parts, 
are 
in 
a 
rudimentary 
condition 
in 
man, 
and 
they 
all 
belong 
to 
the 
system 
of 
the 
panniculus; 
they 
are 
also 
variable 
in 
development, 
or 
at 
least 
in 
function. 
I 
have 
seen 
one 
man 
who 
could 
draw 
the 
whole 
ear 
forwards; 
other 
men 
can 
draw 
it 
upwards; 
another 
who 
could 
draw 
it 
backwards 
(28. 
Canestrini 
quotes 
Hyrtl. 
('Annuario 
della 
Soc. 
dei 
Naturalisti,' 
Modena, 
1867, 
p. 
97) 
to 
the 
same 
effect.); 
and 
from 
what 
one 
of 
these 
persons 
told 
me, 
it 
is 
probable 
that 
most 
of 
us, 
by 
often 
touching 
our 
ears, 
and 
thus 
directing 
our 
attention 
towards 
them, 
could 
recover 
some 
power 
of 
movement 
by 
repeated 
trials. 
The 
power 



of 
erecting 
and 
directing 
the 
shell 
of 
the 
ears 
to 
the 
various 
points 
of 
the 
compass, 
is 
no 
doubt 
of 
the 
highest 
service 
to 
many 
animals, 
as 
they 
thus 
perceive 
the 
direction 
of 
danger; 
but 
I 
have 
never 
heard, 
on 
sufficient 
evidence, 
of 
a 
man 
who 
possessed 
this 
power, 
the 
one 
which 
might 
be 
of 
use 
to 
him. 
The 
whole 
external 
shell 
may 
be 
considered 
a 
rudiment, 
together 
with 
the 
various 
folds 
and 
prominences 
(helix 
and 
anti-helix, 
tragus 
and 
antitragus, 
etc.) 
which 
in 
the 
lower 
animals 
strengthen 
and 
support 
the 
ear 
when 
erect, 
without 
adding 
much 
to 
its 
weight. 
Some 
authors, 
however, 
suppose 
that 
the 
cartilage 
of 
the 
shell 
serves 
to 
transmit 
vibrations 
to 
the 
acoustic 
nerve; 
but 
Mr. 
Toynbee 
(29. 
'The 
Diseases 
of 
the 
Ear,' 
by 
J. 
Toynbee, 
F.R.S., 
1860, 
p. 
12. 
A 
distinguished 
physiologist, 
Prof. 
Preyer, 
informs 
me 
that 
he 
had 
lately 
been 
experimenting 
on 
the 
function 
of 
the 
shell 
of 
the 
ear, 
and 
has 
come 
to 
nearly 
the 
same 
conclusion 
as 
that 
given 
here.), 
after 
collecting 
all 
the 
known 
evidence 
on 
this 
head, 
concludes 
that 
the 
external 
shell 
is 
of 
no 
distinct 
use. 
The 
ears 
of 
the 
chimpanzee 
and 
orang 
are 
curiously 
like 
those 
of 
man, 
and 
the 
proper 
muscles 
are 
likewise 
but 
very 
slightly 
developed. 
(30. 
Prof. 
A. 
Macalister, 
'Annals 
and 
Magazine 
of 
Natural 
History,' 
vol. 
vii. 
1871, 


p. 
342.) 
I 
am 
also 
assured 
by 
the 
keepers 
in 
the 
Zoological 
Gardens 
that 
these 
animals 
never 
move 
or 
erect 
their 
ears; 
so 
that 
they 
are 
in 
an 
equally 
rudimentary 
condition 
with 
those 
of 
man, 
as 
far 
as 
function 
is 
concerned. 
Why 
these 
animals, 
as 
well 
as 
the 
progenitors 
of 
man, 
should 
have 
lost 
the 
power 
of 
erecting 
their 
ears, 
we 
cannot 
say. 
It 
may 
be, 
though 
I 
am 
not 
satisfied 
with 
this 
view, 
that 
owing 
to 
their 
arboreal 
habits 
and 
great 
strength 
they 
were 
but 
little 
exposed 
to 
danger, 
and 
so 
during 
a 
lengthened 
period 
moved 
their 
ears 
but 
little, 
and 
thus 
gradually 
lost 
the 
power 
of 
moving 
them. 
This 
would 
be 
a 
parallel 
case 
with 
that 
of 
those 
large 
and 
heavy 
birds, 
which, 
from 
ihabiting 
oceanic 
islands, 
have 
not 
been 
exposed 
to 
the 
attacks 
of 
beasts 
of 
prey, 
and 
have 
consequently 
lost 
the 
power 
of 
using 
their 
wings 
for 
flight. 
The 
inability 
to 
move 
the 
ears 
in 
man 
and 
several 
apes 
is, 
however, 
partly 
compensated 
by 
the 
freedom 
with 
which 
they 
can 
move 
the 
head 
in 
a 
horizontal 
plane, 
so 
as 
to 
catch 
sounds 
from 
all 
directions. 
It 
has 
been 
asserted 
that 
the 
ear 
of 
man 
alone 
possesses 
a 
lobule; 
but 
"a 
rudiment 
of 
it 
is 
found 
in 
the 
gorilla" 
(31. 
Mr. 
St. 
George 
Mivart, 
'Elementary 
Anatomy,' 
1873, 
p. 
396.); 
and, 
as 
I 
hear 
from 
Prof. 
Preyer, 
it 
is 
not 
rarely 
absent 
in 
the 
negro. 
[Fig. 
2. 
Human 
Ear, 
modelled 
and 
drawn 
by 
Mr. 
Woolner. 
The 
projecting 
point 
is 
labelled 
a.] 



The 
celebrated 
sculptor, 
Mr. 
Woolner, 
informs 
me 
of 
one 
little 
peculiarity 
in 
the 
external 
ear, 
which 
he 
has 
often 
observed 
both 
in 
men 
and 
women, 
and 
of 
which 
he 
perceived 
the 
full 
significance. 
His 
attention 
was 
first 
called 
to 
the 
subject 
whilst 
at 
work 
on 
his 
figure 
of 
Puck, 
to 
which 
he 
had 
given 
pointed 
ears. 
He 
was 
thus 
led 
to 
examine 
the 
ears 
of 
various 
monkeys, 
and 
subsequently 
more 
carefully 
those 
of 
man. 
The 
peculiarity 
consists 
in 
a 
little 
blunt 
point, 
projecting 
from 
the 
inwardly 
folded 
margin, 
or 
helix. 
When 
present, 
it 
is 
developed 
at 
birth, 
and, 
according 
to 
Prof. 
Ludwig 
Meyer, 
more 
frequently 
in 
man 
than 
in 
woman. 
Mr. 
Woolner 
made 
an 
exact 
model 
of 
one 
such 
case, 
and 
sent 
me 
the 
accompanying 
drawing. 
(Fig. 
2). 
These 
points 
not 
only 
project 
inwards 
towards 
the 
centre 
of 
the 
ear, 
but 
often 
a 
little 
outwards 
from 
its 
plane, 
so 
as 
to 
be 
visible 
when 
the 
head 
is 
viewed 
from 
directly 
in 
front 
or 
behind. 
They 
are 
variable 
in 
size, 
and 
somewhat 
in 
position, 
standing 
either 
a 
little 
higher 
or 
lower; 
and 
they 
sometimes 
occur 
on 
one 
ear 
and 
not 
on 
the 
other. 
They 
are 
not 
confined 
to 
mankind, 
for 
I 
observed 
a 
case 
in 
one 
of 
the 
spider-monkeys 
(Ateles 
beelzebuth) 
in 
our 
Zoological 
Gardens; 
and 
Mr. 
E. 
Ray 
Lankester 
informs 
me 
of 
another 
case 
in 
a 
chimpanzee 
in 
the 
gardens 
at 
Hamburg. 
The 
helix 
obviously 
consists 
of 
the 
extreme 
margin 
of 
the 
ear 
folded 
inwards; 
and 
this 
folding 
appears 
to 
be 
in 
some 
manner 
connected 
with 
the 
whole 
external 
ear 
being 
permanently 
pressed 
backwards. 
In 
many 
monkeys, 
which 
do 
not 
stand 
high 
in 
the 
order, 
as 
baboons 
and 
some 
species 
of 
macacus 
(32. 
See 
also 
some 
remarks, 
and 
the 
drawings 
of 
the 
ears 
of 
the 
Lemuroidea, 
in 
Messrs. 
Murie 
and 
Mivart's 
excellent 
paper 
in 
'Transactions 
of 
the 
Zoological 
Society,' 
vol. 
vii. 
1869, 
pp. 
6 
and 
90.), 
the 
upper 
portion 
of 
the 
ear 
is 
slightly 
pointed, 
and 
the 
margin 
is 
not 
at 
all 
folded 
inwards; 
but 
if 
the 
margin 
were 
to 
be 
thus 
folded, 
a 
slight 
point 
would 
necessarily 
project 
inwards 
towards 
the 
centre, 
and 
probably 
a 
little 
outwards 
from 
the 
plane 
of 
the 
ear; 
and 
this 
I 
believe 
to 
be 
their 
origin 
in 
many 
cases. 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
Prof. 
L. 
Meyer, 
in 
an 
able 
paper 
recently 
published 
(33. 
'Uber 
das 
Darwin'sche 
Spitzohr,' 
Archiv 
fur 
Path. 
Anat. 
und 
Phys., 
1871, 
p. 
485.), 
maintains 
that 
the 
whole 
case 
is 
one 
of 
mere 
variability; 
and 
that 
the 
projections 
are 
not 
real 
ones, 
but 
are 
due 
to 
the 
internal 
cartilage 
on 
each 
side 
of 
the 
points 
not 
having 
been 
fully 
developed. 
I 
am 
quite 
ready 
to 
admit 
that 
this 
is 
the 
correct 
explanation 
in 
many 
instances, 
as 
in 
those 
figured 
by 
Prof. 
Meyer, 
in 
which 
there 
are 
several 
minute 
points, 
or 
the 
whole 
margin 
is 
sinuous. 
I 
have 
myself 
seen, 
through 
the 
kindness 
of 
Dr. 
L. 
Down, 
the 
ear 
of 
a 
microcephalous 
idiot, 
on 
which 
there 
is 
a 
projection 
on 
the 
outside 
of 
the 



helix, 
and 
not 
on 
the 
inward 
folded 
edge, 
so 
that 
this 
point 
can 
have 
no 
relation 
to 
a 
former 
apex 
of 
the 
ear. 
Nevertheless 
in 
some 
cases, 
my 
original 
view, 
that 
the 
points 
are 
vestiges 
of 
the 
tips 
of 
formerly 
erect 
and 
pointed 
ears, 
still 
seems 
to 
me 
probable. 
I 
think 
so 
from 
the 
frequency 
of 
their 
occurrence, 
and 
from 
the 
general 
correspondence 
in 
position 
with 
that 
of 
the 
tip 
of 
a 
pointed 
ear. 
In 
one 
case, 
of 
which 
a 
photograph 
has 
been 
sent 
me, 
the 
projection 
is 
so 
large, 
that 
supposing, 
in 
accordance 
with 
Prof. 
Meyer's 
view, 
the 
ear 
to 
be 
made 
perfect 
by 
the 
equal 
development 
of 
the 
cartilage 
throughout 
the 
whole 
extent 
of 
the 
margin, 
it 
would 
have 
covered 
fully 
one-
third 
of 
the 
whole 
ear. 
Two 
cases 
have 
been 
communicated 
to 
me, 
one 
in 
North 
America, 
and 
the 
other 
in 
England, 
in 
which 
the 
upper 
margin 
is 
not 
at 
all 
folded 
inwards, 
but 
is 
pointed, 
so 
that 
it 
closely 
resembles 
the 
pointed 
ear 
of 
an 
ordinary 
quadruped 
in 
outline. 
In 
one 
of 
these 
cases, 
which 
was 
that 
of 
a 
young 
child, 
the 
father 
compared 
the 
ear 
with 
the 
drawing 
which 
I 
have 
given 
(34. 
'The 
Expression 
of 
the 
Emotions,' 
p. 
136.) 
of 
the 
ear 
of 
a 
monkey, 
the 
Cynopithecus 
niger, 
and 
says 
that 
their 
outlines 
are 
closely 
similar. 
If, 
in 
these 
two 
cases, 
the 
margin 
had 
been 
folded 
inwards 
in 
the 
normal 
manner, 
an 
inward 
projection 
must 
have 
been 
formed. 
I 
may 
add 
that 
in 
two 
other 
cases 
the 
outline 
still 
remains 
somewhat 
pointed, 
although 
the 
margin 
of 
the 
upper 
part 
of 
the 
ear 
is 
normally 
folded 
inwards—in 
one 
of 
them, 
however, 
very 
narrowly. 
[Fig.3. 
Foetus 
of 
an 
Orang(?). 
Exact 
copy 
of 
a 
photograph, 
shewing 
the 
form 
of 
the 
ear 
at 
this 
early 
age.] 
The 
following 
woodcut 
(No. 
3) 
is 
an 
accurate 
copy 
of 
a 
photograph 
of 
the 
foetus 
of 
an 
orang 
(kindly 
sent 
me 
by 
Dr. 
Nitsche), 
in 
which 
it 
may 
be 
seen 
how 
different 
the 
pointed 
outline 
of 
the 
ear 
is 
at 
this 
period 
from 
its 
adult 
condition, 
when 
it 
bears 
a 
close 
general 
resemblance 
to 
that 
of 
man. 
It 
is 
evident 
that 
the 
folding 
over 
of 
the 
tip 
of 
such 
an 
ear, 
unless 
it 
changed 
greatly 
during 
its 
further 
development, 
would 
give 
rise 
to 
a 
point 
projecting 
inwards. 
On 
the 
whole, 
it 
still 
seems 
to 
me 
probable 
that 
the 
points 
in 
question 
are 
in 
some 
cases, 
both 
in 
man 
and 
apes, 
vestiges 
of 
a 
former 
condition. 


The 
nictitating 
membrane, 
or 
third 
eyelid, 
with 
its 
accessory 
muscles 
and 
other 
structures, 
is 
especially 
well 
developed 
in 
birds, 
and 
is 
of 
much 
functional 
importance 
to 
them, 
as 
it 
can 
be 
rapidly 
drawn 
across 
the 
whole 
eye-ball. 
It 
is 
found 
in 
some 
reptiles 
and 
amphibians, 
and 
in 
certain 
fishes, 
as 
in 
sharks. 
It 
is 
fairly 
well 
developed 
in 
the 
two 
lower 
divisions 
of 
the 
mammalian 
series, 
namely, 
in 
the 
monotremata 
and 
marsupials, 
and 
in 
some 
few 
of 
the 
higher 
mammals, 
as 
in 
the 
walrus. 
But 
in 
man, 
the 
quadrumana, 



and 
most 
other 
mammals, 
it 
exists, 
as 
is 
admitted 
by 
all 
anatomists, 
as 
a 
mere 
rudiment, 
called 
the 
semilunar 
fold. 
(35. 
Muller's 
'Elements 
of 
Physiology,' 
Eng. 
translat. 
1842, 
vol. 
ii. 
p. 
1117. 
Owen, 
'Anatomy 
of 
Vertebrates,' 
vol. 
iii. 


p. 
260; 
ibid. 
on 
the 
Walrus, 
'Proceedings 
of 
the 
Zoological 
Society,' 
November 
8, 
1854. 
See 
also 
R. 
Knox, 
'Great 
Artists 
and 
Anatomists,' 
p. 
106. 
This 
rudiment 
apparently 
is 
somewhat 
larger 
in 
Negroes 
and 
Australians 
than 
in 
Europeans, 
see 
Carl 
Vogt, 
'Lectures 
on 
Man,' 
Eng. 
translat. 
p. 
129.) 
The 
sense 
of 
smell 
is 
of 
the 
highest 
importance 
to 
the 
greater 
number 
of 
mammals—to 
some, 
as 
the 
ruminants, 
in 
warning 
them 
of 
danger; 
to 
others, 
as 
the 
Carnivora, 
in 
finding 
their 
prey; 
to 
others, 
again, 
as 
the 
wild 
boar, 
for 
both 
purposes 
combined. 
But 
the 
sense 
of 
smell 
is 
of 
extremely 
slight 
service, 
if 
any, 
even 
to 
the 
dark 
coloured 
races 
of 
men, 
in 
whom 
it 
is 
much 
more 
highly 
developed 
than 
in 
the 
white 
and 
civilised 
races. 
(36. 
The 
account 
given 
by 
Humboldt 
of 
the 
power 
of 
smell 
possessed 
by 
the 
natives 
of 
South 
America 
is 
well 
known, 
and 
has 
been 
confirmed 
by 
others. 
M. 
Houzeau 
('Etudes 
sur 
les 
Facultes 
Mentales,' 
etc., 
tom. 
i. 
1872, 
p. 
91) 
asserts 
that 
he 
repeatedly 
made 
experiments, 
and 
proved 
that 
Negroes 
and 
Indians 
could 
recognise 
persons 
in 
the 
dark 
by 
their 
odour. 
Dr. 
W. 
Ogle 
has 
made 
some 
curious 
observations 
on 
the 
connection 
between 
the 
power 
of 
smell 
and 
the 
colouring 
matter 
of 
the 
mucous 
membrane 
of 
the 
olfactory 
region 
as 
well 
as 
of 
the 
skin 
of 
the 
body. 
I 
have, 
therefore, 
spoken 
in 
the 
text 
of 
the 
darkcoloured 
races 
having 
a 
finer 
sense 
of 
smell 
than 
the 
white 
races. 
See 
his 
paper, 
'Medico-Chirurgical 
Transactions,' 
London, 
vol. 
liii. 
1870, 
p. 
276.) 
Nevertheless 
it 
does 
not 
warn 
them 
of 
danger, 
nor 
guide 
them 
to 
their 
food; 
nor 
does 
it 
prevent 
the 
Esquimaux 
from 
sleeping 
in 
the 
most 
fetid 
atmosphere, 
nor 
many 
savages 
from 
eating 
half-putrid 
meat. 
In 
Europeans 
the 
power 
differs 
greatly 
in 
different 
individuals, 
as 
I 
am 
assured 
by 
an 
eminent 
naturalist 
who 
possesses 
this 
sense 
highly 
developed, 
and 
who 
has 
attended 
to 
the 
subject. 
Those 
who 
believe 
in 
the 
principle 
of 
gradual 
evolution, 
will 
not 
readily 
admit 
that 
the 
sense 
of 
smell 
in 
its 
present 
state 
was 
originally 
acquired 
by 
man, 
as 
he 
now 
exists. 
He 
inherits 
the 
power 
in 
an 
enfeebled 
and 
so 
far 
rudimentary 
condition, 
from 
some 
early 
progenitor, 
to 
whom 
it 
was 
highly 
serviceable, 
and 
by 
whom 
it 
was 
continually 
used. 
In 
those 
animals 
which 
have 
this 
sense 
highly 
developed, 
such 
as 
dogs 
and 
horses, 
the 
recollection 
of 
persons 
and 
of 
places 
is 
strongly 
associated 
with 
their 
odour; 
and 
we 
can 
thus 
perhaps 
understand 
how 
it 
is, 
as 
Dr. 
Maudsley 
has 
truly 
remarked 
(37. 
'The 
Physiology 
and 
Pathology 
of 
Mind,' 
2nd 
ed. 
1868, 
p. 



134.), 
that 
the 
sense 
of 
smell 
in 
man 
"is 
singularly 
effective 
in 
recalling 
vividly 
the 
ideas 
and 
images 
of 
forgotten 
scenes 
and 
places." 


Man 
differs 
conspicuously 
from 
all 
the 
other 
primates 
in 
being 
almost 
naked. 
But 
a 
few 
short 
straggling 
hairs 
are 
found 
over 
the 
greater 
part 
of 
the 
body 
in 
the 
man, 
and 
fine 
down 
on 
that 
of 
the 
woman. 
The 
different 
races 
differ 
much 
in 
hairiness; 
and 
in 
the 
individuals 
of 
the 
same 
race 
the 
hairs 
are 
highly 
variable, 
not 
only 
in 
abundance, 
but 
likewise 
in 
position: 
thus 
in 
some 
Europeans 
the 
shoulders 
are 
quite 
naked, 
whilst 
in 
others 
they 
bear 
thick 
tufts 
of 
hair. 
(38. 
Eschricht, 
Uber 
die 
Richtung 
der 
Haare 
am 
menschlichen 
Korper, 
Muller's 
'Archiv 
fur 
Anat. 
und 
Phys.' 
1837, 
s. 
47. 
I 
shall 
often 
have 
to 
refer 
to 
this 
very 
curious 
paper.) 
There 
can 
be 
little 
doubt 
that 
the 
hairs 
thus 
scattered 
over 
the 
body 
are 
the 
rudiments 
of 
the 
uniform 
hairy 
coat 
of 
the 
lower 
animals. 
This 
view 
is 
rendered 
all 
the 
more 
probable, 
as 
it 
is 
known 
that 
fine, 
short, 
and 
pale-coloured 
hairs 
on 
the 
limbs 
and 
other 
parts 
of 
the 
body, 
occasionally 
become 
developed 
into 
"thickset, 
long, 
and 
rather 
coarse 
dark 
hairs," 
when 
abnormally 
nourished 
near 
old-standing 
inflamed 
surfaces. 


(39. 
Paget, 
'Lectures 
on 
Surgical 
Pathology,' 
1853, 
vol. 
i. 
p. 
71.) 
I 
am 
informed 
by 
Sir 
James 
Paget 
that 
often 
several 
members 
of 
a 
family 
have 
a 
few 
hairs 
in 
their 
eyebrows 
much 
longer 
than 
the 
others; 
so 
that 
even 
this 
slight 
peculiarity 
seems 
to 
be 
inherited. 
These 
hairs, 
too, 
seem 
to 
have 
their 
representatives; 
for 
in 
the 
chimpanzee, 
and 
in 
certain 
species 
of 
Macacus, 
there 
are 
scattered 
hairs 
of 
considerable 
length 
rising 
from 
the 
naked 
skin 
above 
the 
eyes, 
and 
corresponding 
to 
our 
eyebrows; 
similar 
long 
hairs 
project 
from 
the 
hairy 
covering 
of 
the 
superciliary 
ridges 
in 
some 
baboons. 


The 
fine 
wool-like 
hair, 
or 
so-called 
lanugo, 
with 
which 
the 
human 
foetus 
during 
the 
sixth 
month 
is 
thickly 
covered, 
offers 
a 
more 
curious 
case. 
It 
is 
first 
developed, 
during 
the 
fifth 
month, 
on 
the 
eyebrows 
and 
face, 
and 
especially 
round 
the 
mouth, 
where 
it 
is 
much 
longer 
than 
that 
on 
the 
head. 
A 
moustache 
of 
this 
kind 
was 
observed 
by 
Eschricht 
(40. 
Eschricht, 
ibid. 
s. 
40, 
47.) 
on 
a 
female 
foetus; 
but 
this 
is 
not 
so 
surprising 
a 
circumstance 
as 
it 
may 
at 
first 
appear, 
for 
the 
two 
sexes 
generally 
resemble 
each 
other 
in 
all 
external 
characters 
during 
an 
early 
period 
of 
growth. 
The 
direction 
and 
arrangement 
of 
the 
hairs 
on 
all 
parts 
of 
the 
foetal 
body 
are 
the 
same 
as 
in 
the 
adult, 
but 
are 
subject 
to 
much 
variability. 
The 
whole 
surface, 
including 
even 
the 
forehead 
and 
ears, 
is 
thus 
thickly 
clothed; 
but 
it 
is 
a 
significant 
fact 
that 
the 
palms 
of 
the 
hands 
and 
the 
soles 
of 
the 
feet 
are 
quite 
naked, 
like 
the 
inferior 
surfaces 
of 



all 
four 
extremities 
in 
most 
of 
the 
lower 
animals. 
As 
this 
can 
hardly 
be 
an 
accidental 
coincidence, 
the 
woolly 
covering 
of 
the 
foetus 
probably 
represents 
the 
first 
permanent 
coat 
of 
hair 
in 
those 
mammals 
which 
are 
born 
hairy. 
Three 
or 
four 
cases 
have 
been 
recorded 
of 
persons 
born 
with 
their 
whole 
bodies 
and 
faces 
thickly 
covered 
with 
fine 
long 
hairs; 
and 
this 
strange 
condition 
is 
strongly 
inherited, 
and 
is 
correlated 
with 
an 
abnormal 
condition 
of 
the 
teeth. 
(41. 
See 
my 
'Variation 
of 
Animals 
and 
Plants 
under 
Domestication,' 
vol. 
ii. 
p. 
327. 
Prof. 
Alex. 
Brandt 
has 
recently 
sent 
me 
an 
additional 
case 
of 
a 
father 
and 
son, 
born 
in 
Russia, 
with 
these 
peculiarities. 
I 
have 
received 
drawings 
of 
both 
from 
Paris.) 
Prof. 
Alex. 
Brandt 
informs 
me 
that 
he 
has 
compared 
the 
hair 
from 
the 
face 
of 
a 
man 
thus 
characterised, 
aged 
thirty-five, 
with 
the 
lanugo 
of 
a 
foetus, 
and 
finds 
it 
quite 
similar 
in 
texture; 
therefore, 
as 
he 
remarks, 
the 
case 
may 
be 
attributed 
to 
an 
arrest 
of 
development 
in 
the 
hair, 
together 
with 
its 
continued 
growth. 
Many 
delicate 
children, 
as 
I 
have 
been 
assured 
by 
a 
surgeon 
to 
a 
hospital 
for 
children, 
have 
their 
backs 
covered 
by 
rather 
long 
silky 
hairs; 
and 
such 
cases 
probably 
come 
under 
the 
same 
head. 


It 
appears 
as 
if 
the 
posterior 
molar 
or 
wisdom-teeth 
were 
tending 
to 
become 
rudimentary 
in 
the 
more 
civilised 
races 
of 
man. 
These 
teeth 
are 
rather 
smaller 
than 
the 
other 
molars, 
as 
is 
likewise 
the 
case 
with 
the 
corresponding 
teeth 
in 
the 
chimpanzee 
and 
orang; 
and 
they 
have 
only 
two 
separate 
fangs. 
They 
do 
not 
cut 
through 
the 
gums 
till 
about 
the 
seventeenth 
year, 
and 
I 
have 
been 
assured 
that 
they 
are 
much 
more 
liable 
to 
decay, 
and 
are 
earlier 
lost 
than 
the 
other 
teeth; 
but 
this 
is 
denied 
by 
some 
eminent 
dentists. 
They 
are 
also 
much 
more 
liable 
to 
vary, 
both 
in 
structure 
and 
in 
the 
period 
of 
their 
development, 
than 
the 
other 
teeth. 
(42. 
Dr. 
Webb, 
'Teeth 
in 
Man 
and 
the 
Anthropoid 
Apes,' 
as 
quoted 
by 
Dr. 
C. 
Carter 
Blake 
in 
Anthropological 
Review, 
July 
1867, 
p. 
299.) 
In 
the 
Melanian 
races, 
on 
the 
other 
hand, 
the 
wisdom-teeth 
are 
usually 
furnished 
with 
three 
separate 
fangs, 
and 
are 
generally 
sound; 
they 
also 
differ 
from 
the 
other 
molars 
in 
size, 
less 
than 
in 
the 
Caucasian 
races. 
(43. 
Owen, 
'Anatomy 
of 
Vertebrates,' 
vol. 
iii. 
pp. 
320, 
321, 
and 
325.) 
Prof. 
Schaaffhausen 
accounts 
for 
this 
difference 
between 
the 
races 
by 
"the 
posterior 
dental 
portion 
of 
the 
jaw 
being 
always 
shortened" 
in 
those 
that 
are 
civilised 
(44. 
'On 
the 
Primitive 
Form 
of 
the 
Skull,' 
Eng. 
translat., 
in 
'Anthropological 
Review,' 
Oct. 
1868, 
p. 
426), 
and 
this 
shortening 
may, 
I 
presume, 
be 
attributed 
to 
civilised 
men 
habitually 
feeding 
on 
soft, 
cooked 
food, 
and 
thus 
using 
their 
jaws 
less. 
I 
am 
informed 
by 
Mr. 
Brace 
that 
it 
is 



becoming 
quite 
a 
common 
practice 
in 
the 
United 
States 
to 
remove 
some 
of 
the 
molar 
teeth 
of 
children, 
as 
the 
jaw 
does 
not 
grow 
large 
enough 
for 
the 
perfect 
development 
of 
the 
normal 
number. 
(45. 
Prof. 
Montegazza 
writes 
to 
me 
from 
Florence, 
that 
he 
has 
lately 
been 
studying 
the 
last 
molar 
teeth 
in 
the 
different 
races 
of 
man, 
and 
has 
come 
to 
the 
same 
conclusion 
as 
that 
given 
in 
my 
text, 
viz., 
that 
in 
the 
higher 
or 
civilised 
races 
they 
are 
on 
the 
road 
towards 
atrophy 
or 
elimination.) 


With 
respect 
to 
the 
alimentary 
canal, 
I 
have 
met 
with 
an 
account 
of 
only 
a 
single 
rudiment, 
namely 
the 
vermiform 
appendage 
of 
the 
caecum. 
The 
caecum 
is 
a 
branch 
or 
diverticulum 
of 
the 
intestine, 
ending 
in 
a 
cul-de-sac, 
and 
is 
extremely 
long 
in 
many 
of 
the 
lower 
vegetable-feeding 
mammals. 
In 
the 
marsupial 
koala 
it 
is 
actually 
more 
than 
thrice 
as 
long 
as 
the 
whole 
body. 


(46. 
Owen, 
'Anatomy 
of 
Vertebrates,' 
vol. 
iii. 
pp. 
416, 
434, 
441.) 
It 
is 
sometimes 
produced 
into 
a 
long 
gradually-tapering 
point, 
and 
is 
sometimes 
constricted 
in 
parts. 
It 
appears 
as 
if, 
in 
consequence 
of 
changed 
diet 
or 
habits, 
the 
caecum 
had 
become 
much 
shortened 
in 
various 
animals, 
the 
vermiform 
appendage 
being 
left 
as 
a 
rudiment 
of 
the 
shortened 
part. 
That 
this 
appendage 
is 
a 
rudiment, 
we 
may 
infer 
from 
its 
small 
size, 
and 
from 
the 
evidence 
which 
Prof. 
Canestrini 
(47. 
'Annuario 
della 
Soc. 
d. 
Nat.' 
Modena, 
1867, 
p. 
94.) 
has 
collected 
of 
its 
variability 
in 
man. 
It 
is 
occasionally 
quite 
absent, 
or 
again 
is 
largely 
developed. 
The 
passage 
is 
sometimes 
completely 
closed 
for 
half 
or 
two-thirds 
of 
its 
length, 
with 
the 
terminal 
part 
consisting 
of 
a 
flattened 
solid 
expansion. 
In 
the 
orang 
this 
appendage 
is 
long 
and 
convoluted: 
in 
man 
it 
arises 
from 
the 
end 
of 
the 
short 
caecum, 
and 
is 
commonly 
from 
four 
to 
five 
inches 
in 
length, 
being 
only 
about 
the 
third 
of 
an 
inch 
in 
diameter. 
Not 
only 
is 
it 
useless, 
but 
it 
is 
sometimes 
the 
cause 
of 
death, 
of 
which 
fact 
I 
have 
lately 
heard 
two 
instances: 
this 
is 
due 
to 
small 
hard 
bodies, 
such 
as 
seeds, 
entering 
the 
passage, 
and 
causing 
inflammation. 
(48. 
M. 
C. 
Martins 
("De 
l'Unite 
Organique," 
in 
'Revue 
des 
Deux 
Mondes,' 
June 
15, 
1862, 
p. 
16) 
and 
Haeckel 
('Generelle 
Morphologie,' 
B. 
ii. 
s. 
278), 
have 
both 
remarked 
on 
the 
singular 
fact 
of 
this 
rudiment 
sometimes 
causing 
death.) 
In 
some 
of 
the 
lower 
Quadrumana, 
in 
the 
Lemuridae 
and 
Carnivora, 
as 
well 
as 
in 
many 
marsupials, 
there 
is 
a 
passage 
near 
the 
lower 
end 
of 
the 
humerus, 
called 
the 
supra-condyloid 
foramen, 
through 
which 
the 
great 
nerve 
of 
the 
fore 
limb 
and 
often 
the 
great 
artery 
pass. 
Now 
in 
the 
humerus 
of 
man, 
there 
is 
generally 
a 
trace 
of 
this 
passage, 
which 
is 
sometimes 
fairly 
well 
developed, 
being 
formed 
by 
a 
depending 
hook-like 
process 
of 
bone, 



completed 
by 
a 
band 
of 
ligament. 
Dr. 
Struthers 
(49. 
With 
respect 
to 
inheritance, 
see 
Dr. 
Struthers 
in 
the 
'Lancet,' 
Feb. 
15, 
1873, 
and 
another 
important 
paper, 
ibid. 
Jan. 
24, 
1863, 
p. 
83. 
Dr. 
Knox, 
as 
I 
am 
informed, 
was 
the 
first 
anatomist 
who 
drew 
attention 
to 
this 
peculiar 
structure 
in 
man; 
see 
his 
'Great 
Artists 
and 
Anatomists,' 
p. 
63. 
See 
also 
an 
important 
memoir 
on 
this 
process 
by 
Dr. 
Gruber, 
in 
the 
'Bulletin 
de 
l'Acad. 
Imp. 
de 
St. 
Petersbourg,' 
tom. 
xii. 
1867, 
p. 
448.), 
who 
has 
closely 
attended 
to 
the 
subject, 
has 
now 
shewn 
that 
this 
peculiarity 
is 
sometimes 
inherited, 
as 
it 
has 
occurred 
in 
a 
father, 
and 
in 
no 
less 
than 
four 
out 
of 
his 
seven 
children. 
When 
present, 
the 
great 
nerve 
invariably 
passes 
through 
it; 
and 
this 
clearly 
indicates 
that 
it 
is 
the 
homologue 
and 
rudiment 
of 
the 
supra-condyloid 
foramen 
of 
the 
lower 
animals. 
Prof. 
Turner 
estimates, 
as 
he 
informs 
me, 
that 
it 
occurs 
in 
about 
one 
per 
cent. 
of 
recent 
skeletons. 
But 
if 
the 
occasional 
development 
of 
this 
structure 
in 
man 
is, 
as 
seems 
probable, 
due 
to 
reversion, 
it 
is 
a 
return 
to 
a 
very 
ancient 
state 
of 
things, 
because 
in 
the 
higher 
Quadrumana 
it 
is 
absent. 


There 
is 
another 
foramen 
or 
perforation 
in 
the 
humerus, 
occasionally 
present 
in 
man, 
which 
may 
be 
called 
the 
inter-condyloid. 
This 
occurs, 
but 
not 
constantly, 
in 
various 
anthropoid 
and 
other 
apes 
(50. 
Mr. 
St. 
George 
Mivart, 
'Transactions 
Phil. 
Soc.' 
1867, 
p. 
310.), 
and 
likewise 
in 
many 
of 
the 
lower 
animals. 
It 
is 
remarkable 
that 
this 
perforation 
seems 
to 
have 
been 
present 
in 
man 
much 
more 
frequently 
during 
ancient 
times 
than 
recently. 
Mr. 
Busk 
(51. 
"On 
the 
Caves 
of 
Gibraltar," 
'Transactions 
of 
the 
International 
Congress 
of 
Prehistoric 
Archaeology,' 
Third 
Session, 
1869, 
p. 
159. 
Prof. 
Wyman 
has 
lately 
shewn 
(Fourth 
Annual 
Report, 
Peabody 
Museum, 
1871, 
p. 
20), 
that 
this 
perforation 
is 
present 
in 
thirty-one 
per 
cent. 
of 
some 
human 
remains 
from 
ancient 
mounds 
in 
the 
Western 
United 
States, 
and 
in 
Florida. 
It 
frequently 
occurs 
in 
the 
negro.) 
has 
collected 
the 
following 
evidence 
on 
this 
head: 
Prof. 
Broca 
"noticed 
the 
perforation 
in 
four 
and 
a 
half 
per 
cent. 
of 
the 
arm-bones 
collected 
in 
the 
'Cimetiere 
du 
Sud,' 
at 
Paris; 
and 
in 
the 
Grotto 
of 
Orrony, 
the 
contents 
of 
which 
are 
referred 
to 
the 
Bronze 
period, 
as 
many 
as 
eight 
humeri 
out 
of 
thirty-two 
were 
perforated; 
but 
this 
extraordinary 
proportion, 
he 
thinks, 
might 
be 
due 
to 
the 
cavern 
having 
been 
a 
sort 
of 
'family 
vault.' 
Again, 
M. 
Dupont 
found 
thirty 
per 
cent. 
of 
perforated 
bones 
in 
the 
caves 
of 
the 
Valley 
of 
the 
Lesse, 
belonging 
to 
the 
Reindeer 
period; 
whilst 
M. 
Leguay, 
in 
a 
sort 
of 
dolmen 
at 
Argenteuil, 
observed 
twenty-five 
per 
cent. 
to 
be 
perforated; 
and 
M. 
Pruner-Bey 
found 
twenty-six 
per 
cent. 
in 
the 
same 
condition 
in 
bones 
from 
Vaureal. 
Nor 
should 
it 
be 
left 
unnoticed 
that 
M. 
Pruner-Bey 
states 
that 
this 



condition 
is 
common 
in 
Guanche 
skeletons." 
It 
is 
an 
interesting 
fact 
that 
ancient 
races, 
in 
this 
and 
several 
other 
cases, 
more 
frequently 
present 
structures 
which 
resemble 
those 
of 
the 
lower 
animals 
than 
do 
the 
modern. 
One 
chief 
cause 
seems 
to 
be 
that 
the 
ancient 
races 
stand 
somewhat 
nearer 
in 
the 
long 
line 
of 
descent 
to 
their 
remote 
animal-like 
progenitors. 


In 
man, 
the 
os 
coccyx, 
together 
with 
certain 
other 
vertebrae 
hereafter 
to 
be 
described, 
though 
functionless 
as 
a 
tail, 
plainly 
represent 
this 
part 
in 
other 
vertebrate 
animals. 
At 
an 
early 
embryonic 
period 
it 
is 
free, 
and 
projects 
beyond 
the 
lower 
extremities; 
as 
may 
be 
seen 
in 
the 
drawing 
(Fig. 
1.) 
of 
a 
human 
embryo. 
Even 
after 
birth 
it 
has 
been 
known, 
in 
certain 
rare 
and 
anomalous 
cases 
(52. 
Quatrefages 
has 
lately 
collected 
the 
evidence 
on 
this 
subject. 
'Revue 
des 
Cours 
Scientifiques,' 
1867-1868, 
p. 
625. 
In 
1840 
Fleischmann 
exhibited 
a 
human 
foetus 
bearing 
a 
free 
tail, 
which, 
as 
is 
not 
always 
the 
case, 
included 
vertebral 
bodies; 
and 
this 
tail 
was 
critically 
examined 
by 
the 
many 
anatomists 
present 
at 
the 
meeting 
of 
naturalists 
at 
Erlangen 
(see 
Marshall 
in 
Niederlandischen 
Archiv 
fur 
Zoologie, 
December 
1871).), 
to 
form 
a 
small 
external 
rudiment 
of 
a 
tail. 
The 
os 
coccyx 
is 
short, 
usually 
including 
only 
four 
vertebrae, 
all 
anchylosed 
together: 
and 
these 
are 
in 
a 
rudimentary 
condition, 
for 
they 
consist, 
with 
the 
exception 
of 
the 
basal 
one, 
of 
the 
centrum 
alone. 
(53. 
Owen, 
'On 
the 
Nature 
of 
Limbs,' 
1849, 
p. 
114.) 
They 
are 
furnished 
with 
some 
small 
muscles; 
one 
of 
which, 
as 
I 
am 
informed 
by 
Prof. 
Turner, 
has 
been 
expressly 
described 
by 
Theile 
as 
a 
rudimentary 
repetition 
of 
the 
extensor 
of 
the 
tail, 
a 
muscle 
which 
is 
so 
largely 
developed 
in 
many 
mammals. 


The 
spinal 
cord 
in 
man 
extends 
only 
as 
far 
downwards 
as 
the 
last 
dorsal 
or 
first 
lumbar 
vertebra; 
but 
a 
thread-like 
structure 
(the 
filum 
terminale) 
runs 
down 
the 
axis 
of 
the 
sacral 
part 
of 
the 
spinal 
canal, 
and 
even 
along 
the 
back 
of 
the 
coccygeal 
bones. 
The 
upper 
part 
of 
this 
filament, 
as 
Prof. 
Turner 
informs 
me, 
is 
undoubtedly 
homologous 
with 
the 
spinal 
cord; 
but 
the 
lower 
part 
apparently 
consists 
merely 
of 
the 
pia 
mater, 
or 
vascular 
investing 
membrane. 
Even 
in 
this 
case 
the 
os 
coccyx 
may 
be 
said 
to 
possess 
a 
vestige 
of 
so 
important 
a 
structure 
as 
the 
spinal 
cord, 
though 
no 
longer 
enclosed 
within 
a 
bony 
canal. 
The 
following 
fact, 
for 
which 
I 
am 
also 
indebted 
to 
Prof. 
Turner, 
shews 
how 
closely 
the 
os 
coccyx 
corresponds 
with 
the 
true 
tail 
in 
the 
lower 
animals: 
Luschka 
has 
recently 
discovered 
at 
the 
extremity 
of 
the 
coccygeal 
bones 
a 
very 
peculiar 
convoluted 
body, 
which 
is 
continuous 
with 
the 
middle 
sacral 
artery; 
and 
this 
discovery 
led 
Krause 
and 
Meyer 
to 
examine 



the 
tail 
of 
a 
monkey 
(Macacus), 
and 
of 
a 
cat, 
in 
both 
of 
which 
they 
found 
a 
similarly 
convoluted 
body, 
though 
not 
at 
the 
extremity. 


The 
reproductive 
system 
offers 
various 
rudimentary 
structures; 
but 
these 
differ 
in 
one 
important 
respect 
from 
the 
foregoing 
cases. 
Here 
we 
are 
not 
concerned 
with 
the 
vestige 
of 
a 
part 
which 
does 
not 
belong 
to 
the 
species 
in 
an 
efficient 
state, 
but 
with 
a 
part 
efficient 
in 
the 
one 
sex, 
and 
represented 
in 
the 
other 
by 
a 
mere 
rudiment. 
Nevertheless, 
the 
occurrence 
of 
such 
rudiments 
is 
as 
difficult 
to 
explain, 
on 
the 
belief 
of 
the 
separate 
creation 
of 
each 
species, 
as 
in 
the 
foregoing 
cases. 
Hereafter 
I 
shall 
have 
to 
recur 
to 
these 
rudiments, 
and 
shall 
shew 
that 
their 
presence 
generally 
depends 
merely 
on 
inheritance, 
that 
is, 
on 
parts 
acquired 
by 
one 
sex 
having 
been 
partially 
transmitted 
to 
the 
other. 
I 
will 
in 
this 
place 
only 
give 
some 
instances 
of 
such 
rudiments. 
It 
is 
well 
known 
that 
in 
the 
males 
of 
all 
mammals, 
including 
man, 
rudimentary 
mammae 
exist. 
These 
in 
several 
instances 
have 
become 
well 
developed, 
and 
have 
yielded 
a 
copious 
supply 
of 
milk. 
Their 
essential 
identity 
in 
the 
two 
sexes 
is 
likewise 
shewn 
by 
their 
occasional 
sympathetic 
enlargement 
in 
both 
during 
an 
attack 
of 
the 
measles. 
The 
vesicula 
prostatica, 
which 
has 
been 
observed 
in 
many 
male 
mammals, 
is 
now 
universally 
acknowledged 
to 
be 
the 
homologue 
of 
the 
female 
uterus, 
together 
with 
the 
connected 
passage. 
It 
is 
impossible 
to 
read 
Leuckart's 
able 
description 
of 
this 
organ, 
and 
his 
reasoning, 
without 
admitting 
the 
justness 
of 
his 
conclusion. 
This 
is 
especially 
clear 
in 
the 
case 
of 
those 
mammals 
in 
which 
the 
true 
female 
uterus 
bifurcates, 
for 
in 
the 
males 
of 
these 
the 
vesicula 
likewise 
bifurcates. 
(54. 
Leuckart, 
in 
Todd's 
'Cyclopaedia 
of 
Anatomy' 
1849-52, 
vol. 
iv. 
p. 
1415. 
In 
man 
this 
organ 
is 
only 
from 
three 
to 
six 
lines 
in 
length, 
but, 
like 
so 
many 
other 
rudimentary 
parts, 
it 
is 
variable 
in 
development 
as 
well 
as 
in 
other 
characters.) 
Some 
other 
rudimentary 
structures 
belonging 
to 
the 
reproductive 
system 
might 
have 
been 
here 
adduced. 
(55. 
See, 
on 
this 
subject, 
Owen, 
'Anatomy 
of 
Vertebrates,' 
vol. 
iii. 
pp. 
675, 
676, 
706.) 


The 
bearing 
of 
the 
three 
great 
classes 
of 
facts 
now 
given 
is 
unmistakeable. 
But 
it 
would 
be 
superfluous 
fully 
to 
recapitulate 
the 
line 
of 
argument 
given 
in 
detail 
in 
my 
'Origin 
of 
Species.' 
The 
homological 
construction 
of 
the 
whole 
frame 
in 
the 
members 
of 
the 
same 
class 
is 
intelligible, 
if 
we 
admit 
their 
descent 
from 
a 
common 
progenitor, 
together 
with 
their 
subsequent 
adaptation 
to 
diversified 
conditions. 
On 
any 
other 
view, 
the 
similarity 
of 
pattern 
between 
the 
hand 
of 
a 
man 
or 
monkey, 
the 
foot 
of 
a 
horse, 
the 
flipper 
of 
a 
seal, 
the 
wing 
of 
a 
bat, 
etc., 
is 
utterly 
inexplicable. 
(56. 



Prof. 
Bianconi, 
in 
a 
recently 
published 
work, 
illustrated 
by 
admirable 
engravings 
('La 
Theorie 
Darwinienne 
et 
la 
creation 
dite 
independante,' 
1874), 
endeavours 
to 
shew 
that 
homological 
structures, 
in 
the 
above 
and 
other 
cases, 
can 
be 
fully 
explained 
on 
mechanical 
principles, 
in 
accordance 
with 
their 
uses. 
No 
one 
has 
shewn 
so 
well, 
how 
admirably 
such 
structures 
are 
adapted 
for 
their 
final 
purpose; 
and 
this 
adaptation 
can, 
as 
I 
believe, 
be 
explained 
through 
natural 
selection. 
In 
considering 
the 
wing 
of 
a 
bat, 
he 
brings 
forward 


(p. 
218) 
what 
appears 
to 
me 
(to 
use 
Auguste 
Comte's 
words) 
a 
mere 
metaphysical 
principle, 
namely, 
the 
preservation 
"in 
its 
integrity 
of 
the 
mammalian 
nature 
of 
the 
animal." 
In 
only 
a 
few 
cases 
does 
he 
discuss 
rudiments, 
and 
then 
only 
those 
parts 
which 
are 
partially 
rudimentary, 
such 
as 
the 
little 
hoofs 
of 
the 
pig 
and 
ox, 
which 
do 
not 
touch 
the 
ground; 
these 
he 
shews 
clearly 
to 
be 
of 
service 
to 
the 
animal. 
It 
is 
unfortunate 
that 
he 
did 
not 
consider 
such 
cases 
as 
the 
minute 
teeth, 
which 
never 
cut 
through 
the 
jaw 
in 
the 
ox, 
or 
the 
mammae 
of 
male 
quadrupeds, 
or 
the 
wings 
of 
certain 
beetles, 
existing 
under 
the 
soldered 
wing-covers, 
or 
the 
vestiges 
of 
the 
pistil 
and 
stamens 
in 
various 
flowers, 
and 
many 
other 
such 
cases. 
Although 
I 
greatly 
admire 
Prof. 
Bianconi's 
work, 
yet 
the 
belief 
now 
held 
by 
most 
naturalists 
seems 
to 
me 
left 
unshaken, 
that 
homological 
structures 
are 
inexplicable 
on 
the 
principle 
of 
mere 
adaptation.) 
It 
is 
no 
scientific 
explanation 
to 
assert 
that 
they 
have 
all 
been 
formed 
on 
the 
same 
ideal 
plan. 
With 
respect 
to 
development, 
we 
can 
clearly 
understand, 
on 
the 
principle 
of 
variations 
supervening 
at 
a 
rather 
late 
embryonic 
period, 
and 
being 
inherited 
at 
a 
corresponding 
period, 
how 
it 
is 
that 
the 
embryos 
of 
wonderfully 
different 
forms 
should 
still 
retain, 
more 
or 
less 
perfectly, 
the 
structure 
of 
their 
common 
progenitor. 
No 
other 
explanation 
has 
ever 
been 
given 
of 
the 
marvellous 
fact 
that 
the 
embryos 
of 
a 
man, 
dog, 
seal, 
bat, 
reptile, 
etc., 
can 
at 
first 
hardly 
be 
distinguished 
from 
each 
other. 
In 
order 
to 
understand 
the 
existence 
of 
rudimentary 
organs, 
we 
have 
only 
to 
suppose 
that 
a 
former 
progenitor 
possessed 
the 
parts 
in 
question 
in 
a 
perfect 
state, 
and 
that 
under 
changed 
habits 
of 
life 
they 
became 
greatly 
reduced, 
either 
from 
simple 
disuse, 
or 
through 
the 
natural 
selection 
of 
those 
individuals 
which 
were 
least 
encumbered 
with 
a 
superfluous 
part, 
aided 
by 
the 
other 
means 
previously 
indicated. 
Thus 
we 
can 
understand 
how 
it 
has 
come 
to 
pass 
that 
man 
and 
all 
other 
vertebrate 
animals 
have 
been 
constructed 
on 
the 
same 
general 
model, 
why 
they 
pass 
through 
the 
same 
early 
stages 
of 
development, 
and 
why 
they 
retain 



certain 
rudiments 
in 
common. 
Consequently 
we 
ought 
frankly 
to 
admit 
their 
community 
of 
descent: 
to 
take 
any 
other 
view, 
is 
to 
admit 
that 
our 
own 
structure, 
and 
that 
of 
all 
the 
animals 
around 
us, 
is 
a 
mere 
snare 
laid 
to 
entrap 
our 
judgment. 
This 
conclusion 
is 
greatly 
strengthened, 
if 
we 
look 
to 
the 
members 
of 
the 
whole 
animal 
series, 
and 
consider 
the 
evidence 
derived 
from 
their 
affinities 
or 
classification, 
their 
geographical 
distribution 
and 
geological 
succession. 
It 
is 
only 
our 
natural 
prejudice, 
and 
that 
arrogance 
which 
made 
our 
forefathers 
declare 
that 
they 
were 
descended 
from 
demi-gods, 
which 
leads 
us 
to 
demur 
to 
this 
conclusion. 
But 
the 
time 
will 
before 
long 
come, 
when 
it 
will 
be 
thought 
wonderful 
that 
naturalists, 
who 
were 
well 
acquainted 
with 
the 
comparative 
structure 
and 
development 
of 
man, 
and 
other 
mammals, 
should 
have 
believed 
that 
each 
was 
the 
work 
of 
a 
separate 
act 
of 
creation. 


CHAPTER 
II. 


ON 
THE 
MANNER 
OF 
DEVELOPMENT 
OF 
MAN 
FROM 
SOME 
LOWER 
FORM. 


Variability 
of 
body 
and 
mind 
in 
man—Inheritance—Causes 
of 
variability 


— 
Laws 
of 
variation 
the 
same 
in 
man 
as 
in 
the 
lower 
animals—Direct 
action 
of 
the 
conditions 
of 
life—Effects 
of 
the 
increased 
use 
and 
disuse 
of 
parts— 
Arrested 
development—Reversion—Correlated 
variation—Rate 
of 
increase 
— 
Checks 
to 
increase—Natural 
selection—Man 
the 
most 
dominant 
animal 
in 
the 
world—Importance 
of 
his 
corporeal 
structure—The 
causes 
which 
have 
led 
to 
his 
becoming 
erect—Consequent 
changes 
of 
structure—Decrease 
in 
size 
of 
the 
canine 
teeth—Increased 
size 
and 
altered 
shape 
of 
the 
skull— 
Nakedness 
—Absence 
of 
a 
tail—Defenceless 
condition 
of 
man. 
It 
is 
manifest 
that 
man 
is 
now 
subject 
to 
much 
variability. 
No 
two 
individuals 
of 
the 
same 
race 
are 
quite 
alike. 
We 
may 
compare 
millions 
of 
faces, 
and 
each 
will 
be 
distinct. 
There 
is 
an 
equally 
great 
amount 
of 
diversity 
in 
the 
proportions 
and 
dimensions 
of 
the 
various 
parts 
of 
the 
body; 
the 
length 
of 
the 
legs 
being 
one 
of 
the 
most 
variable 
points. 
(1. 
'Investigations 
in 
Military 
and 
Anthropological 
Statistics 
of 
American 
Soldiers,' 
by 
B.A. 
Gould, 
1869, 
p. 
256.) 
Although 
in 
some 
quarters 
of 
the 
world 
an 
elongated 
skull, 
and 
in 
other 
quarters 
a 
short 
skull 
prevails, 
yet 
there 
is 
great 
diversity 
of 
shape 
even 
within 
the 
limits 
of 
the 
same 
race, 
as 
with 
the 
aborigines 
of 
America 
and 
South 
Australia—the 
latter 
a 
race 
"probably 
as 
pure 
and 



homogeneous 
in 
blood, 
customs, 
and 
language 
as 
any 
in 
existence"—and 
even 
with 
the 
inhabitants 
of 
so 
confined 
an 
area 
as 
the 
Sandwich 
Islands. 
(2. 
With 
respect 
to 
the 
"Cranial 
forms 
of 
the 
American 
aborigines," 
see 
Dr. 
Aitken 
Meigs 
in 
'Proc. 
Acad. 
Nat. 
Sci.' 
Philadelphia, 
May 
1868. 
On 
the 
Australians, 
see 
Huxley, 
in 
Lyell's 
'Antiquity 
of 
Man,' 
1863, 
p. 
87. 
On 
the 
Sandwich 
Islanders, 
Prof. 
J. 
Wyman, 
'Observations 
on 
Crania,' 
Boston, 
1868, 


p. 
18.) 
An 
eminent 
dentist 
assures 
me 
that 
there 
is 
nearly 
as 
much 
diversity 
in 
the 
teeth 
as 
in 
the 
features. 
The 
chief 
arteries 
so 
frequently 
run 
in 
abnormal 
courses, 
that 
it 
has 
been 
found 
useful 
for 
surgical 
purposes 
to 
calculate 
from 
1040 
corpses 
how 
often 
each 
course 
prevails. 
(3. 
'Anatomy 
of 
the 
Arteries,' 
by 
R. 
Quain. 
Preface, 
vol. 
i. 
1844.) 
The 
muscles 
are 
eminently 
variable: 
thus 
those 
of 
the 
foot 
were 
found 
by 
Prof. 
Turner 
(4. 
'Transactions 
of 
the 
Royal 
Society 
of 
Edinburgh,' 
vol. 
xxiv. 
pp. 
175, 
189.) 
not 
to 
be 
strictly 
alike 
in 
any 
two 
out 
of 
fifty 
bodies; 
and 
in 
some 
the 
deviations 
were 
considerable. 
He 
adds, 
that 
the 
power 
of 
performing 
the 
appropriate 
movements 
must 
have 
been 
modified 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
several 
deviations. 
Mr. 
J. 
Wood 
has 
recorded 
(5. 
'Proceedings 
Royal 
Society,' 
1867, 
p. 
544; 
also 
1868, 
pp. 
483, 
524. 
There 
is 
a 
previous 
paper, 
1866, 
p. 
229.) 
the 
occurrence 
of 
295 
muscular 
variations 
in 
thirty-six 
subjects, 
and 
in 
another 
set 
of 
the 
same 
number 
no 
less 
than 
558 
variations, 
those 
occurring 
on 
both 
sides 
of 
the 
body 
being 
only 
reckoned 
as 
one. 
In 
the 
last 
set, 
not 
one 
body 
out 
of 
the 
thirty-six 
was 
"found 
totally 
wanting 
in 
departures 
from 
the 
standard 
descriptions 
of 
the 
muscular 
system 
given 
in 
anatomical 
text 
books." 
A 
single 
body 
presented 
the 
extraordinary 
number 
of 
twenty-five 
distinct 
abnormalities. 
The 
same 
muscle 
sometimes 
varies 
in 
many 
ways: 
thus 
Prof. 
Macalister 
describes 
(6. 
'Proc. 
R. 
Irish 
Academy,' 
vol. 
x. 
1868, 
p. 
141.) 
no 
less 
than 
twenty 
distinct 
variations 
in 
the 
palmaris 
accessorius. 
The 
famous 
old 
anatomist, 
Wolff 
(7. 
'Act. 
Acad. 
St. 
Petersburg,' 
1778, 
part 
ii. 
p. 
217.), 
insists 
that 
the 
internal 
viscera 
are 
more 
variable 
than 
the 
external 
parts: 
Nulla 
particula 
est 
quae 
non 
aliter 
et 
aliter 
in 
aliis 
se 
habeat 
hominibus. 
He 
has 
even 
written 
a 
treatise 
on 
the 
choice 
of 
typical 
examples 
of 
the 
viscera 
for 
representation. 
A 
discussion 
on 
the 
beau-ideal 
of 
the 
liver, 
lungs, 
kidneys, 
etc., 
as 
of 
the 
human 
face 
divine, 
sounds 
strange 
in 
our 
ears. 


The 
variability 
or 
diversity 
of 
the 
mental 
faculties 
in 
men 
of 
the 
same 
race, 
not 
to 
mention 
the 
greater 
differences 
between 
the 
men 
of 
distinct 
races, 
is 
so 
notorious 
that 
not 
a 
word 
need 
here 
be 
said. 
So 
it 
is 
with 
the 
lower 
animals. 
All 
who 
have 
had 
charge 
of 
menageries 
admit 
this 
fact, 
and 
we 
see 
it 



plainly 
in 
our 
dogs 
and 
other 
domestic 
animals. 
Brehm 
especially 
insists 
that 
each 
individual 
monkey 
of 
those 
which 
he 
kept 
tame 
in 
Africa 
had 
its 
own 
peculiar 
disposition 
and 
temper: 
he 
mentions 
one 
baboon 
remarkable 
for 
its 
high 
intelligence; 
and 
the 
keepers 
in 
the 
Zoological 
Gardens 
pointed 
out 
to 
me 
a 
monkey, 
belonging 
to 
the 
New 
World 
division, 
equally 
remarkable 
for 
intelligence. 
Rengger, 
also, 
insists 
on 
the 
diversity 
in 
the 
various 
mental 
characters 
of 
the 
monkeys 
of 
the 
same 
species 
which 
he 
kept 
in 
Paraguay; 
and 
this 
diversity, 
as 
he 
adds, 
is 
partly 
innate, 
and 
partly 
the 
result 
of 
the 
manner 
in 
which 
they 
have 
been 
treated 
or 
educated. 
(8. 
Brehm, 
'Thierleben,' 


B. 
i. 
ss. 
58, 
87. 
Rengger, 
'Saugethiere 
von 
Paraguay,' 
s. 
57.) 
I 
have 
elsewhere 
(9. 
'Variation 
of 
Animals 
and 
Plants 
under 
Domestication,' 
vol. 
ii. 
chap. 
xii.) 
so 
fully 
discussed 
the 
subject 
of 
Inheritance, 
that 
I 
need 
here 
add 
hardly 
anything. 
A 
greater 
number 
of 
facts 
have 
been 
collected 
with 
respect 
to 
the 
transmission 
of 
the 
most 
trifling, 
as 
well 
as 
of 
the 
most 
important 
characters 
in 
man, 
than 
in 
any 
of 
the 
lower 
animals; 
though 
the 
facts 
are 
copious 
enough 
with 
respect 
to 
the 
latter. 
So 
in 
regard 
to 
mental 
qualities, 
their 
transmission 
is 
manifest 
in 
our 
dogs, 
horses, 
and 
other 
domestic 
animals. 
Besides 
special 
tastes 
and 
habits, 
general 
intelligence, 
courage, 
bad 
and 
good 
temper, 
etc., 
are 
certainly 
transmitted. 
With 
man 
we 
see 
similar 
facts 
in 
almost 
every 
family; 
and 
we 
now 
know, 
through 
the 
admirable 
labours 
of 
Mr. 
Galton 
(10. 
'Hereditary 
Genius: 
an 
Inquiry 
into 
its 
Laws 
and 
Consequences,' 
1869.), 
that 
genius 
which 
implies 
a 
wonderfully 
complex 
combination 
of 
high 
faculties, 
tends 
to 
be 
inherited; 
and, 
on 
the 
other 
hand, 
it 
is 
too 
certain 
that 
insanity 
and 
deteriorated 
mental 
powers 
likewise 
run 
in 
families. 


With 
respect 
to 
the 
causes 
of 
variability, 
we 
are 
in 
all 
cases 
very 
ignorant; 
but 
we 
can 
see 
that 
in 
man 
as 
in 
the 
lower 
animals, 
they 
stand 
in 
some 
relation 
to 
the 
conditions 
to 
which 
each 
species 
has 
been 
exposed, 
during 
several 
generations. 
Domesticated 
animals 
vary 
more 
than 
those 
in 
a 
state 
of 
nature; 
and 
this 
is 
apparently 
due 
to 
the 
diversified 
and 
changing 
nature 
of 
the 
conditions 
to 
which 
they 
have 
been 
subjected. 
In 
this 
respect 
the 
different 
races 
of 
man 
resemble 
domesticated 
animals, 
and 
so 
do 
the 
individuals 
of 
the 
same 
race, 
when 
inhabiting 
a 
very 
wide 
area, 
like 
that 
of 
America. 
We 
see 
the 
influence 
of 
diversified 
conditions 
in 
the 
more 
civilised 
nations; 
for 
the 
members 
belonging 
to 
different 
grades 
of 
rank, 
and 
following 
different 
occupations, 
present 
a 
greater 
range 
of 
character 
than 
do 
the 
members 
of 
barbarous 
nations. 
But 
the 
uniformity 
of 
savages 
has 
often 
been 
exaggerated, 



and 
in 
some 
cases 
can 
hardly 
be 
said 
to 
exist. 
(11. 
Mr. 
Bates 
remarks 
('The 
Naturalist 
on 
the 
Amazons,' 
1863, 
vol. 
ii 
p. 
159), 
with 
respect 
to 
the 
Indians 
of 
the 
same 
South 
American 
tribe, 
"no 
two 
of 
them 
were 
at 
all 
similar 
in 
the 
shape 
of 
the 
head; 
one 
man 
had 
an 
oval 
visage 
with 
fine 
features, 
and 
another 
was 
quite 
Mongolian 
in 
breadth 
and 
prominence 
of 
cheek, 
spread 
of 
nostrils, 
and 
obliquity 
of 
eyes.") 
It 
is, 
nevertheless, 
an 
error 
to 
speak 
of 
man, 
even 
if 
we 
look 
only 
to 
the 
conditions 
to 
which 
he 
has 
been 
exposed, 
as 
"far 
more 
domesticated" 
(12. 
Blumenbach, 
'Treatises 
on 
Anthropology.' 
Eng. 
translat., 
1865, 
p. 
205.) 
than 
any 
other 
animal. 
Some 
savage 
races, 
such 
as 
the 
Australians, 
are 
not 
exposed 
to 
more 
diversified 
conditions 
than 
are 
many 
species 
which 
have 
a 
wide 
range. 
In 
another 
and 
much 
more 
important 
respect, 
man 
differs 
widely 
from 
any 
strictly 
domesticated 
animal; 
for 
his 
breeding 
has 
never 
long 
been 
controlled, 
either 
by 
methodical 
or 
unconscious 
selection. 
No 
race 
or 
body 
of 
men 
has 
been 
so 
completely 
subjugated 
by 
other 
men, 
as 
that 
certain 
individuals 
should 
be 
preserved, 
and 
thus 
unconsciously 
selected, 
from 
somehow 
excelling 
in 
utility 
to 
their 
masters. 
Nor 
have 
certain 
male 
and 
female 
individuals 
been 
intentionally 
picked 
out 
and 
matched, 
except 
in 
the 
well-known 
case 
of 
the 
Prussian 
grenadiers; 
and 
in 
this 
case 
man 
obeyed, 
as 
might 
have 
been 
expected, 
the 
law 
of 
methodical 
selection; 
for 
it 
is 
asserted 
that 
many 
tall 
men 
were 
reared 
in 
the 
villages 
inhabited 
by 
the 
grenadiers 
and 
their 
tall 
wives. 
In 
Sparta, 
also, 
a 
form 
of 
selection 
was 
followed, 
for 
it 
was 
enacted 
that 
all 
children 
should 
be 
examined 
shortly 
after 
birth; 
the 
well-formed 
and 
vigorous 
being 
preserved, 
the 
others 
left 
to 
perish. 
(13. 
Mitford's 
'History 
of 
Greece,' 
vol. 
i. 
p. 
282. 
It 
appears 
also 
from 
a 
passage 
in 
Xenophon's 
'Memorabilia,' 
B. 
ii. 
4 
(to 
which 
my 
attention 
has 
been 
called 
by 
the 
Rev. 
J.N. 
Hoare), 
that 
it 
was 
a 
well 
recognised 
principle 
with 
the 
Greeks, 
that 
men 
ought 
to 
select 
their 
wives 
with 
a 
view 
to 
the 
health 
and 
vigour 
of 
their 
children. 
The 
Grecian 
poet, 
Theognis, 
who 
lived 
550 
B.C., 
clearly 
saw 
how 
important 
selection, 
if 
carefully 
applied, 
would 
be 
for 
the 
improvement 
of 
mankind. 
He 
saw, 
likewise, 
that 
wealth 
often 
checks 
the 
proper 
action 
of 
sexual 
selection. 
He 
thus 
writes: 


"With 
kine 
and 
horses, 
Kurnus! 
we 
proceed 


By 
reasonable 
rules, 
and 
choose 
a 
breed 


For 
profit 
and 
increase, 
at 
any 
price: 


Of 
a 
sound 
stock, 
without 
defect 
or 
vice. 


But, 
in 
the 
daily 
matches 
that 
we 
make, 



The 
price 
is 
everything: 
for 
money's 
sake, 


Men 
marry: 
women 
are 
in 
marriage 
given 


The 
churl 
or 
ruffian, 
that 
in 
wealth 
has 
thriven, 


May 
match 
his 
offspring 
with 
the 
proudest 
race: 


Thus 
everything 
is 
mix'd, 
noble 
and 
base! 


If 
then 
in 
outward 
manner, 
form, 
and 
mind, 


You 
find 
us 
a 
degraded, 
motley 
kind, 


Wonder 
no 
more, 
my 
friend! 
the 
cause 
is 
plain, 


And 
to 
lament 
the 
consequence 
is 
vain." 


(The 
Works 
of 
J. 
Hookham 
Frere, 
vol. 
ii. 
1872, 
p. 
334.)) 


If 
we 
consider 
all 
the 
races 
of 
man 
as 
forming 
a 
single 
species, 
his 
range 
is 
enormous; 
but 
some 
separate 
races, 
as 
the 
Americans 
and 
Polynesians, 
have 
very 
wide 
ranges. 
It 
is 
a 
well-known 
law 
that 
widely-ranging 
species 
are 
much 
more 
variable 
than 
species 
with 
restricted 
ranges; 
and 
the 
variability 
of 
man 
may 
with 
more 
truth 
be 
compared 
with 
that 
of 
widely-ranging 
species, 
than 
with 
that 
of 
domesticated 
animals. 


Not 
only 
does 
variability 
appear 
to 
be 
induced 
in 
man 
and 
the 
lower 
animals 
by 
the 
same 
general 
causes, 
but 
in 
both 
the 
same 
parts 
of 
the 
body 
are 
affected 
in 
a 
closely 
analogous 
manner. 
This 
has 
been 
proved 
in 
such 
full 
detail 
by 
Godron 
and 
Quatrefages, 
that 
I 
need 
here 
only 
refer 
to 
their 
works. 


(14. 
Godron, 
'De 
l'Espece,' 
1859, 
tom. 
ii. 
livre 
3. 
Quatrefages, 
'Unite 
de 
l'Espece 
Humaine,' 
1861. 
Also 
Lectures 
on 
Anthropology, 
given 
in 
the 
'Revue 
des 
Cours 
Scientifiques,' 
1866-1868.) 
Monstrosities, 
which 
graduate 
into 
slight 
variations, 
are 
likewise 
so 
similar 
in 
man 
and 
the 
lower 
animals, 
that 
the 
same 
classification 
and 
the 
same 
terms 
can 
be 
used 
for 
both, 
as 
has 
been 
shewn 
by 
Isidore 
Geoffroy 
St.-Hilaire. 
(15. 
'Hist. 
Gen. 
et 
Part. 
des 
Anomalies 
de 
l'Organisation,' 
in 
three 
volumes, 
tom. 
i. 
1832.) 
In 
my 
work 
on 
the 
variation 
of 
domestic 
animals, 
I 
have 
attempted 
to 
arrange 
in 
a 
rude 
fashion 
the 
laws 
of 
variation 
under 
the 
following 
heads:—The 
direct 
and 
definite 
action 
of 
changed 
conditions, 
as 
exhibited 
by 
all 
or 
nearly 
all 
the 
individuals 
of 
the 
same 
species, 
varying 
in 
the 
same 
manner 
under 
the 
same 
circumstances. 
The 
effects 
of 
the 
long-continued 
use 
or 
disuse 
of 
parts. 
The 
cohesion 
of 
homologous 
parts. 
The 
variability 
of 
multiple 
parts. 
Compensation 
of 
growth; 
but 
of 
this 
law 
I 
have 
found 
no 
good 
instance 
in 
the 
case 
of 
man. 
The 
effects 
of 
the 
mechanical 
pressure 
of 
one 
part 
on 
another; 
as 
of 
the 
pelvis 
on 
the 
cranium 
of 
the 
infant 
in 
the 
womb. 
Arrests 
of 
development, 
leading 
to 
the 
diminution 
or 
suppression 
of 
parts. 
The 

reappearance 
of 
long-lost 
characters 
through 
reversion. 
And 
lastly, 
correlated 
variation. 
All 
these 
so-called 
laws 
apply 
equally 
to 
man 
and 
the 
lower 
animals; 
and 
most 
of 
them 
even 
to 
plants. 
It 
would 
be 
superfluous 
here 
to 
discuss 
all 
of 
them 
(16. 
I 
have 
fully 
discussed 
these 
laws 
in 
my 
'Variation 
of 
Animals 
and 
Plants 
under 
Domestication,' 
vol. 
ii. 
chap. 
xxii. 
and 
xxiii. 
M. 
J.P. 
Durand 
has 
lately 
(1868) 
published 
a 
valuable 
essay, 
'De 
l'Influence 
des 
Milieux,' 
etc. 
He 
lays 
much 
stress, 
in 
the 
case 
of 
plants, 
on 
the 
nature 
of 
the 
soil.); 
but 
several 
are 
so 
important, 
that 
they 
must 
be 
treated 
at 
considerable 
length. 


THE 
DIRECT 
AND 
DEFINITE 
ACTION 
OF 
CHANGED 
CONDITIONS. 


This 
is 
a 
most 
perplexing 
subject. 
It 
cannot 
be 
denied 
that 
changed 
conditions 
produce 
some, 
and 
occasionally 
a 
considerable 
effect, 
on 
organisms 
of 
all 
kinds; 
and 
it 
seems 
at 
first 
probable 
that 
if 
sufficient 
time 
were 
allowed 
this 
would 
be 
the 
invariable 
result. 
But 
I 
have 
failed 
to 
obtain 
clear 
evidence 
in 
favour 
of 
this 
conclusion; 
and 
valid 
reasons 
may 
be 
urged 
on 
the 
other 
side, 
at 
least 
as 
far 
as 
the 
innumerable 
structures 
are 
concerned, 
which 
are 
adapted 
for 
special 
ends. 
There 
can, 
however, 
be 
no 
doubt 
that 
changed 
conditions 
induce 
an 
almost 
indefinite 
amount 
of 
fluctuating 
variability, 
by 
which 
the 
whole 
organisation 
is 
rendered 
in 
some 
degree 
plastic. 


In 
the 
United 
States, 
above 
1,000,000 
soldiers, 
who 
served 
in 
the 
late 
war, 
were 
measured, 
and 
the 
States 
in 
which 
they 
were 
born 
and 
reared 
were 
recorded. 
(17. 
'Investigations 
in 
Military 
and 
Anthrop. 
Statistics,' 
etc., 
1869, 
by 
B.A. 
Gould, 
pp. 
93, 
107, 
126, 
131, 
134.) 
From 
this 
astonishing 
number 
of 
observations 
it 
is 
proved 
that 
local 
influences 
of 
some 
kind 
act 
directly 
on 
stature; 
and 
we 
further 
learn 
that 
"the 
State 
where 
the 
physical 
growth 
has 
in 
great 
measure 
taken 
place, 
and 
the 
State 
of 
birth, 
which 
indicates 
the 
ancestry, 
seem 
to 
exert 
a 
marked 
influence 
on 
the 
stature." 
For 
instance, 
it 
is 
established, 
"that 
residence 
in 
the 
Western 
States, 
during 
the 
years 
of 
growth, 
tends 
to 
produce 
increase 
of 
stature." 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
it 
is 
certain 
that 
with 
sailors, 
their 
life 
delays 
growth, 
as 
shewn 
"by 
the 
great 
difference 
between 
the 
statures 
of 
soldiers 
and 
sailors 
at 
the 
ages 
of 
seventeen 
and 
eighteen 
years." 
Mr. 
B.A. 
Gould 
endeavoured 
to 
ascertain 
the 
nature 
of 
the 
influences 
which 
thus 
act 
on 
stature; 
but 
he 
arrived 
only 
at 
negative 
results, 
namely 
that 
they 
did 
not 
relate 
to 
climate, 
the 
elevation 
of 
the 
land, 
soil, 
nor 
even 
"in 
any 



controlling 
degree" 
to 
the 
abundance 
or 
the 
need 
of 
the 
comforts 
of 
life. 
This 
latter 
conclusion 
is 
directly 
opposed 
to 
that 
arrived 
at 
by 
Villerme, 
from 
the 
statistics 
of 
the 
height 
of 
the 
conscripts 
in 
different 
parts 
of 
France. 
When 
we 
compare 
the 
differences 
in 
stature 
between 
the 
Polynesian 
chiefs 
and 
the 
lower 
orders 
within 
the 
same 
islands, 
or 
between 
the 
inhabitants 
of 
the 
fertile 
volcanic 
and 
low 
barren 
coral 
islands 
of 
the 
same 
ocean 
(18. 
For 
the 
Polynesians, 
see 
Prichard's 
'Physical 
History 
of 
Mankind,' 
vol. 
v. 
1847, 
pp. 
145, 
283. 
Also 
Godron, 
'De 
l'Espece,' 
tom. 
ii. 
p. 
289. 
There 
is 
also 
a 
remarkable 
difference 
in 
appearance 
between 
the 
closely-allied 
Hindoos 
inhabiting 
the 
Upper 
Ganges 
and 
Bengal; 
see 
Elphinstone's 
'History 
of 
India,' 
vol. 
i. 
p. 
324.) 
or 
again 
between 
the 
Fuegians 
on 
the 
eastern 
and 
western 
shores 
of 
their 
country, 
where 
the 
means 
of 
subsistence 
are 
very 
different, 
it 
is 
scarcely 
possible 
to 
avoid 
the 
conclusion 
that 
better 
food 
and 
greater 
comfort 
do 
influence 
stature. 
But 
the 
preceding 
statements 
shew 
how 
difficult 
it 
is 
to 
arrive 
at 
any 
precise 
result. 
Dr. 
Beddoe 
has 
lately 
proved 
that, 
with 
the 
inhabitants 
of 
Britain, 
residence 
in 
towns 
and 
certain 
occupations 
have 
a 
deteriorating 
influence 
on 
height; 
and 
he 
infers 
that 
the 
result 
is 
to 
a 
certain 
extent 
inherited, 
as 
is 
likewise 
the 
case 
in 
the 
United 
States. 
Dr. 
Beddoe 
further 
believes 
that 
wherever 
a 
"race 
attains 
its 
maximum 
of 
physical 
development, 
it 
rises 
highest 
in 
energy 
and 
moral 
vigour." 
(19. 
'Memoirs, 
Anthropological 
Society,' 
vol. 
iii. 
1867-69, 
pp. 
561, 
565, 
567.) 


Whether 
external 
conditions 
produce 
any 
other 
direct 
effect 
on 
man 
is 
not 
known. 
It 
might 
have 
been 
expected 
that 
differences 
of 
climate 
would 
have 
had 
a 
marked 
influence, 
inasmuch 
as 
the 
lungs 
and 
kidneys 
are 
brought 
into 
activity 
under 
a 
low 
temperature, 
and 
the 
liver 
and 
skin 
under 
a 
high 
one. 
(20. 
Dr. 
Brakenridge, 
'Theory 
of 
Diathesis,' 
'Medical 
Times,' 
June 
19 
and 
July 
17, 
1869.) 
It 
was 
formerly 
thought 
that 
the 
colour 
of 
the 
skin 
and 
the 
character 
of 
the 
hair 
were 
determined 
by 
light 
or 
heat; 
and 
although 
it 
can 
hardly 
be 
denied 
that 
some 
effect 
is 
thus 
produced, 
almost 
all 
observers 
now 
agree 
that 
the 
effect 
has 
been 
very 
small, 
even 
after 
exposure 
during 
many 
ages. 
But 
this 
subject 
will 
be 
more 
properly 
discussed 
when 
we 
treat 
of 
the 
different 
races 
of 
mankind. 
With 
our 
domestic 
animals 
there 
are 
grounds 
for 
believing 
that 
cold 
and 
damp 
directly 
affect 
the 
growth 
of 
the 
hair; 
but 
I 
have 
not 
met 
with 
any 
evidence 
on 
this 
head 
in 
the 
case 
of 
man. 


EFFECTS 
OF 
THE 
INCREASED 
USE 
AND 
DISUSE 
OF 
PARTS. 



It 
is 
well 
known 
that 
use 
strengthens 
the 
muscles 
in 
the 
individual, 
and 
complete 
disuse, 
or 
the 
destruction 
of 
the 
proper 
nerve, 
weakens 
them. 
When 
the 
eye 
is 
destroyed, 
the 
optic 
nerve 
often 
becomes 
atrophied. 
When 
an 
artery 
is 
tied, 
the 
lateral 
channels 
increase 
not 
only 
in 
diameter, 
but 
in 
the 
thickness 
and 
strength 
of 
their 
coats. 
When 
one 
kidney 
ceases 
to 
act 
from 
disease, 
the 
other 
increases 
in 
size, 
and 
does 
double 
work. 
Bones 
increase 
not 
only 
in 
thickness, 
but 
in 
length, 
from 
carrying 
a 
greater 
weight. 
(21. 
I 
have 
given 
authorities 
for 
these 
several 
statements 
in 
my 
'Variation 
of 
Animals 
and 
Plants 
under 
Domestication,' 
vol. 
ii. 
pp. 
297-300. 
Dr. 
Jaeger, 
"Uber 
das 
Langenwachsthum 
der 
Knochen," 
'Jenaischen 
Zeitschrift,' 
B. 
v. 
Heft. 
i.) 
Different 
occupations, 
habitually 
followed, 
lead 
to 
changed 
proportions 
in 
various 
parts 
of 
the 
body. 
Thus 
it 
was 
ascertained 
by 
the 
United 
States 
Commission 
(22. 
'Investigations,' 
etc., 
by 
B.A. 
Gould, 
1869, 
p. 
288.) 
that 
the 
legs 
of 
the 
sailors 
employed 
in 
the 
late 
war 
were 
longer 
by 
0.217 
of 
an 
inch 
than 
those 
of 
the 
soldiers, 
though 
the 
sailors 
were 
on 
an 
average 
shorter 
men; 
whilst 
their 
arms 
were 
shorter 
by 
1.09 
of 
an 
inch, 
and 
therefore, 
out 
of 
proportion, 
shorter 
in 
relation 
to 
their 
lesser 
height. 
This 
shortness 
of 
the 
arms 
is 
apparently 
due 
to 
their 
greater 
use, 
and 
is 
an 
unexpected 
result: 
but 
sailors 
chiefly 
use 
their 
arms 
in 
pulling, 
and 
not 
in 
supporting 
weights. 
With 
sailors, 
the 
girth 
of 
the 
neck 
and 
the 
depth 
of 
the 
instep 
are 
greater, 
whilst 
the 
circumference 
of 
the 
chest, 
waist, 
and 
hips 
is 
less, 
than 
in 
soldiers. 


Whether 
the 
several 
foregoing 
modifications 
would 
become 
hereditary, 
if 
the 
same 
habits 
of 
life 
were 
followed 
during 
many 
generations, 
is 
not 
known, 
but 
it 
is 
probable. 
Rengger 
(23. 
'Saugethiere 
von 
Paraguay,' 
1830, 
s. 
4.) 
attributes 
the 
thin 
legs 
and 
thick 
arms 
of 
the 
Payaguas 
Indians 
to 
successive 
generations 
having 
passed 
nearly 
their 
whole 
lives 
in 
canoes, 
with 
their 
lower 
extremities 
motionless. 
Other 
writers 
have 
come 
to 
a 
similar 
conclusion 
in 
analogous 
cases. 
According 
to 
Cranz 
(24. 
'History 
of 
Greenland,' 
Eng. 
translat., 
1767, 
vol. 
i. 
p. 
230.), 
who 
lived 
for 
a 
long 
time 
with 
the 
Esquimaux, 
"the 
natives 
believe 
that 
ingenuity 
and 
dexterity 
in 
seal-catching 
(their 
highest 
art 
and 
virtue) 
is 
hereditary; 
there 
is 
really 
something 
in 
it, 
for 
the 
son 
of 
a 
celebrated 
seal-catcher 
will 
distinguish 
himself, 
though 
he 
lost 
his 
father 
in 
childhood." 
But 
in 
this 
case 
it 
is 
mental 
aptitude, 
quite 
as 
much 
as 
bodily 
structure, 
which 
appears 
to 
be 
inherited. 
It 
is 
asserted 
that 
the 
hands 
of 
English 
labourers 
are 
at 
birth 
larger 
than 
those 
of 
the 
gentry. 
(25. 
'Intermarriage,' 
by 
Alex. 
Walker, 
1838, 
p. 
377.) 
From 
the 
correlation 
which 
exists, 
at 
least 
in 
some 
cases 
(26. 
'The 
Variation 
of 
Animals 
under 



Domestication,' 
vol. 
i. 
p. 
173.), 
between 
the 
development 
of 
the 
extremities 
and 
of 
the 
jaws, 
it 
is 
possible 
that 
in 
those 
classes 
which 
do 
not 
labour 
much 
with 
their 
hands 
and 
feet, 
the 
jaws 
would 
be 
reduced 
in 
size 
from 
this 
cause. 
That 
they 
are 
generally 
smaller 
in 
refined 
and 
civilised 
men 
than 
in 
hardworking 
men 
or 
savages, 
is 
certain. 
But 
with 
savages, 
as 
Mr. 
Herbert 
Spencer 


(27. 
'Principles 
of 
Biology,' 
vol. 
i. 
p. 
455.) 
has 
remarked, 
the 
greater 
use 
of 
the 
jaws 
in 
chewing 
coarse, 
uncooked 
food, 
would 
act 
in 
a 
direct 
manner 
on 
the 
masticatory 
muscles, 
and 
on 
the 
bones 
to 
which 
they 
are 
attached. 
In 
infants, 
long 
before 
birth, 
the 
skin 
on 
the 
soles 
of 
the 
feet 
is 
thicker 
than 
on 
any 
other 
part 
of 
the 
body; 
(28. 
Paget, 
'Lectures 
on 
Surgical 
Pathology,' 
vol. 
ii, 
1853, 
p. 
209.) 
and 
it 
can 
hardly 
be 
doubted 
that 
this 
is 
due 
to 
the 
inherited 
effects 
of 
pressure 
during 
a 
long 
series 
of 
generations. 
It 
is 
familiar 
to 
every 
one 
that 
watchmakers 
and 
engravers 
are 
liable 
to 
be 
short-sighted, 
whilst 
men 
living 
much 
out 
of 
doors, 
and 
especially 
savages, 
are 
generally 
long-sighted. 
(29. 
It 
is 
a 
singular 
and 
unexpected 
fact 
that 
sailors 
are 
inferior 
to 
landsmen 
in 
their 
mean 
distance 
of 
distinct 
vision. 
Dr. 


B.A. 
Gould 
('Sanitary 
Memoirs 
of 
the 
War 
of 
the 
Rebellion,' 
1869, 
p. 
530), 
has 
proved 
this 
to 
be 
the 
case; 
and 
he 
accounts 
for 
it 
by 
the 
ordinary 
range 
of 
vision 
in 
sailors 
being 
"restricted 
to 
the 
length 
of 
the 
vessel 
and 
the 
height 
of 
the 
masts.") 
Short-sight 
and 
long-sight 
certainly 
tend 
to 
be 
inherited. 
(30. 
'The 
Variation 
of 
Animals 
under 
Domestication,' 
vol. 
i. 
p. 
8.) 
The 
inferiority 
of 
Europeans, 
in 
comparison 
with 
savages, 
in 
eyesight 
and 
in 
the 
other 
senses, 
is 
no 
doubt 
the 
accumulated 
and 
transmitted 
effect 
of 
lessened 
use 
during 
many 
generations; 
for 
Rengger 
(31. 
'Saugethiere 
von 
Paraguay,' 
s. 
8, 
10. 
I 
have 
had 
good 
opportunities 
for 
observing 
the 
extraordinary 
power 
of 
eyesight 
in 
the 
Fuegians. 
See 
also 
Lawrence 
('Lectures 
on 
Physiology,' 
etc., 
1822, 
p. 
404) 
on 
this 
same 
subject. 
M. 
Giraud-Teulon 
has 
recently 
collected 
('Revue 
des 
Cours 
Scientifiques,' 
1870, 
p. 
625) 
a 
large 
and 
valuable 
body 
of 
evidence 
proving 
that 
the 
cause 
of 
short-sight, 
"C'est 
le 
travail 
assidu, 
de 
pres.") 
states 
that 
he 
has 
repeatedly 
observed 
Europeans, 
who 
had 
been 
brought 
up 
and 
spent 
their 
whole 
lives 
with 
the 
wild 
Indians, 
who 
nevertheless 
did 
not 
equal 
them 
in 
the 
sharpness 
of 
their 
senses. 
The 
same 
naturalist 
observes 
that 
the 
cavities 
in 
the 
skull 
for 
the 
reception 
of 
the 
several 
sense-organs 
are 
larger 
in 
the 
American 
aborigines 
than 
in 
Europeans; 
and 
this 
probably 
indicates 
a 
corresponding 
difference 
in 
the 
dimensions 
of 
the 
organs 
themselves. 
Blumenbach 
has 
also 
remarked 
on 
the 
large 
size 
of 
the 
nasal 
cavities 
in 
the 
skulls 
of 
the 
American 
aborigines, 
and 
connects 
this 
fact 

with 
their 
remarkably 
acute 
power 
of 
smell. 
The 
Mongolians 
of 
the 
plains 
of 
northern 
Asia, 
according 
to 
Pallas, 
have 
wonderfully 
perfect 
senses; 
and 
Prichard 
believes 
that 
the 
great 
breadth 
of 
their 
skulls 
across 
the 
zygomas 
follows 
from 
their 
highly-developed 
sense 
organs. 
(32. 
Prichard, 
'Physical 
History 
of 
Mankind,' 
on 
the 
authority 
of 
Blumenbach, 
vol. 
i. 
1851, 
p. 
311; 
for 
the 
statement 
by 
Pallas, 
vol. 
iv. 
1844, 
p. 
407.) 


The 
Quechua 
Indians 
inhabit 
the 
lofty 
plateaux 
of 
Peru; 
and 
Alcide 
d'Orbigny 
states 
(33. 
Quoted 
by 
Prichard, 
'Researches 
into 
the 
Physical 
History 
of 
Mankind,' 
vol. 
v. 
p. 
463.) 
that, 
from 
continually 
breathing 
a 
highly 
rarefied 
atmosphere, 
they 
have 
acquired 
chests 
and 
lungs 
of 
extraordinary 
dimensions. 
The 
cells, 
also, 
of 
the 
lungs 
are 
larger 
and 
more 
numerous 
than 
in 
Europeans. 
These 
observations 
have 
been 
doubted, 
but 
Mr. 
D. 
Forbes 
carefully 
measured 
many 
Aymaras, 
an 
allied 
race, 
living 
at 
the 
height 
of 
between 
10,000 
and 
15,000 
feet; 
and 
he 
informs 
me 
(34. 
Mr. 
Forbes' 
valuable 
paper 
is 
now 
published 
in 
the 
'Journal 
of 
the 
Ethnological 
Society 
of 
London,' 
new 
series, 
vol. 
ii. 
1870, 
p.193.) 
that 
they 
differ 
conspicuously 
from 
the 
men 
of 
all 
other 
races 
seen 
by 
him 
in 
the 
circumference 
and 
length 
of 
their 
bodies. 
In 
his 
table 
of 
measurements, 
the 
stature 
of 
each 
man 
is 
taken 
at 
1000, 
and 
the 
other 
measurements 
are 
reduced 
to 
this 
standard. 
It 
is 
here 
seen 
that 
the 
extended 
arms 
of 
the 
Aymaras 
are 
shorter 
than 
those 
of 
Europeans, 
and 
much 
shorter 
than 
those 
of 
Negroes. 
The 
legs 
are 
likewise 
shorter; 
and 
they 
present 
this 
remarkable 
peculiarity, 
that 
in 
every 
Aymara 
measured, 
the 
femur 
is 
actually 
shorter 
than 
the 
tibia. 
On 
an 
average, 
the 
length 
of 
the 
femur 
to 
that 
of 
the 
tibia 
is 
as 
211 
to 
252; 
whilst 
in 
two 
Europeans, 
measured 
at 
the 
same 
time, 
the 
femora 
to 
the 
tibiae 
were 
as 
244 
to 
230; 
and 
in 
three 
Negroes 
as 
258 
to 
241. 
The 
humerus 
is 
likewise 
shorter 
relatively 
to 
the 
forearm. 
This 
shortening 
of 
that 
part 
of 
the 
limb 
which 
is 
nearest 
to 
the 
body, 
appears 
to 
be, 
as 
suggested 
to 
me 
by 
Mr. 
Forbes, 
a 
case 
of 
compensation 
in 
relation 
with 
the 
greatly 
increased 
length 
of 
the 
trunk. 
The 
Aymaras 
present 
some 
other 
singular 
points 
of 
structure, 
for 
instance, 
the 
very 
small 
projection 
of 
the 
heel. 


These 
men 
are 
so 
thoroughly 
acclimatised 
to 
their 
cold 
and 
lofty 
abode, 
that 
when 
formerly 
carried 
down 
by 
the 
Spaniards 
to 
the 
low 
eastern 
plains, 
and 
when 
now 
tempted 
down 
by 
high 
wages 
to 
the 
gold-washings, 
they 
suffer 
a 
frightful 
rate 
of 
mortality. 
Nevertheless 
Mr. 
Forbes 
found 
a 
few 
pure 
families 
which 
had 
survived 
during 
two 
generations: 
and 
he 
observed 
that 
they 
still 
inherited 
their 
characteristic 
peculiarities. 
But 
it 
was 
manifest, 
even 
without 
measurement, 
that 
these 
peculiarities 
had 
all 
decreased; 
and 
on 



measurement, 
their 
bodies 
were 
found 
not 
to 
be 
so 
much 
elongated 
as 
those 
of 
the 
men 
on 
the 
high 
plateau; 
whilst 
their 
femora 
had 
become 
somewhat 
lengthened, 
as 
had 
their 
tibiae, 
although 
in 
a 
less 
degree. 
The 
actual 
measurements 
may 
be 
seen 
by 
consulting 
Mr. 
Forbes's 
memoir. 
From 
these 
observations, 
there 
can, 
I 
think, 
be 
no 
doubt 
that 
residence 
during 
many 
generations 
at 
a 
great 
elevation 
tends, 
both 
directly 
and 
indirectly, 
to 
induce 
inherited 
modifications 
in 
the 
proportions 
of 
the 
body. 
(35. 
Dr. 
Wilckens 
('Landwirthschaft. 
Wochenblatt,' 
No. 
10, 
1869) 
has 
lately 
published 
an 
interesting 
essay 
shewing 
how 
domestic 
animals, 
which 
live 
in 
mountainous 
regions, 
have 
their 
frames 
modified.) 


Although 
man 
may 
not 
have 
been 
much 
modified 
during 
the 
latter 
stages 
of 
his 
existence 
through 
the 
increased 
or 
decreased 
use 
of 
parts, 
the 
facts 
now 
given 
shew 
that 
his 
liability 
in 
this 
respect 
has 
not 
been 
lost; 
and 
we 
positively 
know 
that 
the 
same 
law 
holds 
good 
with 
the 
lower 
animals. 
Consequently 
we 
may 
infer 
that 
when 
at 
a 
remote 
epoch 
the 
progenitors 
of 
man 
were 
in 
a 
transitional 
state, 
and 
were 
changing 
from 
quadrupeds 
into 
bipeds, 
natural 
selection 
would 
probably 
have 
been 
greatly 
aided 
by 
the 
inherited 
effects 
of 
the 
increased 
or 
diminished 
use 
of 
the 
different 
parts 
of 
the 
body. 


ARRESTS 
OF 
DEVELOPMENT. 


There 
is 
a 
difference 
between 
arrested 
development 
and 
arrested 
growth, 
for 
parts 
in 
the 
former 
state 
continue 
to 
grow 
whilst 
still 
retaining 
their 
early 
condition. 
Various 
monstrosities 
come 
under 
this 
head; 
and 
some, 
as 
a 
cleft 
palate, 
are 
known 
to 
be 
occasionally 
inherited. 
It 
will 
suffice 
for 
our 
purpose 
to 
refer 
to 
the 
arrested 
brain-development 
of 
microcephalous 
idiots, 
as 
described 
in 
Vogt's 
memoir. 
(36. 
'Memoires 
sur 
les 
Microcephales,' 
1867, 
pp. 
50, 
125, 
169, 
171, 
184-198.) 
Their 
skulls 
are 
smaller, 
and 
the 
convolutions 
of 
the 
brain 
are 
less 
complex 
than 
in 
normal 
men. 
The 
frontal 
sinus, 
or 
the 
projection 
over 
the 
eye-brows, 
is 
largely 
developed, 
and 
the 
jaws 
are 
prognathous 
to 
an 
"effrayant" 
degree; 
so 
that 
these 
idiots 
somewhat 
resemble 
the 
lower 
types 
of 
mankind. 
Their 
intelligence, 
and 
most 
of 
their 
mental 
faculties, 
are 
extremely 
feeble. 
They 
cannot 
acquire 
the 
power 
of 
speech, 
and 
are 
wholly 
incapable 
of 
prolonged 
attention, 
but 
are 
much 
given 
to 
imitation. 
They 
are 
strong 
and 
remarkably 
active, 
continually 
gambolling 
and 
jumping 
about, 
and 
making 
grimaces. 
They 
often 
ascend 
stairs 
on 
all-fours; 
and 
are 



curiously 
fond 
of 
climbing 
up 
furniture 
or 
trees. 
We 
are 
thus 
reminded 
of 
the 
delight 
shewn 
by 
almost 
all 
boys 
in 
climbing 
trees; 
and 
this 
again 
reminds 
us 
how 
lambs 
and 
kids, 
originally 
alpine 
animals, 
delight 
to 
frisk 
on 
any 
hillock, 
however 
small. 
Idiots 
also 
resemble 
the 
lower 
animals 
in 
some 
other 
respects; 
thus 
several 
cases 
are 
recorded 
of 
their 
carefully 
smelling 
every 
mouthful 
of 
food 
before 
eating 
it. 
One 
idiot 
is 
described 
as 
often 
using 
his 
mouth 
in 
aid 
of 
his 
hands, 
whilst 
hunting 
for 
lice. 
They 
are 
often 
filthy 
in 
their 
habits, 
and 
have 
no 
sense 
of 
decency; 
and 
several 
cases 
have 
been 
published 
of 
their 
bodies 
being 
remarkably 
hairy. 
(37. 
Prof. 
Laycock 
sums 
up 
the 
character 
of 
brute-like 
idiots 
by 
calling 
them 
"theroid;" 
'Journal 
of 
Mental 
Science,' 
July 
1863. 
Dr. 
Scott 
('The 
Deaf 
and 
Dumb,' 
2nd 
ed. 
1870, 
p. 
10) 
has 
often 
observed 
the 
imbecile 
smelling 
their 
food. 
See, 
on 
this 
same 
subject, 
and 
on 
the 
hairiness 
of 
idiots, 
Dr. 
Maudsley, 
'Body 
and 
Mind,' 
1870, 
pp. 
46-51. 
Pinel 
has 
also 
given 
a 
striking 
case 
of 
hairiness 
in 
an 
idiot.) 


REVERSION. 


Many 
of 
the 
cases 
to 
be 
here 
given, 
might 
have 
been 
introduced 
under 
the 
last 
heading. 
When 
a 
structure 
is 
arrested 
in 
its 
development, 
but 
still 
continues 
growing, 
until 
it 
closely 
resembles 
a 
corresponding 
structure 
in 
some 
lower 
and 
adult 
member 
of 
the 
same 
group, 
it 
may 
in 
one 
sense 
be 
considered 
as 
a 
case 
of 
reversion. 
The 
lower 
members 
in 
a 
group 
give 
us 
some 
idea 
how 
the 
common 
progenitor 
was 
probably 
constructed; 
and 
it 
is 
hardly 
credible 
that 
a 
complex 
part, 
arrested 
at 
an 
early 
phase 
of 
embryonic 
development, 
should 
go 
on 
growing 
so 
as 
ultimately 
to 
perform 
its 
proper 
function, 
unless 
it 
had 
acquired 
such 
power 
during 
some 
earlier 
state 
of 
existence, 
when 
the 
present 
exceptional 
or 
arrested 
structure 
was 
normal. 
The 
simple 
brain 
of 
a 
microcephalous 
idiot, 
in 
as 
far 
as 
it 
resembles 
that 
of 
an 
ape, 
may 
in 
this 
sense 
be 
said 
to 
offer 
a 
case 
of 
reversion. 
(38. 
In 
my 
'Variation 
of 
Animals 
under 
Domestication' 
(vol. 
ii. 
p. 
57), 
I 
attributed 
the 
not 
very 
rare 
cases 
of 
supernumerary 
mammae 
in 
women 
to 
reversion. 
I 
was 
led 
to 
this 
as 
a 
probable 
conclusion, 
by 
the 
additional 
mammae 
being 
generally 
placed 
symmetrically 
on 
the 
breast; 
and 
more 
especially 
from 
one 
case, 
in 
which 
a 
single 
efficient 
mamma 
occurred 
in 
the 
inguinal 
region 
of 
a 
woman, 
the 
daughter 
of 
another 
woman 
with 
supernumerary 
mammae. 
But 
I 
now 
find 
(see, 
for 
instance, 
Prof. 
Preyer, 
'Der 
Kampf 
um 
das 
Dasein,' 
1869, 
s. 
45) 
that 
mammae 
erraticae, 
occur 
in 
other 
situations, 
as 
on 
the 
back, 
in 
the 
armpit, 



and 
on 
the 
thigh; 
the 
mammae 
in 
this 
latter 
instance 
having 
given 
so 
much 
milk 
that 
the 
child 
was 
thus 
nourished. 
The 
probability 
that 
the 
additional 
mammae 
are 
due 
to 
reversion 
is 
thus 
much 
weakened; 
nevertheless, 
it 
still 
seems 
to 
me 
probable, 
because 
two 
pairs 
are 
often 
found 
symmetrically 
on 
the 
breast; 
and 
of 
this 
I 
myself 
have 
received 
information 
in 
several 
cases. 
It 
is 
well 
known 
that 
some 
Lemurs 
normally 
have 
two 
pairs 
of 
mammae 
on 
the 
breast. 
Five 
cases 
have 
been 
recorded 
of 
the 
presence 
of 
more 
than 
a 
pair 
of 
mammae 
(of 
course 
rudimentary) 
in 
the 
male 
sex 
of 
mankind; 
see 
'Journal 
of 
Anat. 
and 
Physiology,' 
1872, 
p. 
56, 
for 
a 
case 
given 
by 
Dr. 
Handyside, 
in 
which 
two 
brothers 
exhibited 
this 
peculiarity; 
see 
also 
a 
paper 
by 
Dr. 
Bartels, 
in 
'Reichert's 
and 
du 
Bois-Reymond's 
Archiv.,' 
1872, 
p. 
304. 
In 
one 
of 
the 
cases 
alluded 
to 
by 
Dr. 
Bartels, 
a 
man 
bore 
five 
mammae, 
one 
being 
medial 
and 
placed 
above 
the 
navel; 
Meckel 
von 
Hemsbach 
thinks 
that 
this 
latter 
case 
is 
illustrated 
by 
a 
medial 
mamma 
occurring 
in 
certain 
Cheiroptera. 
On 
the 
whole, 
we 
may 
well 
doubt 
if 
additional 
mammae 
would 
ever 
have 
been 
developed 
in 
both 
sexes 
of 
mankind, 
had 
not 
his 
early 
progenitors 
been 
provided 
with 
more 
than 
a 
single 
pair. 


In 
the 
above 
work 
(vol. 
ii. 
p. 
12), 
I 
also 
attributed, 
though 
with 
much 
hesitation, 
the 
frequent 
cases 
of 
polydactylism 
in 
men 
and 
various 
animals 
to 
reversion. 
I 
was 
partly 
led 
to 
this 
through 
Prof. 
Owen's 
statement, 
that 
some 
of 
the 
Ichthyopterygia 
possess 
more 
than 
five 
digits, 
and 
therefore, 
as 
I 
supposed, 
had 
retained 
a 
primordial 
condition; 
but 
Prof. 
Gegenbaur 
('Jenaischen 
Zeitschrift,' 
B. 
v. 
Heft 
3, 
s. 
341), 
disputes 
Owen's 
conclusion. 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
according 
to 
the 
opinion 
lately 
advanced 
by 
Dr. 
Gunther, 
on 
the 
paddle 
of 
Ceratodus, 
which 
is 
provided 
with 
articulated 
bony 
rays 
on 
both 
sides 
of 
a 
central 
chain 
of 
bones, 
there 
seems 
no 
great 
difficulty 
in 
admitting 
that 
six 
or 
more 
digits 
on 
one 
side, 
or 
on 
both 
sides, 
might 
reappear 
through 
reversion. 
I 
am 
informed 
by 
Dr. 
Zouteveen 
that 
there 
is 
a 
case 
on 
record 
of 
a 
man 
having 
twenty-four 
fingers 
and 
twenty-four 
toes! 
I 
was 
chiefly 
led 
to 
the 
conclusion 
that 
the 
presence 
of 
supernumerary 
digits 
might 
be 
due 
to 
reversion 
from 
the 
fact 
that 
such 
digits, 
not 
only 
are 
strongly 
inherited, 
but, 
as 
I 
then 
believed, 
had 
the 
power 
of 
regrowth 
after 
amputation, 
like 
the 
normal 
digits 
of 
the 
lower 
vertebrata. 
But 
I 
have 
explained 
in 
the 
second 
edition 
of 
my 
Variation 
under 
Domestication 
why 
I 
now 
place 
little 
reliance 
on 
the 
recorded 
cases 
of 
such 
regrowth. 
Nevertheless 
it 
deserves 
notice, 
inasmuch 
as 
arrested 
development 
and 
reversion 
are 
intimately 
related 
processes; 
that 
various 
structures 
in 
an 
embryonic 
or 
arrested 
condition, 
such 
as 
a 
cleft 



palate, 
bifid 
uterus, 
etc., 
are 
frequently 
accompanied 
by 
polydactylism. 
This 
has 
been 
strongly 
insisted 
on 
by 
Meckel 
and 
Isidore 
Geoffroy 
St.-Hilaire. 
But 
at 
present 
it 
is 
the 
safest 
course 
to 
give 
up 
altogether 
the 
idea 
that 
there 
is 
any 
relation 
between 
the 
development 
of 
supernumerary 
digits 
and 
reversion 
to 
some 
lowly 
organised 
progenitor 
of 
man.) 
There 
are 
other 
cases 
which 
come 
more 
strictly 
under 
our 
present 
head 
of 
reversion. 
Certain 
structures, 
regularly 
occurring 
in 
the 
lower 
members 
of 
the 
group 
to 
which 
man 
belongs, 
occasionally 
make 
their 
appearance 
in 
him, 
though 
not 
found 
in 
the 
normal 
human 
embryo; 
or, 
if 
normally 
present 
in 
the 
human 
embryo, 
they 
become 
abnormally 
developed, 
although 
in 
a 
manner 
which 
is 
normal 
in 
the 
lower 
members 
of 
the 
group. 
These 
remarks 
will 
be 
rendered 
clearer 
by 
the 
following 
illustrations. 


In 
various 
mammals 
the 
uterus 
graduates 
from 
a 
double 
organ 
with 
two 
distinct 
orifices 
and 
two 
passages, 
as 
in 
the 
marsupials, 
into 
a 
single 
organ, 
which 
is 
in 
no 
way 
double 
except 
from 
having 
a 
slight 
internal 
fold, 
as 
in 
the 
higher 
apes 
and 
man. 
The 
rodents 
exhibit 
a 
perfect 
series 
of 
gradations 
between 
these 
two 
extreme 
states. 
In 
all 
mammals 
the 
uterus 
is 
developed 
from 
two 
simple 
primitive 
tubes, 
the 
inferior 
portions 
of 
which 
form 
the 
cornua; 
and 
it 
is 
in 
the 
words 
of 
Dr. 
Farre, 
"by 
the 
coalescence 
of 
the 
two 
cornua 
at 
their 
lower 
extremities 
that 
the 
body 
of 
the 
uterus 
is 
formed 
in 
man; 
while 
in 
those 
animals 
in 
which 
no 
middle 
portion 
or 
body 
exists, 
the 
cornua 
remain 
ununited. 
As 
the 
development 
of 
the 
uterus 
proceeds, 
the 
two 
cornua 
become 
gradually 
shorter, 
until 
at 
length 
they 
are 
lost, 
or, 
as 
it 
were, 
absorbed 
into 
the 
body 
of 
the 
uterus." 
The 
angles 
of 
the 
uterus 
are 
still 
produced 
into 
cornua, 
even 
in 
animals 
as 
high 
up 
in 
the 
scale 
as 
the 
lower 
apes 
and 
lemurs. 


Now 
in 
women, 
anomalous 
cases 
are 
not 
very 
infrequent, 
in 
which 
the 
mature 
uterus 
is 
furnished 
with 
cornua, 
or 
is 
partially 
divided 
into 
two 
organs; 
and 
such 
cases, 
according 
to 
Owen, 
repeat 
"the 
grade 
of 
concentrative 
development," 
attained 
by 
certain 
rodents. 
Here 
perhaps 
we 
have 
an 
instance 
of 
a 
simple 
arrest 
of 
embryonic 
development, 
with 
subsequent 
growth 
and 
perfect 
functional 
development; 
for 
either 
side 
of 
the 
partially 
double 
uterus 
is 
capable 
of 
performing 
the 
proper 
office 
of 
gestation. 
In 
other 
and 
rarer 
cases, 
two 
distinct 
uterine 
cavities 
are 
formed, 
each 
having 
its 
proper 
orifice 
and 
passage. 
(39. 
See 
Dr. 
A. 
Farre's 
well-known 
article 
in 
the 
'Cyclopaedia 
of 
Anatomy 
and 
Physiology,' 
vol. 
v. 
1859, 
p. 
642. 
Owen, 
'Anatomy 
of 
Vertebrates,' 
vol. 
iii. 
1868, 
p. 
687. 
Professor 
Turner, 
in 
'Edinburgh 
Medical 
Journal,' 
February, 
1865.) 
No 
such 
stage 
is 
passed 
through 
during 
the 



ordinary 
development 
of 
the 
embryo; 
and 
it 
is 
difficult 
to 
believe, 
though 
perhaps 
not 
impossible, 
that 
the 
two 
simple, 
minute, 
primitive 
tubes 
should 
know 
how 
(if 
such 
an 
expression 
may 
be 
used) 
to 
grow 
into 
two 
distinct 
uteri, 
each 
with 
a 
well-constructed 
orifice 
and 
passage, 
and 
each 
furnished 
with 
numerous 
muscles, 
nerves, 
glands 
and 
vessels, 
if 
they 
had 
not 
formerly 
passed 
through 
a 
similar 
course 
of 
development, 
as 
in 
the 
case 
of 
existing 
marsupials. 
No 
one 
will 
pretend 
that 
so 
perfect 
a 
structure 
as 
the 
abnormal 
double 
uterus 
in 
woman 
could 
be 
the 
result 
of 
mere 
chance. 
But 
the 
principle 
of 
reversion, 
by 
which 
a 
long-lost 
structure 
is 
called 
back 
into 
existence, 
might 
serve 
as 
the 
guide 
for 
its 
full 
development, 
even 
after 
the 
lapse 
of 
an 
enormous 
interval 
of 
time. 


Professor 
Canestrini, 
after 
discussing 
the 
foregoing 
and 
various 
analogous 
cases, 
arrives 
at 
the 
same 
conclusion 
as 
that 
just 
given. 
He 
adduces 
another 
instance, 
in 
the 
case 
of 
the 
malar 
bone 
(40. 
'Annuario 
della 
Soc. 
dei 
Naturalisti,' 
Modena, 
1867, 
p. 
83. 
Prof. 
Canestrini 
gives 
extracts 
on 
this 
subject 
from 
various 
authorities. 
Laurillard 
remarks, 
that 
as 
he 
has 
found 
a 
complete 
similarity 
in 
the 
form, 
proportions, 
and 
connection 
of 
the 
two 
malar 
bones 
in 
several 
human 
subjects 
and 
in 
certain 
apes, 
he 
cannot 
consider 
this 
disposition 
of 
the 
parts 
as 
simply 
accidental. 
Another 
paper 
on 
this 
same 
anomaly 
has 
been 
published 
by 
Dr. 
Saviotti 
in 
the 
'Gazzetta 
delle 
Cliniche,' 
Turin, 
1871, 
where 
he 
says 
that 
traces 
of 
the 
division 
may 
be 
detected 
in 
about 
two 
per 
cent. 
of 
adult 
skulls; 
he 
also 
remarks 
that 
it 
more 
frequently 
occurs 
in 
prognathous 
skulls, 
not 
of 
the 
Aryan 
race, 
than 
in 
others. 
See 
also 


G. 
Delorenzi 
on 
the 
same 
subject; 
'Tre 
nuovi 
casi 
d'anomalia 
dell' 
osso 
malare,' 
Torino, 
1872. 
Also, 
E. 
Morselli, 
'Sopra 
una 
rara 
anomalia 
dell' 
osso 
malare,' 
Modena, 
1872. 
Still 
more 
recently 
Gruber 
has 
written 
a 
pamphlet 
on 
the 
division 
of 
this 
bone. 
I 
give 
these 
references 
because 
a 
reviewer, 
without 
any 
grounds 
or 
scruples, 
has 
thrown 
doubts 
on 
my 
statements.), 
which, 
in 
some 
of 
the 
Quadrumana 
and 
other 
mammals, 
normally 
consists 
of 
two 
portions. 
This 
is 
its 
condition 
in 
the 
human 
foetus 
when 
two 
months 
old; 
and 
through 
arrested 
development, 
it 
sometimes 
remains 
thus 
in 
man 
when 
adult, 
more 
especially 
in 
the 
lower 
prognathous 
races. 
Hence 
Canestrini 
concludes 
that 
some 
ancient 
progenitor 
of 
man 
must 
have 
had 
this 
bone 
normally 
divided 
into 
two 
portions, 
which 
afterwards 
became 
fused 
together. 
In 
man 
the 
frontal 
bone 
consists 
of 
a 
single 
piece, 
but 
in 
the 
embryo, 
and 
in 
children, 
and 
in 
almost 
all 
the 
lower 
mammals, 
it 
consists 
of 
two 
pieces 
separated 
by 
a 
distinct 
suture. 
This 
suture 
occasionally 
persists 
more 
or 
less 
distinctly 
in 

man 
after 
maturity; 
and 
more 
frequently 
in 
ancient 
than 
in 
recent 
crania, 
especially, 
as 
Canestrini 
has 
observed, 
in 
those 
exhumed 
from 
the 
Drift, 
and 
belonging 
to 
the 
brachycephalic 
type. 
Here 
again 
he 
comes 
to 
the 
same 
conclusion 
as 
in 
the 
analogous 
case 
of 
the 
malar 
bones. 
In 
this, 
and 
other 
instances 
presently 
to 
be 
given, 
the 
cause 
of 
ancient 
races 
approaching 
the 
lower 
animals 
in 
certain 
characters 
more 
frequently 
than 
do 
the 
modern 
races, 
appears 
to 
be, 
that 
the 
latter 
stand 
at 
a 
somewhat 
greater 
distance 
in 
the 
long 
line 
of 
descent 
from 
their 
early 
semi-human 
progenitors. 


Various 
other 
anomalies 
in 
man, 
more 
or 
less 
analogous 
to 
the 
foregoing, 
have 
been 
advanced 
by 
different 
authors, 
as 
cases 
of 
reversion; 
but 
these 
seem 
not 
a 
little 
doubtful, 
for 
we 
have 
to 
descend 
extremely 
low 
in 
the 
mammalian 
series, 
before 
we 
find 
such 
structures 
normally 
present. 
(41. 
A 
whole 
series 
of 
cases 
is 
given 
by 
Isidore 
Geoffroy 
St.-Hilaire, 
'Hist. 
des 
Anomalies,' 
tom, 
iii, 
p. 
437. 
A 
reviewer 
('Journal 
of 
Anatomy 
and 
Physiology,' 
1871, 
p. 
366) 
blames 
me 
much 
for 
not 
having 
discussed 
the 
numerous 
cases, 
which 
have 
been 
recorded, 
of 
various 
parts 
arrested 
in 
their 
development. 
He 
says 
that, 
according 
to 
my 
theory, 
"every 
transient 
condition 
of 
an 
organ, 
during 
its 
development, 
is 
not 
only 
a 
means 
to 
an 
end, 
but 
once 
was 
an 
end 
in 
itself." 
This 
does 
not 
seem 
to 
me 
necessarily 
to 
hold 
good. 
Why 
should 
not 
variations 
occur 
during 
an 
early 
period 
of 
development, 
having 
no 
relation 
to 
reversion; 
yet 
such 
variations 
might 
be 
preserved 
and 
accumulated, 
if 
in 
any 
way 
serviceable, 
for 
instance, 
in 
shortening 
and 
simplifying 
the 
course 
of 
development? 
And 
again, 
why 
should 
not 
injurious 
abnormalities, 
such 
as 
atrophied 
or 
hypertrophied 
parts, 
which 
have 
no 
relation 
to 
a 
former 
state 
of 
existence, 
occur 
at 
an 
early 
period, 
as 
well 
as 
during 
maturity?) 


In 
man, 
the 
canine 
teeth 
are 
perfectly 
efficient 
instruments 
for 
mastication. 
But 
their 
true 
canine 
character, 
as 
Owen 
(42. 
'Anatomy 
of 
Vertebrates,' 
vol. 
iii. 
1868, 
p. 
323.) 
remarks, 
"is 
indicated 
by 
the 
conical 
form 
of 
the 
crown, 
which 
terminates 
in 
an 
obtuse 
point, 
is 
convex 
outward 
and 
flat 
or 
sub-concave 
within, 
at 
the 
base 
of 
which 
surface 
there 
is 
a 
feeble 
prominence. 
The 
conical 
form 
is 
best 
expressed 
in 
the 
Melanian 
races, 
especially 
the 
Australian. 
The 
canine 
is 
more 
deeply 
implanted, 
and 
by 
a 
stronger 
fang 
than 
the 
incisors." 
Nevertheless, 
this 
tooth 
no 
longer 
serves 
man 
as 
a 
special 
weapon 
for 
tearing 
his 
enemies 
or 
prey; 
it 
may, 
therefore, 
as 
far 
as 
its 
proper 
function 
is 
concerned, 
be 
considered 
as 
rudimentary. 
In 
every 
large 
collection 
of 
human 
skulls 
some 
may 
be 
found, 
as 
Haeckel 
(43. 



'Generelle 
Morphologie,' 
1866, 
B. 
ii. 
s. 
clv.) 
observes, 
with 
the 
canine 
teeth 
projecting 
considerably 
beyond 
the 
others 
in 
the 
same 
manner 
as 
in 
the 
anthropomorphous 
apes, 
but 
in 
a 
less 
degree. 
In 
these 
cases, 
open 
spaces 
between 
the 
teeth 
in 
the 
one 
jaw 
are 
left 
for 
the 
reception 
of 
the 
canines 
of 
the 
opposite 
jaw. 
An 
inter-space 
of 
this 
kind 
in 
a 
Kaffir 
skull, 
figured 
by 
Wagner, 
is 
surprisingly 
wide. 
(44. 
Carl 
Vogt's 
'Lectures 
on 
Man,' 
Eng. 
translat., 
1864, 


p. 
151.) 
Considering 
how 
few 
are 
the 
ancient 
skulls 
which 
have 
been 
examined, 
compared 
to 
recent 
skulls, 
it 
is 
an 
interesting 
fact 
that 
in 
at 
least 
three 
cases 
the 
canines 
project 
largely; 
and 
in 
the 
Naulette 
jaw 
they 
are 
spoken 
of 
as 
enormous. 
(45. 
C. 
Carter 
Blake, 
on 
a 
jaw 
from 
La 
Naulette, 
'Anthropological 
Review,' 
1867, 
p. 
295. 
Schaaffhausen, 
ibid. 
1868, 
p. 
426.) 
Of 
the 
anthropomorphous 
apes 
the 
males 
alone 
have 
their 
canines 
fully 
developed; 
but 
in 
the 
female 
gorilla, 
and 
in 
a 
less 
degree 
in 
the 
female 
orang, 
these 
teeth 
project 
considerably 
beyond 
the 
others; 
therefore 
the 
fact, 
of 
which 
I 
have 
been 
assured, 
that 
women 
sometimes 
have 
considerably 
projecting 
canines, 
is 
no 
serious 
objection 
to 
the 
belief 
that 
their 
occasional 
great 
development 
in 
man 
is 
a 
case 
of 
reversion 
to 
an 
ape-like 
progenitor. 
He 
who 
rejects 
with 
scorn 
the 
belief 
that 
the 
shape 
of 
his 
own 
canines, 
and 
their 
occasional 
great 
development 
in 
other 
men, 
are 
due 
to 
our 
early 
forefathers 
having 
been 
provided 
with 
these 
formidable 
weapons, 
will 
probably 
reveal, 
by 
sneering, 
the 
line 
of 
his 
descent. 
For 
though 
he 
no 
longer 
intends, 
nor 
has 
the 
power, 
to 
use 
these 
teeth 
as 
weapons, 
he 
will 
unconsciously 
retract 
his 
"snarling 
muscles" 
(thus 
named 
by 
Sir 
C. 
Bell) 
(46. 
The 
Anatomy 
of 
Expression, 
1844, 
pp. 
110, 
131.), 
so 
as 
to 
expose 
them 
ready 
for 
action, 
like 
a 
dog 
prepared 
to 
fight. 


Many 
muscles 
are 
occasionally 
developed 
in 
man, 
which 
are 
proper 
to 
the 
Quadrumana 
or 
other 
mammals. 
Professor 
Vlacovich 
(47. 
Quoted 
by 
Prof. 
Canestrini 
in 
the 
'Annuario 
della 
Soc. 
dei 
Naturalisti,' 
1867, 
p. 
90.) 
examined 
forty 
male 
subjects, 
and 
found 
a 
muscle, 
called 
by 
him 
the 
ischio-pubic, 
in 
nineteen 
of 
them; 
in 
three 
others 
there 
was 
a 
ligament 
which 
represented 
this 
muscle; 
and 
in 
the 
remaining 
eighteen 
no 
trace 
of 
it. 
In 
only 
two 
out 
of 
thirty 
female 
subjects 
was 
this 
muscle 
developed 
on 
both 
sides, 
but 
in 
three 
others 
the 
rudimentary 
ligament 
was 
present. 
This 
muscle, 
therefore, 
appears 
to 
be 
much 
more 
common 
in 
the 
male 
than 
in 
the 
female 
sex; 
and 
on 
the 
belief 
in 
the 
descent 
of 
man 
from 
some 
lower 
form, 
the 
fact 
is 
intelligible; 
for 
it 
has 
been 
detected 
in 
several 
of 
the 
lower 
animals, 
and 
in 
all 
of 
these 
it 
serves 
exclusively 
to 
aid 
the 
male 
in 
the 
act 
of 
reproduction. 



Mr. 
J. 
Wood, 
in 
his 
valuable 
series 
of 
papers 
(48. 
These 
papers 
deserve 
careful 
study 
by 
any 
one 
who 
desires 
to 
learn 
how 
frequently 
our 
muscles 
vary, 
and 
in 
varying 
come 
to 
resemble 
those 
of 
the 
Quadrumana. 
The 
following 
references 
relate 
to 
the 
few 
points 
touched 
on 
in 
my 
text: 
'Proc. 
Royal 
Soc.' 
vol. 
xiv. 
1865, 
pp. 
379-384; 
vol. 
xv. 
1866, 
pp. 
241, 
242; 
vol. 
xv. 
1867, 
p. 
544; 
vol. 
xvi. 
1868, 
p. 
524. 
I 
may 
here 
add 
that 
Dr. 
Murie 
and 
Mr. 
St. 
George 
Mivart 
have 
shewn 
in 
their 
Memoir 
on 
the 
Lemuroidea 
('Transactions, 
Zoological 
Society,' 
vol. 
vii. 
1869, 
p. 
96), 
how 
extraordinarily 
variable 
some 
of 
the 
muscles 
are 
in 
these 
animals, 
the 
lowest 
members 
of 
the 
Primates. 
Gradations, 
also, 
in 
the 
muscles 
leading 
to 
structures 
found 
in 
animals 
still 
lower 
in 
the 
scale, 
are 
numerous 
in 
the 
Lemuroidea.), 
has 
minutely 
described 
a 
vast 
number 
of 
muscular 
variations 
in 
man, 
which 
resemble 
normal 
structures 
in 
the 
lower 
animals. 
The 
muscles 
which 
closely 
resemble 
those 
regularly 
present 
in 
our 
nearest 
allies, 
the 
Quadrumana, 
are 
too 
numerous 
to 
be 
here 
even 
specified. 
In 
a 
single 
male 
subject, 
having 
a 
strong 
bodily 
frame, 
and 
well-formed 
skull, 
no 
less 
than 
seven 
muscular 
variations 
were 
observed, 
all 
of 
which 
plainly 
represented 
muscles 
proper 
to 
various 
kinds 
of 
apes. 
This 
man, 
for 
instance, 
had 
on 
both 
sides 
of 
his 
neck 
a 
true 
and 
powerful 
"levator 
claviculae," 
such 
as 
is 
found 
in 
all 
kinds 
of 
apes, 
and 
which 
is 
said 
to 
occur 
in 
about 
one 
out 
of 
sixty 
human 
subjects. 
(49. 
See 
also 
Prof. 
Macalister 
in 
'Proceedings, 
Royal 
Irish 
Academy,' 
vol. 
x. 
1868, 
p. 
124.) 
Again, 
this 
man 
had 
"a 
special 
abductor 
of 
the 
metatarsal 
bone 
of 
the 
fifth 
digit, 
such 
as 
Professor 
Huxley 
and 
Mr. 
Flower 
have 
shewn 
to 
exist 
uniformly 
in 
the 
higher 
and 
lower 
apes." 
I 
will 
give 
only 
two 
additional 
cases; 
the 
acromio-basilar 
muscle 
is 
found 
in 
all 
mammals 
below 
man, 
and 
seems 
to 
be 
correlated 
with 
a 
quadrupedal 
gait, 
(50. 
Mr. 
Champneys 
in 
'Journal 
of 
Anatomy 
and 
Physiology,' 
Nov. 
1871, 
p. 
178.) 
and 
it 
occurs 
in 
about 
one 
out 
of 
sixty 
human 
subjects. 
In 
the 
lower 
extremities 
Mr. 
Bradley 


(51. 
Ibid. 
May 
1872, 
p. 
421.) 
found 
an 
abductor 
ossis 
metatarsi 
quinti 
in 
both 
feet 
of 
man; 
this 
muscle 
had 
not 
up 
to 
that 
time 
been 
recorded 
in 
mankind, 
but 
is 
always 
present 
in 
the 
anthropomorphous 
apes. 
The 
muscles 
of 
the 
hands 
and 
arms—parts 
which 
are 
so 
eminently 
characteristic 
of 
man—are 
extremely 
liable 
to 
vary, 
so 
as 
to 
resemble 
the 
corresponding 
muscles 
in 
the 
lower 
animals. 
(52. 
Prof. 
Macalister 
(ibid. 
p. 
121) 
has 
tabulated 
his 
observations, 
and 
finds 
that 
muscular 
abnormalities 
are 
most 
frequent 
in 
the 
fore-arms, 
secondly, 
in 
the 
face, 
thirdly, 
in 
the 
foot, 
etc.) 
Such 
resemblances 
are 
either 
perfect 
or 
imperfect; 
yet 
in 
the 
latter 
case 
they 
are 
manifestly 
of 
a 

transitional 
nature. 
Certain 
variations 
are 
more 
common 
in 
man, 
and 
others 
in 
woman, 
without 
our 
being 
able 
to 
assign 
any 
reason. 
Mr. 
Wood, 
after 
describing 
numerous 
variations, 
makes 
the 
following 
pregnant 
remark. 
"Notable 
departures 
from 
the 
ordinary 
type 
of 
the 
muscular 
structures 
run 
in 
grooves 
or 
directions, 
which 
must 
be 
taken 
to 
indicate 
some 
unknown 
factor, 
of 
much 
importance 
to 
a 
comprehensive 
knowledge 
of 
general 
and 
scientific 
anatomy." 
(53. 
The 
Rev. 
Dr. 
Haughton, 
after 
giving 
('Proc. 
R. 
Irish 
Academy,' 
June 
27, 
1864, 
p. 
715) 
a 
remarkable 
case 
of 
variation 
in 
the 
human 
flexor 
pollicis 
longus, 
adds, 
"This 
remarkable 
example 
shews 
that 
man 
may 
sometimes 
possess 
the 
arrangement 
of 
tendons 
of 
thumb 
and 
fingers 
characteristic 
of 
the 
macaque; 
but 
whether 
such 
a 
case 
should 
be 
regarded 
as 
a 
macaque 
passing 
upwards 
into 
a 
man, 
or 
a 
man 
passing 
downwards 
into 
a 
macaque, 
or 
as 
a 
congenital 
freak 
of 
nature, 
I 
cannot 
undertake 
to 
say." 
It 
is 
satisfactory 
to 
hear 
so 
capable 
an 
anatomist, 
and 
so 
embittered 
an 
opponent 
of 
evolutionism, 
admitting 
even 
the 
possibility 
of 
either 
of 
his 
first 
propositions. 
Prof. 
Macalister 
has 
also 
described 
('Proceedings 
Royal 
Irish 
Academy,' 
vol. 
x. 
1864, 
p. 
138) 
variations 
in 
the 
flexor 
pollicis 
longus, 
remarkable 
from 
their 
relations 
to 
the 
same 
muscle 
in 
the 
Quadrumana.) 


That 
this 
unknown 
factor 
is 
reversion 
to 
a 
former 
state 
of 
existence 
may 
be 
admitted 
as 
in 
the 
highest 
degree 
probable. 
(54. 
Since 
the 
first 
edition 
of 
this 
book 
appeared, 
Mr. 
Wood 
has 
published 
another 
memoir 
in 
the 
Philosophical 
Transactions, 
1870, 
p. 
83, 
on 
the 
varieties 
of 
the 
muscles 
of 
the 
human 
neck, 
shoulder, 
and 
chest. 
He 
here 
shews 
how 
extremely 
variable 
these 
muscles 
are, 
and 
how 
often 
and 
how 
closely 
the 
variations 
resemble 
the 
normal 
muscles 
of 
the 
lower 
animals. 
He 
sums 
up 
by 
remarking, 
"It 
will 
be 
enough 
for 
my 
purpose 
if 
I 
have 
succeeded 
in 
shewing 
the 
more 
important 
forms 
which, 
when 
occurring 
as 
varieties 
in 
the 
human 
subject, 
tend 
to 
exhibit 
in 
a 
sufficiently 
marked 
manner 
what 
may 
be 
considered 
as 
proofs 
and 
examples 
of 
the 
Darwinian 
principle 
of 
reversion, 
or 
law 
of 
inheritance, 
in 
this 
department 
of 
anatomical 
science.") 
It 
is 
quite 
incredible 
that 
a 
man 
should 
through 
mere 
accident 
abnormally 
resemble 
certain 
apes 
in 
no 
less 
than 
seven 
of 
his 
muscles, 
if 
there 
had 
been 
no 
genetic 
connection 
between 
them. 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
if 
man 
is 
descended 
from 
some 
ape-like 
creature, 
no 
valid 
reason 
can 
be 
assigned 
why 
certain 
muscles 
should 
not 
suddenly 
reappear 
after 
an 
interval 
of 
many 
thousand 
generations, 
in 
the 
same 
manner 
as 
with 
horses, 
asses, 
and 
mules, 
dark-coloured 
stripes 
suddenly 
reappear 
on 
the 
legs, 
and 
shoulders, 
after 
an 
interval 
of 
hundreds, 
or 
more 
probably 
of 



thousands 
of 
generations. 


These 
various 
cases 
of 
reversion 
are 
so 
closely 
related 
to 
those 
of 
rudimentary 
organs 
given 
in 
the 
first 
chapter, 
that 
many 
of 
them 
might 
have 
been 
indifferently 
introduced 
either 
there 
or 
here. 
Thus 
a 
human 
uterus 
furnished 
with 
cornua 
may 
be 
said 
to 
represent, 
in 
a 
rudimentary 
condition, 
the 
same 
organ 
in 
its 
normal 
state 
in 
certain 
mammals. 
Some 
parts 
which 
are 
rudimentary 
in 
man, 
as 
the 
os 
coccyx 
in 
both 
sexes, 
and 
the 
mammae 
in 
the 
male 
sex, 
are 
always 
present; 
whilst 
others, 
such 
as 
the 
supracondyloid 
foramen, 
only 
occasionally 
appear, 
and 
therefore 
might 
have 
been 
introduced 
under 
the 
head 
of 
reversion. 
These 
several 
reversionary 
structures, 
as 
well 
as 
the 
strictly 
rudimentary 
ones, 
reveal 
the 
descent 
of 
man 
from 
some 
lower 
form 
in 
an 
unmistakable 
manner. 


CORRELATED 
VARIATION. 


In 
man, 
as 
in 
the 
lower 
animals, 
many 
structures 
are 
so 
intimately 
related, 
that 
when 
one 
part 
varies 
so 
does 
another, 
without 
our 
being 
able, 
in 
most 
cases, 
to 
assign 
any 
reason. 
We 
cannot 
say 
whether 
the 
one 
part 
governs 
the 
other, 
or 
whether 
both 
are 
governed 
by 
some 
earlier 
developed 
part. 
Various 
monstrosities, 
as 
I. 
Geoffroy 
repeatedly 
insists, 
are 
thus 
intimately 
connected. 
Homologous 
structures 
are 
particularly 
liable 
to 
change 
together, 
as 
we 
see 
on 
the 
opposite 
sides 
of 
the 
body, 
and 
in 
the 
upper 
and 
lower 
extremities. 
Meckel 
long 
ago 
remarked, 
that 
when 
the 
muscles 
of 
the 
arm 
depart 
from 
their 
proper 
type, 
they 
almost 
always 
imitate 
those 
of 
the 
leg; 
and 
so, 
conversely, 
with 
the 
muscles 
of 
the 
legs. 
The 
organs 
of 
sight 
and 
hearing, 
the 
teeth 
and 
hair, 
the 
colour 
of 
the 
skin 
and 
of 
the 
hair, 
colour 
and 
constitution, 
are 
more 
or 
less 
correlated. 
(55. 
The 
authorities 
for 
these 
several 
statements 
are 
given 
in 
my 
'Variation 
of 
Animals 
under 
Domestication,' 
vol. 
ii. 
pp. 
320335.) 
Professor 
Schaaffhausen 
first 
drew 
attention 
to 
the 
relation 
apparently 
existing 
between 
a 
muscular 
frame 
and 
the 
strongly-pronounced 
supra-orbital 
ridges, 
which 
are 
so 
characteristic 
of 
the 
lower 
races 
of 
man. 


Besides 
the 
variations 
which 
can 
be 
grouped 
with 
more 
or 
less 
probability 
under 
the 
foregoing 
heads, 
there 
is 
a 
large 
class 
of 
variations 
which 
may 
be 
provisionally 
called 
spontaneous, 
for 
to 
our 
ignorance 
they 
appear 
to 
arise 
without 
any 
exciting 
cause. 
It 
can, 
however, 
be 
shewn 
that 
such 
variations, 
whether 
consisting 
of 
slight 
individual 
differences, 
or 
of 
strongly-marked 
and 
abrupt 
deviations 
of 
structure, 
depend 
much 
more 
on 
the 
constitution 
of 
the 



organism 
than 
on 
the 
nature 
of 
the 
cond 


(56. 
This 
whole 
subject 
has 
been 
disc 
'Variation 
of 
Animals 
and 
Plants 
under 
D 
RATE 
OF 
INCREASE. 


Civilised 
populations 
have 
been 
kno 
the 
United 
States, 
to 
double 
their 
n 
according 
to 
a 
calculation, 
by 
Euler, 
th 
years. 
(57. 
See 
the 
ever 
memorable 
'Ess 
the 
Rev. 
T. 
Malthus, 
vol. 
i. 
1826. 
pp. 
6, 
population 
of 
the 
United 
States 
(thirty 
m 
whole 
terraqueous 
globe 
so 
thickly, 
tha 
each 
square 
yard 
of 
surface. 
The 
pri 
continued 
increase 
of 
man 
is 
the 
diffi 
living 
in 
comfort. 
We 
may 
infer 
that 
th 
instance, 
in 
the 
United 
States, 
where 
su 
of 
room. 
If 
such 
means 
were 
suddenly 
d 
would 
be 
quickly 
doubled. 
With 
civili 
chiefly 
by 
restraining 
marriages. 
The 
poorest 
classes 
is 
also 
very 
important; 
a 
various 
diseases, 
of 
the 
inhabitants 
of 
c 
ages. 
The 
effects 
of 
severe 
epidemics 
an 
more 
than 
counterbalanced, 
in 
nations 
Emigration 
also 
comes 
in 
aid 
as 
a 
temp 
poor 
classes, 
not 
to 
any 
great 
extent. 


There 
is 
reason 
to 
suspect, 
as 
Malthu 
power 
is 
actually 
less 
in 
barbarous, 
than 
positively 
on 
this 
head, 
for 
with 
savage 
the 
concurrent 
testimony 
of 
missiona 
resided 
with 
such 
people, 
it 
appears 
tha 
large 
ones 
rare. 
This 
may 
be 
partly 
acc 
women 
suckling 
their 
infants 
during 
a 
lo 
savages, 
who 
often 
suffer 
much 
hardsh 
nutritious 
food 
as 
civilised 
men, 
would 
b 
in 
a 
former 
work 
(58. 
'Variation 
of 
Anim 
vol 
ii. 
pp. 
111-113, 
163.), 
that 
all 
our 
do 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Produced by Sue Asscher asschers@bigpond.com This Etext is based on the First Edition. 
ON THE 
ORIGIN OF SPECIES. 
"But with regard to the material world, we can at least go so far as this-Â­we can perceive that events are brought about not by insulated interpositions of Divine power, exerted in each particular case, but by the establishment of general laws." 
W. Whewell: Bridgewater Treatise. 
"To conclude, therefore, let no man out of a weak conceit of sobriety, or an ill-applied moderation, think or maintain, that a man can search too far or be too well studied in the book of God's word, or in the book of God's works; divinity or philosophy; but rather let men endeavour an endless progress or proficience in both." 
Bacon: Advancement of Learning. Down, Bromley, Kent, October 1st, 1859. 
ON 
THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES BY MEANS OF NATURAL SELECTION, 
OR THE 
PRESERVATION OF FAVOURED RACES IN THE STRUGGLE FOR LIFE. 
BY CHARLES DARWIN, M.A., FELLOW OF THE ROYAL, GEOLOGICAL, LINNAEAN, ETC., SOCIETIES; 
AUTHOR OF 'JOURNAL OF RESEARCHES DURING H.M.S. BEAGLE'S VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD.' 
LONDON: 
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET. 
1859. 
CONTENTS. 
INTRODUCTION. 
CHAPTER 1. VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION. 
Causes of Variability. 
Effects of Habit. Correlation of Growth. Inheritance. Character of Domestic Varieties. Difficulty of distinguishing between Varieties and Species. Origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more Species. Domestic Pigeons, their Differences and Origin. Principle of Selection anciently followed, its Effects. Methodical and Unconscious Selection. Unknown Origin of our Domestic Productions. Circumstances favourable to Man's power of Selection. 

CHAPTER 2. VARIATION UNDER NATURE. 
Variability. Individual Differences. Doubtful species. Wide ranging, much diffused, and common species vary most. Species of the larger genera in any country vary more than the species of the smaller genera. Many of the species of the larger genera resemble varieties in being very closely, but unequally, related to each other, and in having restricted ranges. 

CHAPTER 3. STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE. 
Bears on natural selection. The term used in a wide sense. Geometrical powers of increase. Rapid increase of naturalised animals and plants. Nature of the checks to increase. Competition universal. Effects of climate. Protection from the number of individuals. Complex relations of all animals and plants throughout nature. Struggle for life most severe between individuals and varieties of the same species; often severe between species of the same genus. The relation of organism to organism the most important of all relations. 

CHAPTER 4. NATURAL SELECTION. 
Natural Selection: its power compared with man's selection, its power on characters of trifling importance, its power at all ages and on both sexes. Sexual Selection. 
On the generality of intercrosses between individuals of the same species. Circumstances favourable and unfavourable to Natural Selection, namely, intercrossing, isolation, number of individuals. Slow action. Extinction caused by Natural Selection. Divergence of Character, related to the diversity of inhabitants of any small area, and to naturalisation. Action of Natural Selection, through Divergence of Character and Extinction, on the descendants from a common parent. Explains the Grouping of all organic beings. 

CHAPTER 5. LAWS OF VARIATION. 
Effects of external conditions. 
Use and disuse, combined with natural selection; organs of flight and of 
vision. 
Acclimatisation. 
Correlation of growth. 
Compensation and economy of growth. 
False correlations. 
Multiple, rudimentary, and lowly organised structures variable. 
Parts developed in an unusual manner are highly variable: specific characters 
more variable than generic: secondary sexual characters variable. 
Species of the same genus vary in an analogous manner. 
Reversions to long-lost characters. 
Summary. CHAPTER 6. DIFFICULTIES ON THEORY. Difficulties on the theory of descent with modification. 
Transitions. 
Absence or rarity of transitional varieties. 
Transitions in habits of life. 
Diversified habits in the same species. 
Species with habits widely different from those of their allies. 
Organs of extreme perfection. 
Means of transition. 
Cases of difficulty. 
Natura non facit saltum. 
Organs of small importance. 
Organs not in all cases absolutely perfect. 
The law of Unity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence embraced by the theory of Natural Selection. 

CHAPTER 7. INSTINCT. 
Instincts comparable with habits, but different in their origin. Instincts graduated. Aphides and ants. Instincts variable. Domestic instincts, their origin. Natural instincts of the cuckoo, ostrich, and parasitic bees. Slave-making ants. Hive-bee, its cell-making instinct. Difficulties on the theory of the Natural Selection of instincts. Neuter or sterile insects. Summary. 

CHAPTER 8. HYBRIDISM. 
Distinction between the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids. Sterility various in degree, not universal, affected by close interbreeding, removed by domestication. Laws governing the sterility of hybrids. Sterility not a special endowment, but incidental on other differences. Causes of the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids. Parallelism between the effects of changed conditions of life and crossing. Fertility of varieties when crossed and of their mongrel offspring not universal. Hybrids and mongrels compared independently of their fertility. Summary. 

CHAPTER 9. ON THE IMPERFECTION OF THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD. 
On the absence of intermediate varieties at the present day. On the nature of extinct intermediate varieties; on their number. On the vast lapse of time, as inferred from the rate of deposition and of denudation. On the poorness of our palaeontological collections. On the intermittence of geological formations. On the absence of intermediate varieties in any one formation. On the sudden appearance of groups of species. On their sudden appearance in the lowest known fossiliferous strata. 

CHAPTER 10. ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS. 
On the slow and successive appearance of new species. On their different rates of change. Species once lost do not reappear. Groups of species follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as do single species. On Extinction. On simultaneous changes in the forms of life throughout the world. On the affinities of extinct species to each other and to living species. On the state of development of ancient forms. On the succession of the same types within the same areas. Summary of preceding and present chapters. 

CHAPTER 11. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. 
Present distribution cannot be accounted for by differences in physical conditions. Importance of barriers. Affinity of the productions of the same continent. Centres of creation. Means of dispersal, by changes of climate and of the level of the land, and by occasional means. Dispersal during the Glacial period co-extensive with the world. 
CHAPTER 12. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION--continued. 
Distribution of fresh-water productions. On the inhabitants of oceanic islands. Absence of Batrachians and of terrestrial Mammals. On the relation of the inhabitants of islands to those of the nearest mainland. On colonisation from the nearest source with subsequent modification. Summary of the last and present chapters. 
CHAPTER 13. MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS: MORPHOLOGY: EMBRYOLOGY: RUDIMENTARY ORGANS. 
CLASSIFICATION, groups subordinate to groups. Natural system. Rules and difficulties in classification, explained on the theory of descent with modification. 
Classification of varieties. Descent always used in classification. Analogical or adaptive characters. Affinities, general, complex and radiating. Extinction separates and defines groups. MORPHOLOGY, between members of the same class, between parts of the same individual. EMBRYOLOGY, laws of, explained by variations not supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding age. RUDIMENTARY ORGANS; their origin explained. Summary. 

CHAPTER 14. RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION. 
Recapitulation of the difficulties on the theory of Natural Selection. Recapitulation of the general and special circumstances in its favour. Causes of the general belief in the immutability of species. How far the theory of natural selection may be extended. Effects of its adoption on the study of Natural history. Concluding remarks. 

ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES. INTRODUCTION. 
When on board H.M.S. 'Beagle,' as naturalist, I was much struck with certain facts in the distribution of the inhabitants of South America, and in the geological relations of the present to the past inhabitants of that continent. These facts seemed to me to throw some light on the origin of species--that mystery of mysteries, as it has been called by one of our greatest philosophers. On my return home, it occurred to me, in 1837, that something might perhaps be made out on this question by patiently accumulating and reflecting on all sorts of facts which could possibly have any bearing on it. After five years' work I allowed myself to speculate on the subject, and drew up some short notes; these I enlarged in 1844 into a sketch of the conclusions, which then seemed to me probable: from that period to the present day I have steadily pursued the same object. I hope that I may be excused for entering on these personal details, as I give them to show that I have not been hasty in coming to a decision. 
My work is now nearly finished; but as it will take me two or three more years to complete it, and as my health is far from strong, I have been urged to publish this Abstract. I have more especially been induced to do this, as Mr. 
Wallace, who is now studying the natural history of the Malay archipelago, has arrived at almost exactly the same general conclusions that I have on the origin of species. Last year he sent to me a memoir on this subject, with a request that I would forward it to Sir Charles Lyell, who sent it to the Linnean Society, and it is published in the third volume of the Journal of that Society. Sir C. Lyell and Dr. Hooker, who both knew of my work--the latter having read my sketch of 1844--honoured me by thinking it advisable to publish, with Mr. Wallace's excellent memoir, some brief extracts from my manuscripts. 
This Abstract, which I now publish, must necessarily be imperfect. I cannot here give references and authorities for my several statements; and I must trust to the reader reposing some confidence in my accuracy. No doubt errors will have crept in, though I hope I have always been cautious in trusting to good authorities alone. I can here give only the general conclusions at which I have arrived, with a few facts in illustration, but which, I hope, in most cases will suffice. No one can feel more sensible than I do of the necessity of hereafter publishing in detail all the facts, with references, on which my conclusions have been grounded; and I hope in a future work to do this. For I am well aware that scarcely a single point is discussed in this volume on which facts cannot be adduced, often apparently leading to conclusions directly opposite to those at which I have arrived. A fair result can be obtained only by fully stating and balancing the facts and arguments on both sides of each question; and this cannot possibly be here done. 
I much regret that want of space prevents my having the satisfaction of acknowledging the generous assistance which I have received from very many naturalists, some of them personally unknown to me. I cannot, however, let this opportunity pass without expressing my deep obligations to Dr. Hooker, who for the last fifteen years has aided me in every possible way by his large stores of knowledge and his excellent judgment. 
In considering the Origin of Species, it is quite conceivable that a naturalist, reflecting on the mutual affinities of organic beings, on their embryological relations, their geographical distribution, geological succession, and other such facts, might come to the conclusion that each species had not been independently created, but had descended, like varieties, from other species. Nevertheless, such a conclusion, even if well founded, would be unsatisfactory, until it could be shown how the innumerable species inhabiting this world have been modified, so as to acquire that perfection of structure and coadaptation which most justly excites our admiration. Naturalists continually refer to external conditions, such as climate, food, etc., as the only possible cause of variation. In one very limited sense, as we shall hereafter see, this may be true; but it is preposterous to attribute to mere external conditions, the structure, for instance, of the woodpecker, with its feet, tail, beak, and tongue, so admirably adapted to catch insects under the bark of trees. In the case of the misseltoe, which draws its nourishment from certain trees, which has seeds that must be transported by certain birds, and which has flowers with separate sexes absolutely requiring the agency of certain insects to bring pollen from one flower to the other, it is equally preposterous to account for the structure of this parasite, with its relations to several distinct organic beings, by the effects of external conditions, or of habit, or of the volition of the plant itself. 
The author of the 'Vestiges of Creation' would, I presume, say that, after a certain unknown number of generations, some bird had given birth to a woodpecker, and some plant to the misseltoe, and that these had been produced perfect as we now see them; but this assumption seems to me to be no explanation, for it leaves the case of the coadaptations of organic beings to each other and to their physical conditions of life, untouched and unexplained. 
It is, therefore, of the highest importance to gain a clear insight into the means of modification and coadaptation. At the commencement of my observations it seemed to me probable that a careful study of domesticated animals and of cultivated plants would offer the best chance of making out this obscure problem. Nor have I been disappointed; in this and in all other perplexing cases I have invariably found that our knowledge, imperfect though it be, of variation under domestication, afforded the best and safest clue. I may venture to express my conviction of the high value of such studies, although they have been very commonly neglected by naturalists. 
From these considerations, I shall devote the first chapter of this Abstract to Variation under Domestication. We shall thus see that a large amount of hereditary modification is at least possible, and, what is equally or more important, we shall see how great is the power of man in accumulating by his Selection successive slight variations. I will then pass on to the variability of species in a state of nature; but I shall, unfortunately, be compelled to treat this subject far too briefly, as it can be treated properly only by giving long catalogues of facts. We shall, however, be enabled to discuss what circumstances are most favourable to variation. In the next chapter the Struggle for Existence amongst all organic beings throughout the world, which inevitably follows from their high geometrical powers of increase, will be treated of. This is the doctrine of Malthus, applied to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms. As many more individuals of each species are born than can possibly survive; and as, consequently, there is a frequently recurring struggle for existence, it follows that any being, if it vary however slightly in any manner profitable to itself, under the complex and sometimes varying conditions of life, will have a better chance of surviving, and thus be NATURALLY SELECTED. From the strong principle of inheritance, any selected variety will tend to propagate its new and modified form. 
This fundamental subject of Natural Selection will be treated at some length in the fourth chapter; and we shall then see how Natural Selection almost inevitably causes much Extinction of the less improved forms of life and induces what I have called Divergence of Character. In the next chapter I shall discuss the complex and little known laws of variation and of correlation of growth. In the four succeeding chapters, the most apparent and gravest difficulties on the theory will be given: namely, first, the difficulties of transitions, or in understanding how a simple being or a simple organ can be changed and perfected into a highly developed being or elaborately constructed organ; secondly the subject of Instinct, or the mental powers of animals, thirdly, Hybridism, or the infertility of species and the fertility of varieties when intercrossed; and fourthly, the imperfection of the Geological Record. In the next chapter I shall consider the geological succession of organic beings throughout time; in the eleventh and twelfth, their geographical distribution throughout space; in the thirteenth, their classification or mutual affinities, both when mature and in an embryonic condition. In the last chapter I shall give a brief recapitulation of the whole work, and a few concluding remarks. 
No one ought to feel surprise at much remaining as yet unexplained in regard to the origin of species and varieties, if he makes due allowance for our profound ignorance in regard to the mutual relations of all the beings which live around us. Who can explain why one species ranges widely and is very numerous, and why another allied species has a narrow range and is rare? Yet these relations are of the highest importance, for they determine the present welfare, and, as I believe, the future success and modification of every inhabitant of this world. Still less do we know of the mutual relations of the innumerable inhabitants of the world during the many past geological epochs in its history. Although much remains obscure, and will long remain obscure, I can entertain no doubt, after the most deliberate study and dispassionate judgment of which I am capable, that the view which most naturalists entertain, and which I formerly entertained--namely, that each species has been independently created--is erroneous. I am fully convinced that species are not immutable; but that those belonging to what are called the same genera are lineal descendants of some other and generally extinct species, in the same manner as the acknowledged varieties of any one species are the descendants of that species. Furthermore, I am convinced that Natural Selection has been the main but not exclusive means of modification. 
CHAPTER 1. VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION. 
Causes of Variability. Effects of Habit. Correlation of Growth. Inheritance. Character of Domestic Varieties. Difficulty of distinguishing between Varieties and Species. Origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more Species. Domestic Pigeons, their Differences and Origin. Principle of Selection anciently followed, its Effects. Methodical and Unconscious Selection. Unknown Origin of our Domestic Productions. Circumstances favourable to Man's power of Selection. 
When we look to the individuals of the same variety or sub-variety of our older cultivated plants and animals, one of the first points which strikes us, is, that they generally differ much more from each other, than do the individuals of any one species or variety in a state of nature. When we reflect on the vast diversity of the plants and animals which have been cultivated, and which have varied during all ages under the most different climates and treatment, I think we are driven to conclude that this greater variability is simply due to our domestic productions having been raised under conditions of life not so uniform as, and somewhat different from, those to which the parent-species have been exposed under nature. There is, also, I think, some probability in the view propounded by Andrew Knight, that this variability may be partly connected with excess of food. It seems pretty clear that organic beings must be exposed during several generations to the new conditions of life to cause any appreciable amount of variation; and that when the organisation has once begun to vary, it generally continues to vary for many generations. No case is on record of a variable being ceasing to be variable under cultivation. Our oldest cultivated plants, such as wheat, still often yield new varieties: our oldest domesticated animals are still capable of rapid improvement or modification. 
It has been disputed at what period of life the causes of variability, whatever they may be, generally act; whether during the early or late period of development of the embryo, or at the instant of conception. Geoffroy St. Hilaire's experiments show that unnatural treatment of the embryo causes monstrosities; and monstrosities cannot be separated by any clear line of distinction from mere variations. But I am strongly inclined to suspect that the most frequent cause of variability may be attributed to the male and female reproductive elements having been affected prior to the act of conception. Several reasons make me believe in this; but the chief one is the remarkable effect which confinement or cultivation has on the functions of the reproductive system; this system appearing to be far more susceptible than any other part of the organisation, to the action of any change in the conditions of life. Nothing is more easy than to tame an animal, and few things more difficult than to get it to breed freely under confinement, even in the many cases when the male and female unite. How many animals there are which will not breed, though living long under not very close confinement in their native country! This is generally attributed to vitiated instincts; but how many cultivated plants display the utmost vigour, and yet rarely or never seed! In some few such cases it has been found out that very trifling changes, such as a little more or less water at some particular period of growth, will determine whether or not the plant sets a seed. I cannot here enter on the copious details which I have collected on this curious subject; but to show how singular the laws are which determine the reproduction of animals under confinement, I may just mention that carnivorous animals, even from the tropics, breed in this country pretty freely under confinement, with the exception of the plantigrades or bear family; whereas, carnivorous birds, with the rarest exceptions, hardly ever lay fertile eggs. Many exotic plants have pollen utterly worthless, in the same exact condition as in the most sterile hybrids. When, on the one hand, we see domesticated animals and plants, though often weak and sickly, yet breeding quite freely under confinement; and when, on the other hand, we see individuals, though taken young from a state of nature, perfectly tamed, long-lived, and healthy (of which I could give numerous instances), yet having their reproductive system so seriously affected by unperceived causes as to fail in acting, we need not be surprised at this system, when it does act under confinement, acting not quite regularly, and producing offspring not perfectly like their parents or variable. 
Sterility has been said to be the bane of horticulture; but on this view we owe variability to the same cause which produces sterility; and variability is the source of all the choicest productions of the garden. I may add, that as some organisms will breed most freely under the most unnatural conditions (for instance, the rabbit and ferret kept in hutches), showing that their reproductive system has not been thus affected; so will some animals and plants withstand domestication or cultivation, and vary very slightly--perhaps hardly more than in a state of nature. 
A long list could easily be given of "sporting plants;" by this term gardeners mean a single bud or offset, which suddenly assumes a new and sometimes very different character from that of the rest of the plant. Such buds can be propagated by grafting, etc., and sometimes by seed. These "sports" are extremely rare under nature, but far from rare under cultivation; and in this case we see that the treatment of the parent has affected a bud or offset, and not the ovules or pollen. But it is the opinion of most physiologists that there is no essential difference between a bud and an ovule in their earliest stages of formation; so that, in fact, "sports" support my view, that variability may be largely attributed to the ovules or pollen, or to both, having been affected by the treatment of the parent prior to the act of conception. These cases anyhow show that variation is not necessarily connected, as some authors have supposed, with the act of generation. 
Seedlings from the same fruit, and the young of the same litter, sometimes differ considerably from each other, though both the young and the parents, as Muller has remarked, have apparently been exposed to exactly the same conditions of life; and this shows how unimportant the direct effects of the conditions of life are in comparison with the laws of reproduction, and of growth, and of inheritance; for had the action of the conditions been direct, if any of the young had varied, all would probably have varied in the same manner. To judge how much, in the case of any variation, we should attribute to the direct action of heat, moisture, light, food, etc., is most difficult: my impression is, that with animals such agencies have produced very little direct effect, though apparently more in the case of plants. Under this point of view, Mr. Buckman's recent experiments on plants seem extremely valuable. When all or nearly all the individuals exposed to certain conditions are affected in the same way, the change at first appears to be directly due to such conditions; but in some cases it can be shown that quite opposite conditions produce similar changes of structure. Nevertheless some slight amount of change may, I think, be attributed to the direct action of the conditions of life--as, in some cases, increased size from amount of food, colour from particular kinds of food and from light, and perhaps the thickness of fur from climate. 
Habit also has a decided influence, as in the period of flowering with plants when transported from one climate to another. In animals it has a more marked effect; for instance, I find in the domestic duck that the bones of the wing weigh less and the bones of the leg more, in proportion to the whole skeleton, than do the same bones in the wild-duck; and I presume that this change may be safely attributed to the domestic duck flying much less, and walking more, than its wild parent. The great and inherited development of the udders in cows and goats in countries where they are habitually milked, in comparison with the state of these organs in other countries, is another instance of the effect of use. Not a single domestic animal can be named which has not in some country drooping ears; and the view suggested by some authors, that the drooping is due to the disuse of the muscles of the ear, from the animals not being much alarmed by danger, seems probable. 
There are many laws regulating variation, some few of which can be dimly seen, and will be hereafter briefly mentioned. I will here only allude to what may be called correlation of growth. Any change in the embryo or larva will almost certainly entail changes in the mature animal. In monstrosities, the correlations between quite distinct parts are very curious; and many instances are given in Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire's great work on this subject. Breeders believe that long limbs are almost always accompanied by an elongated head. Some instances of correlation are quite whimsical; thus cats with blue eyes are invariably deaf; colour and constitutional peculiarities go together, of which many remarkable cases could be given amongst animals and plants. From the facts collected by Heusinger, it appears that white sheep and pigs are differently affected from coloured individuals by certain vegetable poisons. Hairless dogs have imperfect teeth; long-haired and coarse-haired animals are apt to have, as is asserted, long or many horns; pigeons with feathered feet have skin between their outer toes; pigeons with short beaks have small feet, and those with long beaks large feet. Hence, if man goes on selecting, and thus augmenting, any peculiarity, he will almost certainly unconsciously modify other parts of the structure, owing to the mysterious laws of the correlation of growth. 
The result of the various, quite unknown, or dimly seen laws of variation is infinitely complex and diversified. It is well worth while carefully to study the several treatises published on some of our old cultivated plants, as on the hyacinth, potato, even the dahlia, etc.; and it is really surprising to note the endless points in structure and constitution in which the varieties and sub-varieties differ slightly from each other. The whole organisation seems to have become plastic, and tends to depart in some small degree from that of the parental type. 
Any variation which is not inherited is unimportant for us. But the number and diversity of inheritable deviations of structure, both those of slight and those of considerable physiological importance, is endless. Dr. Prosper Lucas's treatise, in two large volumes, is the fullest and the best on this subject. No breeder doubts how strong is the tendency to inheritance: like produces like is his fundamental belief: doubts have been thrown on this principle by theoretical writers alone. When a deviation appears not unfrequently, and we see it in the father and child, we cannot tell whether it may not be due to the same original cause acting on both; but when amongst individuals, apparently exposed to the same conditions, any very rare deviation, due to some extraordinary combination of circumstances, appears in the parent--say, once amongst several million individuals--and it reappears in the child, the mere doctrine of chances almost compels us to attribute its reappearance to inheritance. Every one must have heard of cases of albinism, prickly skin, hairy bodies, etc., appearing in several members of the same family. If strange and rare deviations of structure are truly inherited, less strange and commoner deviations may be freely admitted to be inheritable. Perhaps the correct way of viewing the whole subject, would be, to look at the inheritance of every character whatever as the rule, and non-inheritance as the anomaly. 
The laws governing inheritance are quite unknown; no one can say why the same peculiarity in different individuals of the same species, and in individuals of different species, is sometimes inherited and sometimes not so; why the child often reverts in certain characters to its grandfather or grandmother or other much more remote ancestor; why a peculiarity is often transmitted from one sex to both sexes or to one sex alone, more commonly but not exclusively to the like sex. It is a fact of some little importance to us, that peculiarities appearing in the males of our domestic breeds are often transmitted either exclusively, or in a much greater degree, to males alone. A much more important rule, which I think may be trusted, is that, at whatever period of life a peculiarity first appears, it tends to appear in the offspring at a corresponding age, though sometimes earlier. In many cases this could not be otherwise: thus the inherited peculiarities in the horns of cattle could appear only in the offspring when nearly mature; peculiarities in the silkworm are known to appear at the corresponding caterpillar or cocoon stage. But hereditary diseases and some other facts make me believe that the rule has a wider extension, and that when there is no apparent reason why a peculiarity should appear at any particular age, yet that it does tend to appear in the offspring at the same period at which it first appeared in the parent. I believe this rule to be of the highest importance in explaining the laws of embryology. These remarks are of course confined to the first APPEARANCE of the peculiarity, and not to its primary cause, which may have acted on the ovules or male element; in nearly the same manner as in the crossed offspring from a short-horned cow by a long-horned bull, the greater length of horn, though appearing late in life, is clearly due to the male element. 
Having alluded to the subject of reversion, I may here refer to a statement often made by naturalists--namely, that our domestic varieties, when run wild, gradually but certainly revert in character to their aboriginal stocks. Hence it has been argued that no deductions can be drawn from domestic races to species in a state of nature. I have in vain endeavoured to discover on what decisive facts the above statement has so often and so boldly been made. There would be great difficulty in proving its truth: we may safely conclude that very many of the most strongly-marked domestic varieties could not possibly live in a wild state. In many cases we do not know what the aboriginal stock was, and so could not tell whether or not nearly perfect reversion had ensued. It would be quite necessary, in order to prevent the effects of intercrossing, that only a single variety should be turned loose in its new home. Nevertheless, as our varieties certainly do occasionally revert in some of their characters to ancestral forms, it seems to me not improbable, that if we could succeed in naturalising, or were to cultivate, during many generations, the several races, for instance, of the cabbage, in very poor soil (in which case, however, some effect would have to be attributed to the direct action of the poor soil), that they would to a large extent, or even wholly, revert to the wild aboriginal stock. Whether or not the experiment would succeed, is not of great importance for our line of argument; for by the experiment itself the conditions of life are changed. If it could be shown that our domestic varieties manifested a strong tendency to reversion,--that is, to lose their acquired characters, whilst kept under unchanged conditions, and whilst kept in a considerable body, so that free intercrossing might check, by blending together, any slight deviations of structure, in such case, I grant that we could deduce nothing from domestic varieties in regard to species. But there is not a shadow of evidence in favour of this view: to assert that we could not breed our cart and race-horses, long and short-horned cattle, and poultry of various breeds, and esculent vegetables, for an almost infinite number of generations, would be opposed to all experience. I may add, that when under nature the conditions of life do change, variations and reversions of character probably do occur; but natural selection, as will hereafter be explained, will determine how far the new characters thus arising shall be preserved. 
When we look to the hereditary varieties or races of our domestic animals and plants, and compare them with species closely allied together, we generally perceive in each domestic race, as already remarked, less uniformity of character than in true species. Domestic races of the same species, also, often have a somewhat monstrous character; by which I mean, that, although differing from each other, and from the other species of the same genus, in several trifling respects, they often differ in an extreme degree in some one part, both when compared one with another, and more especially when compared with all the species in nature to which they are nearest allied. With these exceptions (and with that of the perfect fertility of varieties when crossed,--a subject hereafter to be discussed), domestic races of the same species differ from each other in the same manner as, only in most cases in a lesser degree than, do closely-allied species of the same genus in a state of nature. I think this must be admitted, when we find that there are hardly any domestic races, either amongst animals or plants, which have not been ranked by some competent judges as mere varieties, and by other competent judges as the descendants of aboriginally distinct species. If any marked distinction existed between domestic races and species, this source of doubt could not so perpetually recur. It has often been stated that domestic races do not differ from each other in characters of generic value. I think it could be shown that this statement is hardly correct; but naturalists differ most widely in determining what characters are of generic value; all such valuations being at present empirical. Moreover, on the view of the origin of genera which I shall presently give, we have no right to expect often to meet with generic differences in our domesticated productions. 
When we attempt to estimate the amount of structural difference between the domestic races of the same species, we are soon involved in doubt, from not knowing whether they have descended from one or several parent-species. This point, if it could be cleared up, would be interesting; if, for instance, it could be shown that the greyhound, bloodhound, terrier, spaniel, and bull-dog, which we all know propagate their kind so truly, were the offspring of any single species, then such facts would have great weight in making us doubt about the immutability of the many very closely allied and natural species--for instance, of the many foxes--inhabiting different quarters of the world. I do not believe, as we shall presently see, that all our dogs have descended from any one wild species; but, in the case of some other domestic races, there is presumptive, or even strong, evidence in favour of this view. 
It has often been assumed that man has chosen for domestication animals and plants having an extraordinary inherent tendency to vary, and likewise to withstand diverse climates. I do not dispute that these capacities have added largely to the value of most of our domesticated productions; but how could a savage possibly know, when he first tamed an animal, whether it would vary in succeeding generations, and whether it would endure other climates? Has the little variability of the ass or guinea-fowl, or the small power of endurance of warmth by the rein-deer, or of cold by the common camel, prevented their domestication? I cannot doubt that if other animals and plants, equal in number to our domesticated productions, and belonging to equally diverse classes and countries, were taken from a state of nature, and could be made to breed for an equal number of generations under domestication, they would vary on an average as largely as the parent species of our existing domesticated productions have varied. 
In the case of most of our anciently domesticated animals and plants, I do not think it is possible to come to any definite conclusion, whether they have descended from one or several species. The argument mainly relied on by those who believe in the multiple origin of our domestic animals is, that we find in the most ancient records, more especially on the monuments of Egypt, much diversity in the breeds; and that some of the breeds closely resemble, perhaps are identical with, those still existing. Even if this latter fact were found more strictly and generally true than seems to me to be the case, what does it show, but that some of our breeds originated there, four or five thousand years ago? But Mr. Horner's researches have rendered it in some degree probable that man sufficiently civilized to have manufactured pottery existed in the valley of the Nile thirteen or fourteen thousand years ago; and who will pretend to say how long before these ancient periods, savages, like those of Tierra del Fuego or Australia, who possess a semi-domestic dog, may not have existed in Egypt? 
The whole subject must, I think, remain vague; nevertheless, I may, without here entering on any details, state that, from geographical and other considerations, I think it highly probable that our domestic dogs have descended from several wild species. In regard to sheep and goats I can form no opinion. I should think, from facts communicated to me by Mr. Blyth, on the habits, voice, and constitution, etc., of the humped Indian cattle, that these had descended from a different aboriginal stock from our European cattle; and several competent judges believe that these latter have had more than one wild parent. With respect to horses, from reasons which I cannot give here, I am doubtfully inclined to believe, in opposition to several authors, that all the races have descended from one wild stock. Mr. Blyth, whose opinion, from his large and varied stores of knowledge, I should value more than that of almost any one, thinks that all the breeds of poultry have proceeded from the common wild Indian fowl (Gallus bankiva). In regard to ducks and rabbits, the breeds of which differ considerably from each other in structure, I do not doubt that they all have descended from the common wild duck and rabbit. 
The doctrine of the origin of our several domestic races from several aboriginal stocks, has been carried to an absurd extreme by some authors. They believe that every race which breeds true, let the distinctive characters be ever so slight, has had its wild prototype. At this rate there must have existed at least a score of species of wild cattle, as many sheep, and several goats in Europe alone, and several even within Great Britain. One author believes that there formerly existed in Great Britain eleven wild species of sheep peculiar to it! When we bear in mind that Britain has now hardly one peculiar mammal, and France but few distinct from those of Germany and conversely, and so with Hungary, Spain, etc., but that each of these kingdoms possesses several peculiar breeds of cattle, sheep, etc., we must admit that many domestic breeds have originated in Europe; for whence could they have been derived, as these several countries do not possess a number of peculiar species as distinct parent-stocks? So it is in India. Even in the case of the domestic dogs of the whole world, which I fully admit have probably descended from several wild species, I cannot doubt that there has been an immense amount of inherited variation. Who can believe that animals closely resembling the Italian greyhound, the bloodhound, the bull-dog, or Blenheim spaniel, etc.--so unlike all wild Canidae--ever existed freely in a state of nature? It has often been loosely said that all our races of dogs have been produced by the crossing of a few aboriginal species; but by crossing we can get only forms in some degree intermediate between their parents; and if we account for our several domestic races by this process, we must admit the former existence of the most extreme forms, as the Italian greyhound, bloodhound, bull-dog, etc., in the wild state. Moreover, the possibility of making distinct races by crossing has been greatly exaggerated. There can be no doubt that a race may be modified by occasional crosses, if aided by the careful selection of those individual mongrels, which present any desired character; but that a race could be obtained nearly intermediate between two extremely different races or species, I can hardly believe. Sir J. Sebright expressly experimentised for this object, and failed. The offspring from the first cross between two pure breeds is tolerably and sometimes (as I have found with pigeons) extremely uniform, and everything seems simple enough; but when these mongrels are crossed one with another for several generations, hardly two of them will be alike, and then the extreme difficulty, or rather utter hopelessness, of the task becomes apparent. Certainly, a breed intermediate between TWO VERY DISTINCT breeds could not be got without extreme care and long-continued selection; nor can I find a single case on record of a permanent race having been thus formed. 

ON THE BREEDS OF THE DOMESTIC PIGEON. 
Believing that it is always best to study some special group, I have, after deliberation, taken up domestic pigeons. I have kept every breed which I could purchase or obtain, and have been most kindly favoured with skins from several quarters of the world, more especially by the Honourable W. Elliot from India, and by the Honourable C. Murray from Persia. Many treatises in different languages have been published on pigeons, and some of them are very important, as being of considerable antiquity. I have associated with several eminent fanciers, and have been permitted to join two of the London Pigeon Clubs. The diversity of the breeds is something astonishing. Compare the English carrier and the short-faced tumbler, and see the wonderful difference in their beaks, entailing corresponding differences in their skulls. The carrier, more especially the male bird, is also remarkable from the wonderful development of the carunculated skin about the head, and this is accompanied by greatly elongated eyelids, very large external orifices to the nostrils, and a wide gape of mouth. The short-faced tumbler has a beak in outline almost like that of a finch; and the common tumbler has the singular and strictly inherited habit of flying at a great height in a compact flock, and tumbling in the air head over heels. The runt is a bird of great size, with long, massive beak and large feet; some of the sub-breeds of runts have very long necks, others very long wings and tails, others singularly short tails. The barb is allied to the carrier, but, instead of a very long beak, has a very short and very broad one. The pouter has a much elongated body, wings, and legs; and its enormously developed crop, which it glories in inflating, may well excite astonishment and even laughter. The turbit has a very short and conical beak, with a line of reversed feathers down the breast; and it has the habit of continually expanding slightly the upper part of the oesophagus. The Jacobin has the feathers so much reversed along the back of the neck that they form a hood, and it has, proportionally to its size, much elongated wing and tail feathers. The trumpeter and laugher, as their names express, utter a very different coo from the other breeds. The fantail has thirty or even forty tail-feathers, instead of twelve or fourteen, the normal number in all members of the great pigeon family; and these feathers are kept expanded, and are carried so erect that in good birds the head and tail touch; the oil-gland is quite aborted. Several other less distinct breeds might have been specified. 
In the skeletons of the several breeds, the development of the bones of the face in length and breadth and curvature differs enormously. The shape, as well as the breadth and length of the ramus of the lower jaw, varies in a highly remarkable manner. The number of the caudal and sacral vertebrae vary; as does the number of the ribs, together with their relative breadth and the presence of processes. The size and shape of the apertures in the sternum are highly variable; so is the degree of divergence and relative size of the two arms of the furcula. The proportional width of the gape of mouth, the proportional length of the eyelids, of the orifice of the nostrils, of the tongue (not always in strict correlation with the length of beak), the size of the crop and of the upper part of the oesophagus; the development and abortion of the oil-gland; the number of the primary wing and caudal feathers; the relative length of wing and tail to each other and to the body; the relative length of leg and of the feet; the number of scutellae on the toes, the development of skin between the toes, are all points of structure which are variable. The period at which the perfect plumage is acquired varies, as does the state of the down with which the nestling birds are clothed when hatched. The shape and size of the eggs vary. The manner of flight differs remarkably; as does in some breeds the voice and disposition. Lastly, in certain breeds, the males and females have come to differ to a slight degree from each other. 
Altogether at least a score of pigeons might be chosen, which if shown to an ornithologist, and he were told that they were wild birds, would certainly, I think, be ranked by him as well-defined species. Moreover, I do not believe that any ornithologist would place the English carrier, the short-faced tumbler, the runt, the barb, pouter, and fantail in the same genus; more especially as in each of these breeds several truly-inherited sub-breeds, or species as he might have called them, could be shown him. 
Great as the differences are between the breeds of pigeons, I am fully convinced that the common opinion of naturalists is correct, namely, that all have descended from the rock-pigeon (Columba livia), including under this term several geographical races or sub-species, which differ from each other in the most trifling respects. As several of the reasons which have led me to this belief are in some degree applicable in other cases, I will here briefly give them. If the several breeds are not varieties, and have not proceeded from the rock-pigeon, they must have descended from at least seven or eight aboriginal stocks; for it is impossible to make the present domestic breeds by the crossing of any lesser number: how, for instance, could a pouter be produced by crossing two breeds unless one of the parent-stocks possessed the characteristic enormous crop? The supposed aboriginal stocks must all have been rock-pigeons, that is, not breeding or willingly perching on trees. But besides C. livia, with its geographical sub-species, only two or three other species of rock-pigeons are known; and these have not any of the characters of the domestic breeds. Hence the supposed aboriginal stocks must either still exist in the countries where they were originally domesticated, and yet be unknown to ornithologists; and this, considering their size, habits, and remarkable characters, seems very improbable; or they must have become extinct in the wild state. But birds breeding on precipices, and good fliers, are unlikely to be exterminated; and the common rock-pigeon, which has the same habits with the domestic breeds, has not been exterminated even on several of the smaller British islets, or on the shores of the Mediterranean. Hence the supposed extermination of so many species having similar habits with the rock-pigeon seems to me a very rash assumption. Moreover, the several above-named domesticated breeds have been transported to all parts of the world, and, therefore, some of them must have been carried back again into their native country; but not one has ever become wild or feral, though the dovecot-pigeon, which is the rock-pigeon in a very slightly altered state, has become feral in several places. Again, all recent experience shows that it is most difficult to get any wild animal to breed freely under domestication; yet on the hypothesis of the multiple origin of our pigeons, it must be assumed that at least seven or eight species were so thoroughly domesticated in ancient times by half-civilized man, as to be quite prolific under confinement. 
An argument, as it seems to me, of great weight, and applicable in several other cases, is, that the above-specified breeds, though agreeing generally in constitution, habits, voice, colouring, and in most parts of their structure, with the wild rock-pigeon, yet are certainly highly abnormal in other parts of their structure: we may look in vain throughout the whole great family of Columbidae for a beak like that of the English carrier, or that of the short-faced tumbler, or barb; for reversed feathers like those of the jacobin; for a crop like that of the pouter; for tail-feathers like those of the fantail. Hence it must be assumed not only that half-civilized man succeeded in thoroughly domesticating several species, but that he intentionally or by chance picked out extraordinarily abnormal species; and further, that these very species have since all become extinct or unknown. So many strange contingencies seem to me improbable in the highest degree. 
Some facts in regard to the colouring of pigeons well deserve consideration. The rock-pigeon is of a slaty-blue, and has a white rump (the Indian sub-species, C. intermedia of Strickland, having it bluish); the tail has a terminal dark bar, with the bases of the outer feathers externally edged with white; the wings have two black bars; some semi-domestic breeds and some apparently truly wild breeds have, besides the two black bars, the wings chequered with black. These several marks do not occur together in any other species of the whole family. Now, in every one of the domestic breeds, taking thoroughly well-bred birds, all the above marks, even to the white edging of the outer tail-feathers, sometimes concur perfectly developed. Moreover, when two birds belonging to two distinct breeds are crossed, neither of which is blue or has any of the above-specified marks, the mongrel offspring are very apt suddenly to acquire these characters; for instance, I crossed some uniformly white fantails with some uniformly black barbs, and they produced mottled brown and black birds; these I again crossed together, and one grandchild of the pure white fantail and pure black barb was of as beautiful a blue colour, with the white rump, double black wing-bar, and barred and white-edged tail-feathers, as any wild rock-pigeon! We can understand these facts, on the well-known principle of reversion to ancestral characters, if all the domestic breeds have descended from the rock-pigeon. But if we deny this, we must make one of the two following highly improbable suppositions. Either, firstly, that all the several imagined aboriginal stocks were coloured and marked like the rock-pigeon, although no other existing species is thus coloured and marked, so that in each separate breed there might be a tendency to revert to the very same colours and markings. Or, secondly, that each breed, even the purest, has within a dozen or, at most, within a score of generations, been crossed by the rock-pigeon: I say within a dozen or twenty generations, for we know of no fact countenancing the belief that the child ever reverts to some one ancestor, removed by a greater number of generations. In a breed which has been crossed only once with some distinct breed, the tendency to reversion to any character derived from such cross will naturally become less and less, as in each succeeding generation there will be less of the foreign blood; but when there has been no cross with a distinct breed, and there is a tendency in both parents to revert to a character, which has been lost during some former generation, this tendency, for all that we can see to the contrary, may be transmitted undiminished for an indefinite number of generations. These two distinct cases are often confounded in treatises on inheritance. 
Lastly, the hybrids or mongrels from between all the domestic breeds of pigeons are perfectly fertile. I can state this from my own observations, purposely made on the most distinct breeds. Now, it is difficult, perhaps impossible, to bring forward one case of the hybrid offspring of two animals CLEARLY DISTINCT being themselves perfectly fertile. Some authors believe that long-continued domestication eliminates this strong tendency to sterility: from the history of the dog I think there is some probability in this hypothesis, if applied to species closely related together, though it is unsupported by a single experiment. But to extend the hypothesis so far as to suppose that species, aboriginally as distinct as carriers, tumblers, pouters, and fantails now are, should yield offspring perfectly fertile, inter se, seems to me rash in the extreme. 
From these several reasons, namely, the improbability of man having formerly got seven or eight supposed species of pigeons to breed freely under domestication; these supposed species being quite unknown in a wild state, and their becoming nowhere feral; these species having very abnormal characters in certain respects, as compared with all other Columbidae, though so like in most other respects to the rock-pigeon; the blue colour and various marks occasionally appearing in all the breeds, both when kept pure and when crossed; the mongrel offspring being perfectly fertile;--from these several reasons, taken together, I can feel no doubt that all our domestic breeds have descended from the Columba livia with its geographical subÂ­species. 
In favour of this view, I may add, firstly, that C. livia, or the rock-pigeon, has been found capable of domestication in Europe and in India; and that it agrees in habits and in a great number of points of structure with all the domestic breeds. Secondly, although an English carrier or short-faced tumbler differs immensely in certain characters from the rock-pigeon, yet by comparing the several sub-breeds of these breeds, more especially those brought from distant countries, we can make an almost perfect series between the extremes of structure. Thirdly, those characters which are mainly distinctive of each breed, for instance the wattle and length of beak of the carrier, the shortness of that of the tumbler, and the number of tail-feathers in the fantail, are in each breed eminently variable; and the explanation of this fact will be obvious when we come to treat of selection. Fourthly, pigeons have been watched, and tended with the utmost care, and loved by many people. They have been domesticated for thousands of years in several quarters of the world; the earliest known record of pigeons is in the fifth Aegyptian dynasty, about 3000 B.C., as was pointed out to me by Professor Lepsius; but Mr. Birch informs me that pigeons are given in a bill of fare in the previous dynasty. In the time of the Romans, as we hear from Pliny, immense prices were given for pigeons; "nay, they are come to this pass, that they can reckon up their pedigree and race." Pigeons were much valued by Akber Khan in India, about the year 1600; never less than 20,000 pigeons were taken with the court. "The monarchs of Iran and Turan sent him some very rare birds;" and, continues the courtly historian, "His Majesty by crossing the breeds, which method was never practised before, has improved them astonishingly." About this same period the Dutch were as eager about pigeons as were the old Romans. The paramount importance of these considerations in explaining the immense amount of variation which pigeons have undergone, will be obvious when we treat of Selection. We shall then, also, see how it is that the breeds so often have a somewhat monstrous character. It is also a most favourable circumstance for the production of distinct breeds, that male and female pigeons can be easily mated for life; and thus different breeds can be kept together in the same aviary. 
I have discussed the probable origin of domestic pigeons at some, yet quite insufficient, length; because when I first kept pigeons and watched the several kinds, knowing well how true they bred, I felt fully as much difficulty in believing that they could ever have descended from a common parent, as any naturalist could in coming to a similar conclusion in regard to the many species of finches, or other large groups of birds, in nature. One circumstance has struck me much; namely, that all the breeders of the various domestic animals and the cultivators of plants, with whom I have ever conversed, or whose treatises I have read, are firmly convinced that the several breeds to which each has attended, are descended from so many aboriginally distinct species. Ask, as I have asked, a celebrated raiser of Hereford cattle, whether his cattle might not have descended from long horns, and he will laugh you to scorn. I have never met a pigeon, or poultry, or duck, or rabbit fancier, who was not fully convinced that each main breed was descended from a distinct species. Van Mons, in his treatise on pears and apples, shows how utterly he disbelieves that the several sorts, for instance a Ribston-pippin or CodlinÂ­apple, could ever have proceeded from the seeds of the same tree. Innumerable other examples could be given. The explanation, I think, is simple: from long-continued study they are strongly impressed with the differences between the several races; and though they well know that each race varies slightly, for they win their prizes by selecting such slight differences, yet they ignore all general arguments, and refuse to sum up in their minds slight differences accumulated during many successive generations. May not those naturalists who, knowing far less of the laws of inheritance than does the breeder, and knowing no more than he does of the intermediate links in the long lines of descent, yet admit that many of our domestic races have descended from the same parents--may they not learn a lesson of caution, when they deride the idea of species in a state of nature being lineal descendants of other species? 

SELECTION. 
Let us now briefly consider the steps by which domestic races have been produced, either from one or from several allied species. Some little effect may, perhaps, be attributed to the direct action of the external conditions of life, and some little to habit; but he would be a bold man who would account by such agencies for the differences of a dray and race horse, a greyhound and bloodhound, a carrier and tumbler pigeon. One of the most remarkable features in our domesticated races is that we see in them adaptation, not indeed to the animal's or plant's own good, but to man's use or fancy. Some variations useful to him have probably arisen suddenly, or by one step; many botanists, for instance, believe that the fuller's teazle, with its hooks, which cannot be rivalled by any mechanical contrivance, is only a variety of the wild Dipsacus; and this amount of change may have suddenly arisen in a seedling. So it has probably been with the turnspit dog; and this is known to have been the case with the ancon sheep. But when we compare the dray-horse and race-horse, the dromedary and camel, the various breeds of sheep fitted either for cultivated land or mountain pasture, with the wool of one breed good for one purpose, and that of another breed for another purpose; when we compare the many breeds of dogs, each good for man in very different ways; when we compare the game-cock, so pertinacious in battle, with other breeds so little quarrelsome, with "everlasting layers" which never desire to sit, and with the bantam so small and elegant; when we compare the host of agricultural, culinary, orchard, and flower-garden races of plants, most useful to man at different seasons and for different purposes, or so beautiful in his eyes, we must, I think, look further than to mere variability. We cannot suppose that all the breeds were suddenly produced as perfect and as useful as we now see them; indeed, in several cases, we know that this has not been their history. The key is man's power of accumulative selection: nature gives successive variations; man adds them up in certain directions useful to him. In this sense he may be said to make for himself useful breeds. 
The great power of this principle of selection is not hypothetical. It is certain that several of our eminent breeders have, even within a single lifetime, modified to a large extent some breeds of cattle and sheep. In order fully to realise what they have done, it is almost necessary to read several of the many treatises devoted to this subject, and to inspect the animals. Breeders habitually speak of an animal's organisation as something quite plastic, which they can model almost as they please. If I had space I could quote numerous passages to this effect from highly competent authorities. Youatt, who was probably better acquainted with the works of agriculturalists than almost any other individual, and who was himself a very good judge of an animal, speaks of the principle of selection as "that which enables the agriculturist, not only to modify the character of his flock, but to change it altogether. It is the magician's wand, by means of which he may summon into life whatever form and mould he pleases." Lord Somerville, speaking of what breeders have done for sheep, says:--"It would seem as if they had chalked out upon a wall a form perfect in itself, and then had given it existence." That most skilful breeder, Sir John Sebright, used to say, with respect to pigeons, that "he would produce any given feather in three years, but it would take him six years to obtain head and beak." In Saxony the importance of the principle of selection in regard to merino sheep is so fully recognised, that men follow it as a trade: the sheep are placed on a table and are studied, like a picture by a connoisseur; this is done three times at intervals of months, and the sheep are each time marked and classed, so that the very best may ultimately be selected for breeding. 
What English breeders have actually effected is proved by the enormous prices given for animals with a good pedigree; and these have now been exported to almost every quarter of the world. The improvement is by no means generally due to crossing different breeds; all the best breeders are strongly opposed to this practice, except sometimes amongst closely allied sub-breeds. And when a cross has been made, the closest selection is far more indispensable even than in ordinary cases. If selection consisted merely in separating some very distinct variety, and breeding from it, the principle would be so obvious as hardly to be worth notice; but its importance consists in the great effect produced by the accumulation in one direction, during successive generations, of differences absolutely inappreciable by an uneducated eye--differences which I for one have vainly attempted to appreciate. Not one man in a thousand has accuracy of eye and judgment sufficient to become an eminent breeder. If gifted with these qualities, and he studies his subject for years, and devotes his lifetime to it with indomitable perseverance, he will succeed, and may make great improvements; if he wants any of these qualities, he will assuredly fail. Few would readily believe in the natural capacity and years of practice requisite to become even a skilful pigeon-fancier. 
The same principles are followed by horticulturists; but the variations are here often more abrupt. No one supposes that our choicest productions have been produced by a single variation from the aboriginal stock. We have proofs that this is not so in some cases, in which exact records have been kept; thus, to give a very trifling instance, the steadily-increasing size of the common gooseberry may be quoted. We see an astonishing improvement in many florists' flowers, when the flowers of the present day are compared with drawings made only twenty or thirty years ago. When a race of plants is once pretty well established, the seed-raisers do not pick out the best plants, but merely go over their seed-beds, and pull up the "rogues," as they call the plants that deviate from the proper standard. With animals this kind of selection is, in fact, also followed; for hardly any one is so careless as to allow his worst animals to breed. 
In regard to plants, there is another means of observing the accumulated effects of selection--namely, by comparing the diversity of flowers in the different varieties of the same species in the flower-garden; the diversity of leaves, pods, or tubers, or whatever part is valued, in the kitchen-garden, in comparison with the flowers of the same varieties; and the diversity of fruit of the same species in the orchard, in comparison with the leaves and flowers of the same set of varieties. See how different the leaves of the cabbage are, and how extremely alike the flowers; how unlike the flowers of the heartsease are, and how alike the leaves; how much the fruit of the different kinds of gooseberries differ in size, colour, shape, and hairiness, and yet the flowers present very slight differences. It is not that the varieties which differ largely in some one point do not differ at all in other points; this is hardly ever, perhaps never, the case. The laws of correlation of growth, the importance of which should never be overlooked, will ensure some differences; but, as a general rule, I cannot doubt that the continued selection of slight variations, either in the leaves, the flowers, or the fruit, will produce races differing from each other chiefly in these characters. 
It may be objected that the principle of selection has been reduced to methodical practice for scarcely more than three-quarters of a century; it has certainly been more attended to of late years, and many treatises have been published on the subject; and the result, I may add, has been, in a corresponding degree, rapid and important. But it is very far from true that the principle is a modern discovery. I could give several references to the full acknowledgment of the importance of the principle in works of high antiquity. In rude and barbarous periods of English history choice animals were often imported, and laws were passed to prevent their exportation: the destruction of horses under a certain size was ordered, and this may be compared to the "roguing" of plants by nurserymen. The principle of selection I find distinctly given in an ancient Chinese encyclopaedia. Explicit rules are laid down by some of the Roman classical writers. From passages in Genesis, it is clear that the colour of domestic animals was at that early period attended to. Savages now sometimes cross their dogs with wild canine animals, to improve the breed, and they formerly did so, as is attested by passages in Pliny. The savages in South Africa match their draught cattle by colour, as do some of the Esquimaux their teams of dogs. Livingstone shows how much good domestic breeds are valued by the negroes of the interior of Africa who have not associated with Europeans. Some of these facts do not show actual selection, but they show that the breeding of domestic animals was carefully attended to in ancient times, and is now attended to by the lowest savages. It would, indeed, have been a strange fact, had attention not been paid to breeding, for the inheritance of good and bad qualities is so obvious. 
At the present time, eminent breeders try by methodical selection, with a distinct object in view, to make a new strain or sub-breed, superior to anything existing in the country. But, for our purpose, a kind of Selection, which may be called Unconscious, and which results from every one trying to possess and breed from the best individual animals, is more important. Thus, a man who intends keeping pointers naturally tries to get as good dogs as he can, and afterwards breeds from his own best dogs, but he has no wish or expectation of permanently altering the breed. Nevertheless I cannot doubt that this process, continued during centuries, would improve and modify any breed, in the same way as Bakewell, Collins, etc., by this very same process, only carried on more methodically, did greatly modify, even during their own lifetimes, the forms and qualities of their cattle. Slow and insensible changes of this kind could never be recognised unless actual measurements or careful drawings of the breeds in question had been made long ago, which might serve for comparison. In some cases, however, unchanged or but little changed individuals of the same breed may be found in less civilised districts, where the breed has been less improved. There is reason to believe that King Charles's spaniel has been unconsciously modified to a large extent since the time of that monarch. Some highly competent authorities are convinced that the setter is directly derived from the spaniel, and has probably been slowly altered from it. It is known that the English pointer has been greatly changed within the last century, and in this case the change has, it is believed, been chiefly effected by crosses with the fox-hound; but what concerns us is, that the change has been effected unconsciously and gradually, and yet so effectually, that, though the old Spanish pointer certainly came from Spain, Mr. Borrow has not seen, as I am informed by him, any native dog in Spain like our pointer. 
By a similar process of selection, and by careful training, the whole body of English racehorses have come to surpass in fleetness and size the parent Arab stock, so that the latter, by the regulations for the Goodwood Races, are favoured in the weights they carry. Lord Spencer and others have shown how the cattle of England have increased in weight and in early maturity, compared with the stock formerly kept in this country. By comparing the accounts given in old pigeon treatises of carriers and tumblers with these breeds as now existing in Britain, India, and Persia, we can, I think, clearly trace the stages through which they have insensibly passed, and come to differ so greatly from the rock-pigeon. 
Youatt gives an excellent illustration of the effects of a course of selection, which may be considered as unconsciously followed, in so far that the breeders could never have expected or even have wished to have produced the result which ensued--namely, the production of two distinct strains. The two flocks of Leicester sheep kept by Mr. Buckley and Mr. Burgess, as Mr. Youatt remarks, "have been purely bred from the original stock of Mr. Bakewell for upwards of fifty years. There is not a suspicion existing in the mind of any one at all acquainted with the subject that the owner of either of them has deviated in any one instance from the pure blood of Mr. Bakewell's flock, and yet the difference between the sheep possessed by these two gentlemen is so great that they have the appearance of being quite different varieties." 
If there exist savages so barbarous as never to think of the inherited character of the offspring of their domestic animals, yet any one animal particularly useful to them, for any special purpose, would be carefully preserved during famines and other accidents, to which savages are so liable, and such choice animals would thus generally leave more offspring than the inferior ones; so that in this case there would be a kind of unconscious selection going on. We see the value set on animals even by the barbarians of Tierra del Fuego, by their killing and devouring their old women, in times of dearth, as of less value than their dogs. 
In plants the same gradual process of improvement, through the occasional preservation of the best individuals, whether or not sufficiently distinct to be ranked at their first appearance as distinct varieties, and whether or not two or more species or races have become blended together by crossing, may plainly be recognised in the increased size and beauty which we now see in the varieties of the heartsease, rose, pelargonium, dahlia, and other plants, when compared with the older varieties or with their parent-stocks. No one would ever expect to get a first-rate heartsease or dahlia from the seed of a wild plant. No one would expect to raise a first-rate melting pear from the seed of a wild pear, though he might succeed from a poor seedling growing wild, if it had come from a garden-stock. The pear, though cultivated in classical times, appears, from Pliny's description, to have been a fruit of very inferior quality. I have seen great surprise expressed in horticultural works at the wonderful skill of gardeners, in having produced such splendid results from such poor materials; but the art, I cannot doubt, has been simple, and, as far as the final result is concerned, has been followed almost unconsciously. It has consisted in always cultivating the best known variety, sowing its seeds, and, when a slightly better variety has chanced to appear, selecting it, and so onwards. But the gardeners of the classical period, who cultivated the best pear they could procure, never thought what splendid fruit we should eat; though we owe our excellent fruit, in some small degree, to their having naturally chosen and preserved the best varieties they could anywhere find. 
A large amount of change in our cultivated plants, thus slowly and unconsciously accumulated, explains, as I believe, the well-known fact, that in a vast number of cases we cannot recognise, and therefore do not know, the wild parent-stocks of the plants which have been longest cultivated in our flower and kitchen gardens. If it has taken centuries or thousands of years to improve or modify most of our plants up to their present standard of usefulness to man, we can understand how it is that neither Australia, the Cape of Good Hope, nor any other region inhabited by quite uncivilised man, has afforded us a single plant worth culture. It is not that these countries, so rich in species, do not by a strange chance possess the aboriginal stocks of any useful plants, but that the native plants have not been improved by continued selection up to a standard of perfection comparable with that given to the plants in countries anciently civilised. 
In regard to the domestic animals kept by uncivilised man, it should not be overlooked that they almost always have to struggle for their own food, at least during certain seasons. And in two countries very differently circumstanced, individuals of the same species, having slightly different constitutions or structure, would often succeed better in the one country than in the other, and thus by a process of "natural selection," as will hereafter be more fully explained, two sub-breeds might be formed. This, perhaps, partly explains what has been remarked by some authors, namely, that the varieties kept by savages have more of the character of species than the varieties kept in civilised countries. 
On the view here given of the all-important part which selection by man has played, it becomes at once obvious, how it is that our domestic races show adaptation in their structure or in their habits to man's wants or fancies. We can, I think, further understand the frequently abnormal character of our domestic races, and likewise their differences being so great in external characters and relatively so slight in internal parts or organs. Man can hardly select, or only with much difficulty, any deviation of structure excepting such as is externally visible; and indeed he rarely cares for what is internal. He can never act by selection, excepting on variations which are first given to him in some slight degree by nature. No man would ever try to make a fantail, till he saw a pigeon with a tail developed in some slight degree in an unusual manner, or a pouter till he saw a pigeon with a crop of somewhat unusual size; and the more abnormal or unusual any character was when it first appeared, the more likely it would be to catch his attention. But to use such an expression as trying to make a fantail, is, I have no doubt, in most cases, utterly incorrect. The man who first selected a pigeon with a slightly larger tail, never dreamed what the descendants of that pigeon would become through long-continued, partly unconscious and partly methodical selection. Perhaps the parent bird of all fantails had only fourteen tail-feathers somewhat expanded, like the present Java fantail, or like individuals of other and distinct breeds, in which as many as seventeen tail-feathers have been counted. Perhaps the first pouter-pigeon did not inflate its crop much more than the turbit now does the upper part of its oesophagus,--a habit which is disregarded by all fanciers, as it is not one of the points of the breed. 
Nor let it be thought that some great deviation of structure would be necessary to catch the fancier's eye: he perceives extremely small differences, and it is in human nature to value any novelty, however slight, in one's own possession. Nor must the value which would formerly be set on any slight differences in the individuals of the same species, be judged of by the value which would now be set on them, after several breeds have once fairly been established. Many slight differences might, and indeed do now, arise amongst pigeons, which are rejected as faults or deviations from the standard of perfection of each breed. The common goose has not given rise to any marked varieties; hence the Thoulouse and the common breed, which differ only in colour, that most fleeting of characters, have lately been exhibited as distinct at our poultry-shows. 
I think these views further explain what has sometimes been noticed-Â­namely that we know nothing about the origin or history of any of our domestic breeds. But, in fact, a breed, like a dialect of a language, can hardly be said to have had a definite origin. A man preserves and breeds from an individual with some slight deviation of structure, or takes more care than usual in matching his best animals and thus improves them, and the improved individuals slowly spread in the immediate neighbourhood. But as yet they will hardly have a distinct name, and from being only slightly valued, their history will be disregarded. When further improved by the same slow and gradual process, they will spread more widely, and will get recognised as something distinct and valuable, and will then probably first receive a provincial name. In semi-civilised countries, with little free communication, the spreading and knowledge of any new sub-breed will be a slow process. As soon as the points of value of the new sub-breed are once fully acknowledged, the principle, as I have called it, of unconscious selection will always tend,--perhaps more at one period than at another, as the breed rises or falls in fashion,--perhaps more in one district than in another, according to the state of civilisation of the inhabitants--slowly to add to the characteristic features of the breed, whatever they may be. But the chance will be infinitely small of any record having been preserved of such slow, varying, and insensible changes. 
I must now say a few words on the circumstances, favourable, or the reverse, to man's power of selection. A high degree of variability is obviously favourable, as freely giving the materials for selection to work on; not that mere individual differences are not amply sufficient, with extreme care, to allow of the accumulation of a large amount of modification in almost any desired direction. But as variations manifestly useful or pleasing to man appear only occasionally, the chance of their appearance will be much increased by a large number of individuals being kept; and hence this comes to be of the highest importance to success. On this principle Marshall has remarked, with respect to the sheep of parts of Yorkshire, that "as they generally belong to poor people, and are mostly IN SMALL LOTS, they never can be improved." On the other hand, nurserymen, from raising large stocks of the same plants, are generally far more successful than amateurs in getting new and valuable varieties. The keeping of a large number of individuals of a species in any country requires that the species should be placed under favourable conditions of life, so as to breed freely in that country. When the individuals of any species are scanty, all the individuals, whatever their quality may be, will generally be allowed to breed, and this will effectually prevent selection. But probably the most important point of all, is, that the animal or plant should be so highly useful to man, or so much valued by him, that the closest attention should be paid to even the slightest deviation in the qualities or structure of each individual. Unless such attention be paid nothing can be effected. I have seen it gravely remarked, that it was most fortunate that the strawberry began to vary just when gardeners began to attend closely to this plant. No doubt the strawberry had always varied since it was cultivated, but the slight varieties had been neglected. As soon, however, as gardeners picked out individual plants with slightly larger, earlier, or better fruit, and raised seedlings from them, and again picked out the best seedlings and bred from them, then, there appeared (aided by some crossing with distinct species) those many admirable varieties of the strawberry which have been raised during the last thirty or forty years. 
In the case of animals with separate sexes, facility in preventing crosses is an important element of success in the formation of new races,--at least, in a country which is already stocked with other races. In this respect enclosure of the land plays a part. Wandering savages or the inhabitants of open plains rarely possess more than one breed of the same species. Pigeons can be mated for life, and this is a great convenience to the fancier, for thus many races may be kept true, though mingled in the same aviary; and this circumstance must have largely favoured the improvement and formation of new breeds. Pigeons, I may add, can be propagated in great numbers and at a very quick rate, and inferior birds may be freely rejected, as when killed they serve for food. On the other hand, cats, from their nocturnal rambling habits, cannot be matched, and, although so much valued by women and children, we hardly ever see a distinct breed kept up; such breeds as we do sometimes see are almost always imported from some other country, often from islands. Although I do not doubt that some domestic animals vary less than others, yet the rarity or absence of distinct breeds of the cat, the donkey, peacock, goose, etc., may be attributed in main part to selection not having been brought into play: in cats, from the difficulty in pairing them; in donkeys, from only a few being kept by poor people, and little attention paid to their breeding; in peacocks, from not being very easily reared and a large stock not kept; in geese, from being valuable only for two purposes, food and feathers, and more especially from no pleasure having been felt in the display of distinct breeds. 
To sum up on the origin of our Domestic Races of animals and plants. I believe that the conditions of life, from their action on the reproductive system, are so far of the highest importance as causing variability. I do not believe that variability is an inherent and necessary contingency, under all circumstances, with all organic beings, as some authors have thought. The effects of variability are modified by various degrees of inheritance and of reversion. Variability is governed by many unknown laws, more especially by that of correlation of growth. Something may be attributed to the direct action of the conditions of life. Something must be attributed to use and disuse. The final result is thus rendered infinitely complex. In some cases, I do not doubt that the intercrossing of species, aboriginally distinct, has played an important part in the origin of our domestic productions. When in any country several domestic breeds have once been established, their occasional intercrossing, with the aid of selection, has, no doubt, largely aided in the formation of new sub-breeds; but the importance of the crossing of varieties has, I believe, been greatly exaggerated, both in regard to animals and to those plants which are propagated by seed. In plants which are temporarily propagated by cuttings, buds, etc., the importance of the crossing both of distinct species and of varieties is immense; for the cultivator here quite disregards the extreme variability both of hybrids and mongrels, and the frequent sterility of hybrids; but the cases of plants not propagated by seed are of little importance to us, for their endurance is only temporary. Over all these causes of Change I am convinced that the accumulative action of Selection, whether applied methodically and more quickly, or unconsciously and more slowly, but more efficiently, is by far the predominant Power. 

CHAPTER 2. VARIATION UNDER NATURE. 
Variability. Individual differences. Doubtful species. Wide ranging, much diffused, and common species vary most. Species of the larger genera in any country vary more than the species of the smaller genera. Many of the species of the larger genera resemble varieties in being very closely, but unequally, related to each other, and in having restricted ranges. 
Before applying the principles arrived at in the last chapter to organic beings in a state of nature, we must briefly discuss whether these latter are subject to any variation. To treat this subject at all properly, a long catalogue of dry facts should be given; but these I shall reserve for my future work. Nor shall I here discuss the various definitions which have been given of the term species. No one definition has as yet satisfied all naturalists; yet every naturalist knows vaguely what he means when he speaks of a species. Generally the term includes the unknown element of a distinct act of creation. The term "variety" is almost equally difficult to define; but here community of descent is almost universally implied, though it can rarely be proved. We have also what are called monstrosities; but they graduate into varieties. By a monstrosity I presume is meant some considerable deviation of structure in one part, either injurious to or not useful to the species, and not generally propagated. Some authors use the term "variation" in a technical sense, as implying a modification directly due to the physical conditions of life; and "variations" in this sense are supposed not to be inherited: but who can say that the dwarfed condition of shells in the brackish waters of the Baltic, or dwarfed plants on Alpine summits, or the thicker fur of an animal from far northwards, would not in some cases be inherited for at least some few generations? and in this case I presume that the form would be called a variety. 
Again, we have many slight differences which may be called individual differences, such as are known frequently to appear in the offspring from the same parents, or which may be presumed to have thus arisen, from being frequently observed in the individuals of the same species inhabiting the same confined locality. No one supposes that all the individuals of the same species are cast in the very same mould. These individual differences are highly important for us, as they afford materials for natural selection to accumulate, in the same manner as man can accumulate in any given direction individual differences in his domesticated productions. These individual differences generally affect what naturalists consider unimportant parts; but I could show by a long catalogue of facts, that parts which must be called important, whether viewed under a physiological or classificatory point of view, sometimes vary in the individuals of the same species. I am convinced that the most experienced naturalist would be surprised at the number of the cases of variability, even in important parts of structure, which he could collect on good authority, as I have collected, during a course of years. It should be remembered that systematists are far from pleased at finding variability in important characters, and that there are not many men who will laboriously examine internal and important organs, and compare them in many specimens of the same species. I should never have expected that the branching of the main nerves close to the great central ganglion of an insect would have been variable in the same species; I should have expected that changes of this nature could have been effected only by slow degrees: yet quite recently Mr. Lubbock has shown a degree of variability in these main nerves in Coccus, which may almost be compared to the irregular branching of the stem of a tree. This philosophical naturalist, I may add, has also quite recently shown that the muscles in the larvae of certain insects are very far from uniform. Authors sometimes argue in a circle when they state that important organs never vary; for these same authors practically rank that character as important (as some few naturalists have honestly confessed) which does not vary; and, under this point of view, no instance of an important part varying will ever be found: but under any other point of view many instances assuredly can be given. 
There is one point connected with individual differences, which seems to me extremely perplexing: I refer to those genera which have sometimes been called "protean" or "polymorphic," in which the species present an inordinate amount of variation; and hardly two naturalists can agree which forms to rank as species and which as varieties. We may instance Rubus, Rosa, and Hieracium amongst plants, several genera of insects, and several genera of Brachiopod shells. In most polymorphic genera some of the species have fixed and definite characters. Genera which are polymorphic in one country seem to be, with some few exceptions, polymorphic in other countries, and likewise, judging from Brachiopod shells, at former periods of time. These facts seem to be very perplexing, for they seem to show that this kind of variability is independent of the conditions of life. I am inclined to suspect that we see in these polymorphic genera variations in points of structure which are of no service or disservice to the species, and which consequently have not been seized on and rendered definite by natural selection, as hereafter will be explained. 
Those forms which possess in some considerable degree the character of species, but which are so closely similar to some other forms, or are so closely linked to them by intermediate gradations, that naturalists do not like to rank them as distinct species, are in several respects the most important for us. We have every reason to believe that many of these doubtful and closely-allied forms have permanently retained their characters in their own country for a long time; for as long, as far as we know, as have good and true species. Practically, when a naturalist can unite two forms together by others having intermediate characters, he treats the one as a variety of the other, ranking the most common, but sometimes the one first described, as the species, and the other as the variety. But cases of great difficulty, which I will not here enumerate, sometimes occur in deciding whether or not to rank one form as a variety of another, even when they are closely connected by intermediate links; nor will the commonly-assumed hybrid nature of the intermediate links always remove the difficulty. In very many cases, however, one form is ranked as a variety of another, not because the intermediate links have actually been found, but because analogy leads the observer to suppose either that they do now somewhere exist, or may formerly have existed; and here a wide door for the entry of doubt and conjecture is opened. 
Hence, in determining whether a form should be ranked as a species or a variety, the opinion of naturalists having sound judgment and wide experience seems the only guide to follow. We must, however, in many cases, decide by a majority of naturalists, for few well-marked and well-known varieties can be named which have not been ranked as species by at least some competent judges. 
That varieties of this doubtful nature are far from uncommon cannot be disputed. Compare the several floras of Great Britain, of France or of the United States, drawn up by different botanists, and see what a surprising number of forms have been ranked by one botanist as good species, and by another as mere varieties. Mr. H. C. Watson, to whom I lie under deep obligation for assistance of all kinds, has marked for me 182 British plants, which are generally considered as varieties, but which have all been ranked by botanists as species; and in making this list he has omitted many trifling varieties, but which nevertheless have been ranked by some botanists as species, and he has entirely omitted several highly polymorphic genera. Under genera, including the most polymorphic forms, Mr. Babington gives 251 species, whereas Mr. Bentham gives only 112,--a difference of 139 doubtful forms! Amongst animals which unite for each birth, and which are highly locomotive, doubtful forms, ranked by one zoologist as a species and by another as a variety, can rarely be found within the same country, but are common in separated areas. How many of those birds and insects in North America and Europe, which differ very slightly from each other, have been ranked by one eminent naturalist as undoubted species, and by another as varieties, or, as they are often called, as geographical races! Many years ago, when comparing, and seeing others compare, the birds from the separate islands of the Galapagos Archipelago, both one with another, and with those from the American mainland, I was much struck how entirely vague and arbitrary is the distinction between species and varieties. On the islets of the little Madeira group there are many insects which are characterized as varieties in Mr. Wollaston's admirable work, but which it cannot be doubted would be ranked as distinct species by many entomologists. Even Ireland has a few animals, now generally regarded as varieties, but which have been ranked as species by some zoologists. Several most experienced ornithologists consider our British red grouse as only a strongly-marked race of a Norwegian species, whereas the greater number rank it as an undoubted species peculiar to Great Britain. A wide distance between the homes of two doubtful forms leads many naturalists to rank both as distinct species; but what distance, it has been well asked, will suffice? if that between America and Europe is ample, will that between the Continent and the Azores, or Madeira, or the Canaries, or Ireland, be sufficient? It must be admitted that many forms, considered by highly-competent judges as varieties, have so perfectly the character of species that they are ranked by other highly-competent judges as good and true species. But to discuss whether they are rightly called species or varieties, before any definition of these terms has been generally accepted, is vainly to beat the air. 
Many of the cases of strongly-marked varieties or doubtful species well deserve consideration; for several interesting lines of argument, from geographical distribution, analogical variation, hybridism, etc., have been brought to bear on the attempt to determine their rank. I will here give only a single instance,--the well-known one of the primrose and cowslip, or Primula veris and elatior. These plants differ considerably in appearance; they have a different flavour and emit a different odour; they flower at slightly different periods; they grow in somewhat different stations; they ascend mountains to different heights; they have different geographical ranges; and lastly, according to very numerous experiments made during several years by that most careful observer Gartner, they can be crossed only with much difficulty. We could hardly wish for better evidence of the two forms being specifically distinct. On the other hand, they are united by many intermediate links, and it is very doubtful whether these links are hybrids; and there is, as it seems to me, an overwhelming amount of experimental evidence, showing that they descend from common parents, and consequently must be ranked as varieties. 
Close investigation, in most cases, will bring naturalists to an agreement how to rank doubtful forms. Yet it must be confessed, that it is in the best-known countries that we find the greatest number of forms of doubtful value. I have been struck with the fact, that if any animal or plant in a state of nature be highly useful to man, or from any cause closely attract his attention, varieties of it will almost universally be found recorded. These varieties, moreover, will be often ranked by some authors as species. Look at the common oak, how closely it has been studied; yet a German author makes more than a dozen species out of forms, which are very generally considered as varieties; and in this country the highest botanical authorities and practical men can be quoted to show that the sessile and pedunculated oaks are either good and distinct species or mere varieties. 
When a young naturalist commences the study of a group of organisms quite unknown to him, he is at first much perplexed to determine what differences to consider as specific, and what as varieties; for he knows nothing of the amount and kind of variation to which the group is subject; and this shows, at least, how very generally there is some variation. But if he confine his attention to one class within one country, he will soon make up his mind how to rank most of the doubtful forms. His general tendency will be to make many species, for he will become impressed, just like the pigeon or poultry-fancier before alluded to, with the amount of difference in the forms which he is continually studying; and he has little general knowledge of analogical variation in other groups and in other countries, by which to correct his first impressions. As he extends the range of his observations, he will meet with more cases of difficulty; for he will encounter a greater number of closely-allied forms. But if his observations be widely extended, he will in the end generally be enabled to make up his own mind which to call varieties and which species; but he will succeed in this at the expense of admitting much variation,--and the truth of this admission will often be disputed by other naturalists. When, moreover, he comes to study allied forms brought from countries not now continuous, in which case he can hardly hope to find the intermediate links between his doubtful forms, he will have to trust almost entirely to analogy, and his difficulties will rise to a climax. 
Certainly no clear line of demarcation has as yet been drawn between species and sub-species--that is, the forms which in the opinion of some naturalists come very near to, but do not quite arrive at the rank of species; or, again, between sub-species and well-marked varieties, or between lesser varieties and individual differences. These differences blend into each other in an insensible series; and a series impresses the mind with the idea of an actual passage. 
Hence I look at individual differences, though of small interest to the systematist, as of high importance for us, as being the first step towards such slight varieties as are barely thought worth recording in works on natural history. And I look at varieties which are in any degree more distinct and permanent, as steps leading to more strongly marked and more permanent varieties; and at these latter, as leading to sub-species, and to species. The passage from one stage of difference to another and higher stage may be, in some cases, due merely to the long-continued action of different physical conditions in two different regions; but I have not much faith in this view; and I attribute the passage of a variety, from a state in which it differs very slightly from its parent to one in which it differs more, to the action of natural selection in accumulating (as will hereafter be more fully explained) differences of structure in certain definite directions. Hence I believe a wellÂ­marked variety may be justly called an incipient species; but whether this belief be justifiable must be judged of by the general weight of the several facts and views given throughout this work. 
It need not be supposed that all varieties or incipient species necessarily attain the rank of species. They may whilst in this incipient state become extinct, or they may endure as varieties for very long periods, as has been shown to be the case by Mr. Wollaston with the varieties of certain fossil land-shells in Madeira. If a variety were to flourish so as to exceed in numbers the parent species, it would then rank as the species, and the species as the variety; or it might come to supplant and exterminate the parent species; or both might co-exist, and both rank as independent species. But we shall hereafter have to return to this subject. 
From these remarks it will be seen that I look at the term species, as one arbitrarily given for the sake of convenience to a set of individuals closely resembling each other, and that it does not essentially differ from the term variety, which is given to less distinct and more fluctuating forms. The term variety, again, in comparison with mere individual differences, is also applied arbitrarily, and for mere convenience sake. 
Guided by theoretical considerations, I thought that some interesting results might be obtained in regard to the nature and relations of the species which vary most, by tabulating all the varieties in several well-worked floras. At first this seemed a simple task; but Mr. H. C. Watson, to whom I am much indebted for valuable advice and assistance on this subject, soon convinced me that there were many difficulties, as did subsequently Dr. Hooker, even in stronger terms. I shall reserve for my future work the discussion of these difficulties, and the tables themselves of the proportional numbers of the varying species. Dr. Hooker permits me to add, that after having carefully read my manuscript, and examined the tables, he thinks that the following statements are fairly well established. The whole subject, however, treated as it necessarily here is with much brevity, is rather perplexing, and allusions cannot be avoided to the "struggle for existence," "divergence of character," and other questions, hereafter to be discussed. 
Alph. De Candolle and others have shown that plants which have very wide ranges generally present varieties; and this might have been expected, as they become exposed to diverse physical conditions, and as they come into competition (which, as we shall hereafter see, is a far more important circumstance) with different sets of organic beings. But my tables further show that, in any limited country, the species which are most common, that is abound most in individuals, and the species which are most widely diffused within their own country (and this is a different consideration from wide range, and to a certain extent from commonness), often give rise to varieties sufficiently well-marked to have been recorded in botanical works. Hence it is the most flourishing, or, as they may be called, the dominant species,--those which range widely over the world, are the most diffused in their own country, and are the most numerous in individuals,--which oftenest produce well-marked varieties, or, as I consider them, incipient species. And this, perhaps, might have been anticipated; for, as varieties, in order to become in any degree permanent, necessarily have to struggle with the other inhabitants of the country, the species which are already dominant will be the most likely to yield offspring which, though in some slight degree modified, will still inherit those advantages that enabled their parents to become dominant over their compatriots. 
If the plants inhabiting a country and described in any Flora be divided into two equal masses, all those in the larger genera being placed on one side, and all those in the smaller genera on the other side, a somewhat larger number of the very common and much diffused or dominant species will be found on the side of the larger genera. This, again, might have been anticipated; for the mere fact of many species of the same genus inhabiting any country, shows that there is something in the organic or inorganic conditions of that country favourable to the genus; and, consequently, we might have expected to have found in the larger genera, or those including many species, a large proportional number of dominant species. But so many causes tend to obscure this result, that I am surprised that my tables show even a small majority on the side of the larger genera. I will here allude to only two causes of obscurity. Fresh-water and salt-loving plants have generally very wide ranges and are much diffused, but this seems to be connected with the nature of the stations inhabited by them, and has little or no relation to the size of the genera to which the species belong. Again, plants low in the scale of organisation are generally much more widely diffused than plants higher in the scale; and here again there is no close relation to the size of the genera. The cause of lowly-organised plants ranging widely will be discussed in our chapter on geographical distribution. 
From looking at species as only strongly-marked and well-defined varieties, I was led to anticipate that the species of the larger genera in each country would oftener present varieties, than the species of the smaller genera; for wherever many closely related species (i.e. species of the same genus) have been formed, many varieties or incipient species ought, as a general rule, to be now forming. Where many large trees grow, we expect to find saplings. Where many species of a genus have been formed through variation, circumstances have been favourable for variation; and hence we might expect that the circumstances would generally be still favourable to variation. On the other hand, if we look at each species as a special act of creation, there is no apparent reason why more varieties should occur in a group having many species, than in one having few. 
To test the truth of this anticipation I have arranged the plants of twelve countries, and the coleopterous insects of two districts, into two nearly equal masses, the species of the larger genera on one side, and those of the smaller genera on the other side, and it has invariably proved to be the case that a larger proportion of the species on the side of the larger genera present varieties, than on the side of the smaller genera. Moreover, the species of the large genera which present any varieties, invariably present a larger average number of varieties than do the species of the small genera. Both these results follow when another division is made, and when all the smallest genera, with from only one to four species, are absolutely excluded from the tables. These facts are of plain signification on the view that species are only strongly marked and permanent varieties; for wherever many species of the same genus have been formed, or where, if we may use the expression, the manufactory of species has been active, we ought generally to find the manufactory still in action, more especially as we have every reason to believe the process of manufacturing new species to be a slow one. And this certainly is the case, if varieties be looked at as incipient species; for my tables clearly show as a general rule that, wherever many species of a genus have been formed, the species of that genus present a number of varieties, that is of incipient species, beyond the average. It is not that all large genera are now varying much, and are thus increasing in the number of their species, or that no small genera are now varying and increasing; for if this had been so, it would have been fatal to my theory; inasmuch as geology plainly tells us that small genera have in the lapse of time often increased greatly in size; and that large genera have often come to their maxima, declined, and disappeared. All that we want to show is, that where many species of a genus have been formed, on an average many are still forming; and this holds good. 
There are other relations between the species of large genera and their recorded varieties which deserve notice. We have seen that there is no infallible criterion by which to distinguish species and well-marked varieties; and in those cases in which intermediate links have not been found between doubtful forms, naturalists are compelled to come to a determination by the amount of difference between them, judging by analogy whether or not the amount suffices to raise one or both to the rank of species. Hence the amount of difference is one very important criterion in settling whether two forms should be ranked as species or varieties. Now Fries has remarked in regard to plants, and Westwood in regard to insects, that in large genera the amount of difference between the species is often exceedingly small. I have endeavoured to test this numerically by averages, and, as far as my imperfect results go, they always confirm the view. I have also consulted some sagacious and most experienced observers, and, after deliberation, they concur in this view. In this respect, therefore, the species of the larger genera resemble varieties, more than do the species of the smaller genera. Or the case may be put in another way, and it may be said, that in the larger genera, in which a number of varieties or incipient species greater than the average are now manufacturing, many of the species already manufactured still to a certain extent resemble varieties, for they differ from each other by a less than usual amount of difference. 
Moreover, the species of the large genera are related to each other, in the same manner as the varieties of any one species are related to each other. No naturalist pretends that all the species of a genus are equally distinct from each other; they may generally be divided into sub-genera, or sections, or lesser groups. As Fries has well remarked, little groups of species are generally clustered like satellites around certain other species. And what are varieties but groups of forms, unequally related to each other, and clustered round certain forms--that is, round their parent-species? Undoubtedly there is one most important point of difference between varieties and species; namely, that the amount of difference between varieties, when compared with each other or with their parent-species, is much less than that between the species of the same genus. But when we come to discuss the principle, as I call it, of Divergence of Character, we shall see how this may be explained, and how the lesser differences between varieties will tend to increase into the greater differences between species. 
There is one other point which seems to me worth notice. Varieties generally have much restricted ranges: this statement is indeed scarcely more than a truism, for if a variety were found to have a wider range than that of its supposed parent-species, their denominations ought to be reversed. But there is also reason to believe, that those species which are very closely allied to other species, and in so far resemble varieties, often have much restricted ranges. For instance, Mr. H. C. Watson has marked for me in the well-sifted London Catalogue of plants (4th edition) 63 plants which are therein ranked as species, but which he considers as so closely allied to other species as to be of doubtful value: these 63 reputed species range on an average over 6.9 of the provinces into which Mr. Watson has divided Great Britain. Now, in this same catalogue, 53 acknowledged varieties are recorded, and these range over 7.7 provinces; whereas, the species to which these varieties belong range over 14.3 provinces. So that the acknowledged varieties have very nearly the same restricted average range, as have those very closely allied forms, marked for me by Mr. Watson as doubtful species, but which are almost universally ranked by British botanists as good and true species. 
Finally, then, varieties have the same general characters as species, for they cannot be distinguished from species,--except, firstly, by the discovery of intermediate linking forms, and the occurrence of such links cannot affect the actual characters of the forms which they connect; and except, secondly, by a certain amount of difference, for two forms, if differing very little, are generally ranked as varieties, notwithstanding that intermediate linking forms have not been discovered; but the amount of difference considered necessary to give to two forms the rank of species is quite indefinite. In genera having more than the average number of species in any country, the species of these genera have more than the average number of varieties. In large genera the species are apt to be closely, but unequally, allied together, forming little clusters round certain species. Species very closely allied to other species apparently have restricted ranges. In all these several respects the species of large genera present a strong analogy with varieties. And we can clearly understand these analogies, if species have once existed as varieties, and have thus originated: whereas, these analogies are utterly inexplicable if each species has been independently created. 
We have, also, seen that it is the most flourishing and dominant species of the larger genera which on an average vary most; and varieties, as we shall hereafter see, tend to become converted into new and distinct species. The larger genera thus tend to become larger; and throughout nature the forms of life which are now dominant tend to become still more dominant by leaving many modified and dominant descendants. But by steps hereafter to be explained, the larger genera also tend to break up into smaller genera. And thus, the forms of life throughout the universe become divided into groups subordinate to groups. 

CHAPTER 3. STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE. 
Bears on natural selection. The term used in a wide sense. Geometrical powers of increase. Rapid increase of naturalised animals and plants. Nature of the checks to increase. Competition universal. Effects of climate. Protection from the number of individuals. Complex relations of all animals and plants throughout nature. Struggle for life most severe between individuals and varieties of the same species; often severe between species of the same genus. The relation of organism to organism the most important of all relations. 
Before entering on the subject of this chapter, I must make a few preliminary remarks, to show how the struggle for existence bears on Natural Selection. It has been seen in the last chapter that amongst organic beings in a state of nature there is some individual variability; indeed I am not aware that this has ever been disputed. It is immaterial for us whether a multitude of doubtful forms be called species or sub-species or varieties; what rank, for instance, the two or three hundred doubtful forms of British plants are entitled to hold, if the existence of any well-marked varieties be admitted. But the mere existence of individual variability and of some few well-marked varieties, though necessary as the foundation for the work, helps us but little in understanding how species arise in nature. How have all those exquisite adaptations of one part of the organisation to another part, and to the conditions of life, and of one distinct organic being to another being, been perfected? We see these beautiful co-adaptations most plainly in the woodpecker and missletoe; and only a little less plainly in the humblest parasite which clings to the hairs of a quadruped or feathers of a bird; in the structure of the beetle which dives through the water; in the plumed seed which is wafted by the gentlest breeze; in short, we see beautiful adaptations everywhere and in every part of the organic world. 
Again, it may be asked, how is it that varieties, which I have called incipient species, become ultimately converted into good and distinct species, which in most cases obviously differ from each other far more than do the varieties of the same species? How do those groups of species, which constitute what are called distinct genera, and which differ from each other more than do the species of the same genus, arise? All these results, as we shall more fully see in the next chapter, follow inevitably from the struggle for life. Owing to this struggle for life, any variation, however slight and from whatever cause proceeding, if it be in any degree profitable to an individual of any species, in its infinitely complex relations to other organic beings and to external nature, will tend to the preservation of that individual, and will generally be inherited by its offspring. The offspring, also, will thus have a better chance of surviving, for, of the many individuals of any species which are periodically born, but a small number can survive. I have called this principle, by which each slight variation, if useful, is preserved, by the term of Natural Selection, in order to mark its relation to man's power of selection. We have seen that man by selection can certainly produce great results, and can adapt organic beings to his own uses, through the accumulation of slight but useful variations, given to him by the hand of Nature. But Natural Selection, as we shall hereafter see, is a power incessantly ready for action, and is as immeasurably superior to man's feeble efforts, as the works of Nature are to those of Art. 
We will now discuss in a little more detail the struggle for existence. In my future work this subject shall be treated, as it well deserves, at much greater length. The elder De Candolle and Lyell have largely and philosophically shown that all organic beings are exposed to severe competition. In regard to plants, no one has treated this subject with more spirit and ability than W. Herbert, Dean of Manchester, evidently the result of his great horticultural knowledge. Nothing is easier than to admit in words the truth of the universal struggle for life, or more difficult--at least I have found it so--than constantly to bear this conclusion in mind. Yet unless it be thoroughly engrained in the mind, I am convinced that the whole economy of nature, with every fact on distribution, rarity, abundance, extinction, and variation, will be dimly seen or quite misunderstood. We behold the face of nature bright with gladness, we often see superabundance of food; we do not see, or we forget, that the birds which are idly singing round us mostly live on insects or seeds, and are thus constantly destroying life; or we forget how largely these songsters, or their eggs, or their nestlings, are destroyed by birds and beasts of prey; we do not always bear in mind, that though food may be now superabundant, it is not so at all seasons of each recurring year. 
I should premise that I use the term Struggle for Existence in a large and metaphorical sense, including dependence of one being on another, and including (which is more important) not only the life of the individual, but success in leaving progeny. Two canine animals in a time of dearth, may be truly said to struggle with each other which shall get food and live. But a plant on the edge of a desert is said to struggle for life against the drought, though more properly it should be said to be dependent on the moisture. A plant which annually produces a thousand seeds, of which on an average only one comes to maturity, may be more truly said to struggle with the plants of the same and other kinds which already clothe the ground. The missletoe is dependent on the apple and a few other trees, but can only in a far-fetched sense be said to struggle with these trees, for if too many of these parasites grow on the same tree, it will languish and die. But several seedling missletoes, growing close together on the same branch, may more truly be said to struggle with each other. As the missletoe is disseminated by birds, its existence depends on birds; and it may metaphorically be said to struggle with other fruit-bearing plants, in order to tempt birds to devour and thus disseminate its seeds rather than those of other plants. In these several senses, which pass into each other, I use for convenience sake the general term of struggle for existence. 
A struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high rate at which all organic beings tend to increase. Every being, which during its natural lifetime produces several eggs or seeds, must suffer destruction during some period of its life, and during some season or occasional year, otherwise, on the principle of geometrical increase, its numbers would quickly become so inordinately great that no country could support the product. Hence, as more individuals are produced than can possibly survive, there must in every case be a struggle for existence, either one individual with another of the same species, or with the individuals of distinct species, or with the physical conditions of life. It is the doctrine of Malthus applied with manifold force to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms; for in this case there can be no artificial increase of food, and no prudential restraint from marriage. Although some species may be now increasing, more or less rapidly, in numbers, all cannot do so, for the world would not hold them. 
There is no exception to the rule that every organic being naturally increases at so high a rate, that if not destroyed, the earth would soon be covered by the progeny of a single pair. Even slow-breeding man has doubled in twenty-five years, and at this rate, in a few thousand years, there would literally not be standing room for his progeny. Linnaeus has calculated that if an annual plant produced only two seeds--and there is no plant so unproductive as this--and their seedlings next year produced two, and so on, then in twenty years there would be a million plants. The elephant is reckoned to be the slowest breeder of all known animals, and I have taken some pains to estimate its probable minimum rate of natural increase: it will be under the mark to assume that it breeds when thirty years old, and goes on breeding till ninety years old, bringing forth three pair of young in this interval; if this be so, at the end of the fifth century there would be alive fifteen million elephants, descended from the first pair. 
But we have better evidence on this subject than mere theoretical calculations, namely, the numerous recorded cases of the astonishingly rapid increase of various animals in a state of nature, when circumstances have been favourable to them during two or three following seasons. Still more striking is the evidence from our domestic animals of many kinds which have run wild in several parts of the world: if the statements of the rate of increase of slow-breeding cattle and horses in South America, and latterly in Australia, had not been well authenticated, they would have been quite incredible. So it is with plants: cases could be given of introduced plants which have become common throughout whole islands in a period of less than ten years. Several of the plants now most numerous over the wide plains of La Plata, clothing square leagues of surface almost to the exclusion of all other plants, have been introduced from Europe; and there are plants which now range in India, as I hear from Dr. Falconer, from Cape Comorin to the Himalaya, which have been imported from America since its discovery. In such cases, and endless instances could be given, no one supposes that the fertility of these animals or plants has been suddenly and temporarily increased in any sensible degree. The obvious explanation is that the conditions of life have been very favourable, and that there has consequently been less destruction of the old and young, and that nearly all the young have been enabled to breed. In such cases the geometrical ratio of increase, the result of which never fails to be surprising, simply explains the extraordinarily rapid increase and wide diffusion of naturalised productions in their new homes. 
In a state of nature almost every plant produces seed, and amongst animals there are very few which do not annually pair. Hence we may confidently assert, that all plants and animals are tending to increase at a geometrical ratio, that all would most rapidly stock every station in which they could any how exist, and that the geometrical tendency to increase must be checked by destruction at some period of life. Our familiarity with the larger domestic animals tends, I think, to mislead us: we see no great destruction falling on them, and we forget that thousands are annually slaughtered for food, and that in a state of nature an equal number would have somehow to be disposed of. 
The only difference between organisms which annually produce eggs or seeds by the thousand, and those which produce extremely few, is, that the slow-breeders would require a few more years to people, under favourable conditions, a whole district, let it be ever so large. The condor lays a couple of eggs and the ostrich a score, and yet in the same country the condor may be the more numerous of the two: the Fulmar petrel lays but one egg, yet it is believed to be the most numerous bird in the world. One fly deposits hundreds of eggs, and another, like the hippobosca, a single one; but this difference does not determine how many individuals of the two species can be supported in a district. A large number of eggs is of some importance to those species, which depend on a rapidly fluctuating amount of food, for it allows them rapidly to increase in number. But the real importance of a large number of eggs or seeds is to make up for much destruction at some period of life; and this period in the great majority of cases is an early one. If an animal can in any way protect its own eggs or young, a small number may be produced, and yet the average stock be fully kept up; but if many eggs or young are destroyed, many must be produced, or the species will become extinct. It would suffice to keep up the full number of a tree, which lived on an average for a thousand years, if a single seed were produced once in a thousand years, supposing that this seed were never destroyed, and could be ensured to germinate in a fitting place. So that in all cases, the average number of any animal or plant depends only indirectly on the number of its eggs or seeds. 
In looking at Nature, it is most necessary to keep the foregoing considerations always in mind--never to forget that every single organic being around us may be said to be striving to the utmost to increase in numbers; that each lives by a struggle at some period of its life; that heavy destruction inevitably falls either on the young or old, during each generation or at recurrent intervals. Lighten any check, mitigate the destruction ever so little, and the number of the species will almost instantaneously increase to any amount. The face of Nature may be compared to a yielding surface, with ten thousand sharp wedges packed close together and driven inwards by incessant blows, sometimes one wedge being struck, and then another with greater force. 
What checks the natural tendency of each species to increase in number is most obscure. Look at the most vigorous species; by as much as it swarms in numbers, by so much will its tendency to increase be still further increased. We know not exactly what the checks are in even one single instance. Nor will this surprise any one who reflects how ignorant we are on this head, even in regard to mankind, so incomparably better known than any other animal. This subject has been ably treated by several authors, and I shall, in my future work, discuss some of the checks at considerable length, more especially in regard to the feral animals of South America. Here I will make only a few remarks, just to recall to the reader's mind some of the chief points. Eggs or very young animals seem generally to suffer most, but this is not invariably the case. With plants there is a vast destruction of seeds, but, from some observations which I have made, I believe that it is the seedlings which suffer most from germinating in ground already thickly stocked with other plants. Seedlings, also, are destroyed in vast numbers by various enemies; for instance, on a piece of ground three feet long and two wide, dug and cleared, and where there could be no choking from other plants, I marked all the seedlings of our native weeds as they came up, and out of the 357 no less than 295 were destroyed, chiefly by slugs and insects. If turf which has long been mown, and the case would be the same with turf closely browsed by quadrupeds, be let to grow, the more vigorous plants gradually kill the less vigorous, though fully grown, plants: thus out of twenty species growing on a little plot of turf (three feet by four) nine species perished from the other species being allowed to grow up freely. 
The amount of food for each specie which each can increase; but very frequ the serving as prey to other animals, wh of a species. Thus, there seems to be lit grouse, and hares on any large estate d vermin. If not one head of game were England, and, at the same time, if no ve all probability, be less game than at pre of game animals are now annually kille as with the elephant and rhinoceros, no even the tiger in India most rarely dares by its dam. 
Climate plays an important part in d species, and periodical seasons of extrem most effective of all checks. I estimated four-fifths of the birds in my own destruction, when we remember that ten mortality from epidemics with man. The to be quite independent of the struggle chiefly acts in reducing food, it brings the individuals, whether of the same or the same kind of food. Even when clim directly, it will be the least vigorous, through the advancing winter, which w south to north, or from a damp regio species gradually getting rarer and rare change of climate being conspicuous, w effect to its direct action. But this is a species, even where it most abounds destruction at some period of its life, fr the same place and food; and if these e degree favoured by any slight chang numbers, and, as each area is already fu species will decrease. When we travel so in numbers, we may feel sure that th species being favoured, as in this one 
























































































































































































































































































































