                      Project Gutenberg’s Essays on the Theory of Numbers, by Richard Dedekind

                This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
                  almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
                  re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
                with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


              Title: Essays on the Theory of Numbers

              Author: Richard Dedekind

                Translator: Wooster Woodruff Beman

                  Release Date: April 8, 2007 [EBook #21016]

            Language: English

              Character set encoding: TeX

                *** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THEORY OF NUMBERS ***


                  Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins and the
                  Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net                  Transcriber’s Note: The symbol3is used as an approximation to the au-
                  thor’s Part-of symbol, not to be confused with the digit 3. Internal page ref-
                erences have been been adjusted to t the pagination of this edition. A few
                    typographical errors have been corrected - these are noted at the very end of the
          text.                                  IN THE SAME SERIES.



                  ON CONTINUITY AND IRRATIONAL NUMBERS, and ON THE NATURE AND
                          MEANING OF NUMBERS. By R. Dedekind. From the German by W. W.
                    Beman. Pages, 115. Cloth, 75 cents net (3s. 6d. net).

                        GEOMETRIC EXERCISES IN PAPER-FOLDING. By T. Sundara Row. Edited
                      and revised by W. W. Beman and D. E. Smith. With many half-tone engravings
                      from photographs of actual exercises, and a package of papers for folding. Pages,
                    circa 200. Cloth, $1.00. net (4s. 6d. net). (In Preparation.)

                      ON THE STUDY AND DIFFICULTIES OF MATHEMATICS. By Augustus
                      De Morgan. Reprint edition with portrait and bibliographies. Pp., 288. Cloth,
                $1.25 net (4s. 6d. net).

                  LECTURES ON ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS. By Joseph Louis Lagrange.
                          From the French by Thomas J. McCormack. With portrait and biography.
                  Pages, 172. Cloth, $1.00 net (4s. 6d. net).

                  ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE DIFFERENTIAL AND INTEGRAL
                            CALCULUS. By Augustus De Morgan. Reprint edition. With a bibliogra-
                        phy of text-books of the Calculus. Pp., 144. Price, $1.00 net (4s. 6d. net).

                        MATHEMATICAL ESSAYS AND RECREATIONS. By Prof. Hermann Schu-
                            bert, of Hamburg, Germany. From the German by T. J. McCormack, Essays
                          on Number, The Magic Square, The Fourth Dimension, The Squaring of the
                  Circle. Pages, 149. Price, Cloth, 75c. net (3s. net).

                        A BRIEF HISTORY OF ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS. By Dr. Karl Fink,
                          of T¨ubingen. From the German by W. W. Beman and D. E. Smith, Pp. 333.
                  Cloth, $1.50 net (5s. 6d. net).



                            THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY
                                      324 DEARBORN ST., CHICAGO.
                                LONDON: Kegan Paul, Trench, Tr¨ubner & Co.                                      ESSAYS

                                          ON THE

                          THEORY OF NUMBERS



                              I. CONTINUITY AND IRRATIONAL NUMBERS

                          II. THE NATURE AND MEANING OF NUMBERS



                                            BY

                                  RICHARD DEDEKIND



                                    AUTHORISED TRANSLATION BY

                                WOOSTER WOODRUFF BEMAN

                        PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
















                                        CHICAGO
                            THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

                                        LONDON AGENTS
                                Kegan Paul, Trench, Tr¨ubner & Co., Ltd.
                                          1901                                TRANSLATION COPYRIGHTED

                                          BY

                                  The Open Court Publishing Co.
                                          1901.                    CONTINUITY AND IRRATIONAL NUMBERS

                        My attention was rst directed toward the considerations which form the
                    subject of this pamphlet in the autumn of 1858. As professor in the Polytechnic
                  School in Z¨urich I found myself for the rst time obliged to lecture upon the
                  elements of the di erential calculus and felt more keenly than ever before the
                    lack of a really scientic foundation for arithmetic. In discussing the notion of
                  the approach of a variable magnitude to a xed limiting value, and especially
                    in proving the theorem that every magnitude which grows continually, but not
                  beyond all limits, must certainly approach a limiting value, I had recourse to
                    geometric evidences. Even now such resort to geometric intuition in a rst pre-
                  sentation of the di erential calculus, I regard as exceedingly useful, from the
                    didactic standpoint, and indeed indispensable, if one does not wish to lose too
                  much time. But that this form of introduction into the di erential calculus
                  can make no claim to being scientic, no one will deny. For myself this feel-
                    ing of dissatisfaction was so overpowering that I made the xed resolve to keep
                    meditating on the question till I should nd a purely arithmetic and perfectly
                    rigorous foundation for the principles of innitesimal analysis. The statement is
                    so frequently made that the di erential calculus deals with continuous magni-
                    tude, and yet an explanation of this continuity is nowhere given; even the most
                  rigorous expositions of the di erential calculus do not base their proofs upon
                  continuity but, with more or less consciousness of the fact, they either appeal
                    to geometric notions or those suggested by geometry, or depend upon theorems
                    which are never established in a purely arithmetic manner. Among these, for ex-
                    ample, belongs the above-mentioned theorem, and a more careful investigation
                    convinced me that this theorem, or any one equivalent to it, can be regarded in
                    some way as a su cient basis for innitesimal analysis. It then only remained to
                    discover its true origin in the elements of arithmetic and thus at the same time
                    to secure a real denition of the essence of continuity. I succeeded Nov. 24, 1858,
                    and a few days afterward I communicated the results of my meditations to my
                  dear friend Dur`ege with whom I had a long and lively discussion. Later I ex-
                  plained these views of a scientic basis of arithmetic to a few of my pupils, and
                  here in Braunschweig read a paper upon the subject before the scientic club
                  of professors, but I could not make up my mind to its publication, because, in
                    the rst place, the presentation did not seem altogether simple, and further, the
                    theory itself had little promise. Nevertheless I had already half determined to
                  select this theme as subject for this occasion, when a few days ago, March 14,
                    by the kindness of the author, the paper Die Elemente der Funktionenlehre by
                  E. Heine (Crelle’s Journal, Vol. 74) came into my hands and conrmed me in
                  my decision. In the main I fully agree with the substance of this memoir, and
                    indeed I could hardly do otherwise, but I will frankly acknowledge that my own
                  presentation seems to me to be simpler in form and to bring out the vital point
                  more clearly. While writing this preface (March 20, 1872), I am just in receipt
                    of the interesting paper Ueber die Ausdehnung eines Satzes aus der Theorie der
                    trigonometrischen Reihen, by G. Cantor (Math. Annalen, Vol. 5), for which I
                  owe the ingenious author my hearty thanks. As I nd on a hasty perusal, the

                                            1                  axiom given in Section II. of that paper, aside from the form of presentation,
                  agrees with what I designate in Section III. as the essence of continuity. But
                    what advantage will be gained by even a purely abstract denition of real num-
                  bers of a higher type, I am as yet unable to see, conceiving as I do of the domain
              of real numbers as complete in itself.

                                            I.

                            PROPERTIES OF RATIONAL NUMBERS.

                    The development of the arithmetic of rational numbers is here presupposed,
                  but still I think it worth while to call attention to certain important matters
                    without discussion, so as to show at the outset the standpoint assumed in what
                  follows. I regard the whole of arithmetic as a necessary, or at least natural,
                    consequence of the simplest arithmetic act, that of counting, and counting it-
                    self as nothing else than the successive creation of the innite series of positive
                    integers in which each individual is dened by the one immediately preceding;
                  the simplest act is the passing from an already-formed individual to the con-
                  secutive new one to be formed. The chain of these numbers forms in itself an
                    exceedingly useful instrument for the human mind; it presents an inexhaustible
                    wealth of remarkable laws obtained by the introduction of the four fundamental
                    operations of arithmetic. Addition is the combination of any arbitrary repeti-
                  tions of the above-mentioned simplest act into a single act; from it in a similar
                  way arises multiplication. While the performance of these two operations is
                    always possible, that of the inverse operations, subtraction and division, proves
                    to be limited. Whatever the immediate occasion may have been, whatever com-
                    parisons or analogies with experience, or intuition, may have led thereto; it is
                    certainly true that just this limitation in performing the indirect operations has
                in each case been the real motive for a new creative act; thus negative and
                    fractional numbers have been created by the human mind; and in the system of
                    all rational numbers there has been gained an instrument of innitely greater
                  perfection. This system, which I shall denote by R, possesses rst of all a com-
                    pleteness and self-containedness which I have designated in another place1as
                    characteristic of a body of numbers [Zahlk¨orper] and which consists in this that
                    the four fundamental operations are always performable with any two individu-
                  als in R, i. e., the result is always an individual of R, the single case of division
              by the number zero being excepted.
                        For our immediate purpose, however, another property of the system R is
                  still more important; it may be expressed by saying that the system R forms
                    a well-arranged domain of one dimension extending to innity on two opposite
                  sides. What is meant by this is su ciently indicated by my use of expressions
                  borrowed from geometric ideas; but just for this reason it will be necessary
                    to bring out clearly the corresponding purely arithmetic properties in order to
                  avoid even the appearance as if arithmetic were in need of ideas foreign to it.

            1
                    Vorlesungen ¨uber Zahlentheorie, by P. G. Lejeune Dirichlet. 2d ed. §159.


                                            2                      To express that the symbols a and b represent one and the same rational
                number we put a = b as well as b = a. The fact that two rational numbers a,
                b are di erent appears in this that the di erence a b has either a positive or
                  negative value. In the former case a is said to be greater than b, b less than a;
                this is also indicated by the symbols a > b, b < a.2As in the latter case b a
                  has a positive value it follows that b > a, a < b. In regard to these two ways in
                which two numbers may di er the following laws will hold:
                      i. If a > b, and b > c, then a > c. Whenever a, c are two di erent (or
                  unequal) numbers, and b is greater than the one and less than the other, we
                    shall, without hesitation because of the suggestion of geometric ideas, express
                  this briey by saying: b lies between the two numbers a, c.
                    ii. If a, c are two di erent numbers, there are innitely many di erent
              numbers lying between a, c.
                        iii. If a is any denite number, then all numbers of the system R fall into two
                    classes, A1and A2, each of which contains innitely many individuals; the rst
                    class A1comprises all numbers a1that are < a, the second class A2comprises
                  all numbers a2that are > a; the number a itself may be assigned at pleasure
                  to the rst or second class, being respectively the greatest number of the rst
                  class or the least of the second. In every case the separation of the system R
                    into the two classes A1, A2is such that every number of the rst class A1is less
                than every number of the second class A2.

                                            II.

                    COMPARISON OF THE RATIONAL NUMBERS WITH THE POINTS OF
                                      A STRAIGHT LINE.

                    The above-mentioned properties of rational numbers recall the corresponding
                relations of position of the points of a straight line L. If the two opposite
                    directions existing upon it are distinguished by “right” and “left,” and p, q are
                  two di erent points, then either p lies to the right of q, and at the same time q
                to the left of p, or conversely q lies to the right of p and at the same time p to
                  the left of q. A third case is impossible, if p, q are actually di erent points. In
                regard to this di erence in position the following laws hold:
                  i. If p lies to the right of q, and q to the right of r, then p lies to the right
              of r; and we say that q lies between the points p and r.
                      ii. If p, r are two di erent points, then there always exist innitely many
              points that lie between p and r.
                      iii. If p is a denite point in L, then all points in L fall into two classes, P1,
                      P2, each of which contains innitely many individuals; the rst class P1contains
                  all the points p1, that lie to the left of p, and the second class P2contains all
                the points p2that lie to the right of p; the point p itself may be assigned at
                    pleasure to the rst or second class. In every case the separation of the straight

            2
                            Hence in what follows the so-called “algebraic” greater and less are understood unless the
              word “absolute” is added.


                                            3                  line L into the two classes or portions P1, P2, is of such a character that every
                  point of the rst class P1lies to the left of every point of the second class P2.
                        This analogy between rational numbers and the points of a straight line, as
                    is well known, becomes a real correspondence when we select upon the straight
                  line a denite origin or zero-point o and a denite unit of length for the mea-
                  surement of segments. With the aid of the latter to every rational number a a
                    corresponding length can be constructed and if we lay this o  upon the straight
                  line to the right or left of o according as a is positive or negative, we obtain a
                    denite end-point p, which may be regarded as the point corresponding to the
                  number a; to the rational number zero corresponds the point o. In this way to
                  every rational number a, i. e., to every individual in R, corresponds one and
                  only one point p, i. e., an individual in L. To the two numbers a, b respectively
                correspond the two points, p, q, and if a > b, then p lies to the right of q. To
                  the laws i, ii, iii of the previous Section correspond completely the laws i, ii, iii
            of the present.

                                          III.

                              CONTINUITY OF THE STRAIGHT LINE.

                      Of the greatest importance, however, is the fact that in the straight line L
                  there are innitely many points which correspond to no rational number. If
                  the point p corresponds to the rational number a, then, as is well known, the
                  length o p is commensurable with the invariable unit of measure used in the
                    construction, i. e., there exists a third length, a so-called common measure, of
                    which these two lengths are integral multiples. But the ancient Greeks already
                  knew and had demonstrated that there are lengths incommensurable with a
                  given unit of length, e. g., the diagonal of the square whose side is the unit of
                length. If we lay o  such a length from the point o upon the line we obtain
                    an end-point which corresponds to no rational number. Since further it can be
                    easily shown that there are innitely many lengths which are incommensurable
                    with the unit of length, we may a rm: The straight line L is innitely richer in
                      point-individuals than the domain R of rational numbers in number-individuals.
                      If now, as is our desire, we try to follow up arithmetically all phenomena in
                    the straight line, the domain of rational numbers is insu cient and it becomes
                    absolutely necessary that the instrument R constructed by the creation of the
                    rational numbers be essentially improved by the creation of new numbers such
                    that the domain of numbers shall gain the same completeness, or as we may say
                at once, the same continuity, as the straight line.
                        The previous considerations are so familiar and well known to all that many
                    will regard their repetition quite superuous. Still I regarded this recapitulation
                    as necessary to prepare properly for the main question. For, the way in which the
                    irrational numbers are usually introduced is based directly upon the conception
                      of extensive magnitudes—which itself is nowhere carefully dened—and explains
                  number as the result of measuring such a magnitude by another of the same


                                            4                    kind.3Instead of this I demand that arithmetic shall be developed out of itself.
                  That such comparisons with non-arithmetic notions have furnished the im-
                  mediate occasion for the extension of the number-concept may, in a general
                  way, be granted (though this was certainly not the case in the introduction of
                    complex numbers); but this surely is no su cient ground for introducing these
                  foreign notions into arithmetic, the science of numbers. Just as negative and
                  fractional rational numbers are formed by a new creation, and as the laws of
                  operating with these numbers must and can be reduced to the laws of operat-
                    ing with positive integers, so we must endeavor completely to dene irrational
                    numbers by means of the rational numbers alone. The question only remains
            how to do this.
                        The above comparison of the domain R of rational numbers with a straight
                line has led to the recognition of the existence of gaps, of a certain incom-
                  pleteness or discontinuity of the former, while we ascribe to the straight line
                    completeness, absence of gaps, or continuity. In what then does this continu-
                    ity consist? Everything must depend on the answer to this question, and only
                    through it shall we obtain a scientic basis for the investigation of all continu-
                    ous domains. By vague remarks upon the unbroken connection in the smallest
                    parts obviously nothing is gained; the problem is to indicate a precise charac-
                  teristic of continuity that can serve as the basis for valid deductions. For a
                  long time I pondered over this in vain, but nally I found what I was seeking.
                    This discovery will, perhaps, be di erently estimated by di erent people; the
                    majority may nd its substance very commonplace. It consists of the following.
                  In the preceding section attention was called to the fact that every point p of
                    the straight line produces a separation of the same into two portions such that
                  every point of one portion lies to the left of every point of the other. I nd the
                    essence of continuity in the converse, i. e., in the following principle:
                      “If all points of the straight line fall into two classes such that every point
                of the rst class lies to the left of every point of the second class, then there
                    exists one and only one point which produces this division of all points into two
                classes, this severing of the straight line into two portions.”
                    As already said I think I shall not err in assuming that every one will at
                  once grant the truth of this statement; the majority of my readers will be very
                    much disappointed in learning that by this commonplace remark the secret of
                continuity is to be revealed. To this I may say that I am glad if every one
                  nds the above principle so obvious and so in harmony with his own ideas of
                  a line; for I am utterly unable to adduce any proof of its correctness, nor has
                  any one the power. The assumption of this property of the line is nothing else
                    than an axiom by which we attribute to the line its continuity, by which we nd
                  continuity in the line. If space has at all a real existence it is not necessary for
                    it to be continuous; many of its properties would remain the same even were it
                    discontinuous. And if we knew for certain that space was discontinuous there

            3
                            The apparent advantage of the generality of this denition of number disappears as soon
                    as we consider complex numbers. According to my view, on the other hand, the notion of
                  the ratio between two numbers of the same kind can be clearly developed only after the
              introduction of irrational numbers.

                                            5                  would be nothing to prevent us, in case we so desired, from lling up its gaps,
                  in thought, and thus making it continuous; this lling up would consist in a
                    creation of new point-individuals and would have to be e ected in accordance
            with the above principle.

                                          IV.

                            CREATION OF IRRATIONAL NUMBERS.

                    From the last remarks it is su ciently obvious how the discontinuous domain
                  R of rational numbers may be rendered complete so as to form a continuous
                  domain. In Section I it was pointed out that every rational number a e ects a
                  separation of the system R into two classes such that every number a1of the
                  rst class A1is less than every number a2of the second class A2; the number a
                    is either the greatest number of the class A1or the least number of the class A2.
                  If now any separation of the system R into two classes A1, A2is given which
                  possesses only this characteristic property that every number a1in A1is less
                  than every number a2in A2, then for brevity we shall call such a separation a
                    cut [Schnitt] and designate it by (A1, A2). We can then say that every rational
                  number a produces one cut or, strictly speaking, two cuts, which, however,
                  we shall not look upon as essentially di erent; this cut possesses, besides, the
                    property that either among the numbers of the rst class there exists a greatest
                  or among the numbers of the second class a least number. And conversely, if a
                    cut possesses this property, then it is produced by this greatest or least rational
            number.
                        But it is easy to show that there exist innitely many cuts not produced by
                rational numbers. The following example suggests itself most readily.
                        Let D be a positive integer but not the square of an integer, then there exists
            a positive integer   such that

                                      22
                                       < D < (  + 1).

                        If we assign to the second class A2, every positive rational number a2whose
                    square is > D, to the rst class A1all other rational numbers a1, this separation
                  forms a cut (A1, A2), i. e., every number a1is less than every number a2. For
                if a1= 0, or is negative, then on that ground a1is less than any number a2,
                  because, by denition, this last is positive; if a1is positive, then is its square
                  5 D, and hence a1is less than any positive number a2whose square is > D.
                        But this cut is produced by no rational number. To demonstrate this it must
                  be shown rst of all that there exists no rational number whose square = D.
                  Although this is known from the rst elements of the theory of numbers, still
                    the following indirect proof may nd place here. If there exist a rational number
                  whose square = D, then there exist two positive integers t, u, that satisfy the
          equation
                                        22
                                        t Du= 0,



                                            6                    and we may assume that u is the least positive integer possessing the property
                    that its square, by multiplication by D, may be converted into the square of an
            integer t. Since evidently
                                       u < t < (  + 1)u,

                  the number u0= t u is a positive integer certainly less than u. If further we
          put
                                        0
                                        t= Du  t,

                t0is likewise a positive integer, and we have

                              0202222
                              t Du= (  D)(t Du) = 0,

              which is contrary to the assumption respecting u.
                      Hence the square of every rational number x is either < D or > D. From
                  this it easily follows that there is neither in the class A1a greatest, nor in the
              class A2a least number. For if we put

                                            x(x2+ 3D)
                                        y =,
                                              3x2+ D
          we have
                                            2x(D x2)
                                    y x =
                                              3x2+ D
          and
                                              23
                                    2(x D)
                                    y D =.
                                            (3x2+ D)2

                    If in this we assume x to be a positive number from the class A1, then
                  x2< D, and hence y > x and y2< D. Therefore y likewise belongs to the class
                A1. But if we assume x to be a number from the class A2, then x2> D, and
                hence y < x, y > 0, and y2> D. Therefore y likewise belongs to the class A2.
                This cut is therefore produced by no rational number.
                        In this property that not all cuts are produced by rational numbers consists
                  the incompleteness or discontinuity of the domain R of all rational numbers.
                        Whenever, then, we have to do with a cut (A1, A2) produced by no rational
                    number, we create a new, an irrational number  , which we regard as completely
                    dened by this cut (A1, A2); we shall say that the number   corresponds to this
                cut, or that it produces this cut. From now on, therefore, to every denite
                  cut there corresponds a denite rational or irrational number, and we regard
                    two numbers as di erent or unequal always and only when they correspond to
              essentially di erent cuts.
                    In order to obtain a basis for the orderly arrangement of all real, i. e., of
                    all rational and irrational numbers we must investigate the relation between
                  any two cuts (A1, A2) and (B1, B2) produced by any two numbers   and .
                    Obviously a cut (A1, A2) is given completely when one of the two classes, e. g.,
                  the rst A1is known, because the second A2consists of all rational numbers
                  not contained in A1, and the characteristic property of such a rst class lies in


                                            7                  this that if the number a1is contained in it, it also contains all numbers less
                  than a1. If now we compare two such rst classes A1, B1with each other, it
            may happen
                        1. That they are perfectly identical, i. e., that every number contained in A1
                    is also contained in B1, and that every number contained in B1is also contained
                  in A1. In this case A2is necessarily identical with B2, and the two cuts are
                  perfectly identical, which we denote in symbols by   =  or  =  .
                      But if the two classes A1, B1are not identical, then there exists in the one,
                  e. g., in A1, a number a0= b0not contained in the other B1and consequently
                                12
                  found in B2; hence all numbers b1contained in B1are certainly less than this
                  number a0= b0and therefore all numbers b1are contained in A1.
                  12
                  2. If now this number a0is the only one in A1that is not contained in
                                    1
                  B1, then is every other number a1contained in A1also contained in B1and is
                  consequently < a0, i. e., a0is the greatest among all the numbers a1, hence the
                          11
                  cut (A1, A2) is produced by the rational number a = a0= b0. Concerning the
                                                          12
                    other cut (B1, B2) we know already that all numbers b1in B1are also contained
                    in A1and are less than the number a0= b0which is contained in B2; every other
                                          12
                    number b2contained in B2must, however, be greater than b0, for otherwise it
                                                                2
                  would be less than a0, therefore contained in A1and hence in B1; hence b0is
                            12
                    the least among all numbers contained in B2, and consequently the cut (B1, B2)
                is produced by the same rational number  = b0= a0=  . The two cuts are
                                                    21
              then only unessentially di erent.
                    3. If, however, there exist in A1at least two di erent numbers a0= b0
                                                                        12
                  and a00= b00, which are not contained in B1, then there exist innitely many
                12
                  of them, because all the innitely many numbers lying between a0and a00are
                                                                    11
                obviously contained in A1(Section I, ii) but not in B1. In this case we say
                    that the numbers   and  corresponding to these two essentially di erent cuts
                    (A1, A2) and (B1, B2) are di erent, and further that   is greater than , that 
                is less than  , which we express in symbols by   >  as well as  <  . It is to
                    be noticed that this denition coincides completely with the one given earlier,
            when  ,  are rational.
                  The remaining possible cases are these:
                      4. If there exists in B1one and only one number b0= a0, that is not
                                                              12
                    contained in A1then the two cuts (A1, A2) and (B1, B2) are only unessentially
                    di erent and they are produced by one and the same rational number   = a0=
                                                                            2
          b0= .
          1
                      5. But if there are in B1at least two numbers which are not contained in
            A1, then  >  ,   < .
                        As this exhausts the possible cases, it follows that of two di erent numbers
                    one is necessarily the greater, the other the less, which gives two possibilities. A
                    third case is impossible. This was indeed involved in the use of the comparative
                    (greater, less) to designate the relation between  , ; but this use has only now
                  been justied. In just such investigations one needs to exercise the greatest
                  care so that even with the best intention to be honest he shall not, through
                    a hasty choice of expressions borrowed from other notions already developed,
                  allow himself to be led into the use of inadmissible transfers from one domain

                                            8            to the other.
                      If now we consider again somewhat carefully the case   >  it is obvious
                  that the less number , if rational, certainly belongs to the class A1; for since
                  there is in A1a number a0= b0which belongs to the class B2, it follows that
                                12
                    the number , whether the greatest number in B1or the least in B2is certainly
                5 a0and hence contained in A1. Likewise it is obvious from   >  that the
              1
                    greater number  , if rational, certainly belongs to the class B2, because   = a0.
                                                                              1
                  Combining these two considerations we get the following result: If a cut is
                    produced by the number   then any rational number belongs to the class A1or
                  to the class A2according as it is less or greater than  ; if the number   is itself
              rational it may belong to either class.
                        From this we obtain nally the following: If   > , i. e., if there are innitely
                  many numbers in A1not contained in B1then there are innitely many such
                  numbers that at the same time are di erent from   and from ; every such
                  rational number c is <  , because it is contained in A1and at the same time it
              is >  because contained in B2.

                                            V.

                          CONTINUITY OF THE DOMAIN OF REAL NUMBERS.

                      In consequence of the distinctions just established the system R of all real
                    numbers forms a well-arranged domain of one dimension; this is to mean merely
            that the following laws prevail:
                    i. If   > , and  > , then is also   > . We shall say that the number 
            lies between   and .
                      ii. If  ,  are any two di erent numbers, then there exist innitely many
              di erent numbers  lying between  , .
                      iii. If   is any denite number then all numbers of the system R fall into
                    two classes A1and A2each of which contains innitely many individuals; the
                  rst class A1comprises all the numbers  1that are less than  , the second A2
                    comprises all the numbers  2that are greater than  ; the number   itself may be
                  assigned at pleasure to the rst class or to the second, and it is respectively the
                  greatest of the rst or the least of the second class. In each case the separation
                  of the system R into the two classes A1, A2is such that every number of rst
                  class A1is smaller than every number of the second class A2and we say that
              this separation is produced by the number  .
                      For brevity and in order not to weary the reader I suppress the proofs of
                    these theorems which follow immediately from the denitions of the previous
          section.
                        Beside these properties, however, the domain R possesses also continuity;
              i. e., the following theorem is true:
                      iv. If the system R of all real numbers breaks up into two classes A1, A2
                  such that every number  1of the class A1is less than every number  2of the
                    class A2then there exists one and only one number   by which this separation
            is produced.

                                            9                    Proof. By the separation or the cut of R into A1and A2we obtain at
                  the same time a cut (A1, A2) of the system R of all rational numbers which is
                  dened by this that A1contains all rational numbers of the class A1and A2
                  all other rational numbers, i. e., all rational numbers of the class A2. Let  
                  be the perfectly denite number which produces this cut (A1, A2). If  is any
                    number di erent from  , there are always innitely many rational numbers c
                lying between   and . If  <  , then c <  ; hence c belongs to the class A1
                  and consequently also to the class A1, and since at the same time  < c then 
                  also belongs to the same class A1, because every number in A2is greater than
                every number c in A1. But if  >  , then is c >  ; hence c belongs to the class
                A2and consequently also to the class A2, and since at the same time  > c,
                  then  also belongs to the same class A2, because every number in A1is less
                  than every number c in A2. Hence every number  di erent from   belongs to
                the class A1or to the class A2according as  <   or  >  ; consequently  
                  itself is either the greatest number in A1or the least number in A2, i. e.,   is
                    one and obviously the only number by which the separation of R into the classes
              A1, A2is produced. Which was to be proved.

                                          VI.

                              OPERATIONS WITH REAL NUMBERS.

                      To reduce any operation with two real numbers  ,  to operations with
                    rational numbers, it is only necessary from the cuts (A1, A2), (B1, B2) produced
                by the numbers   and  in the system R to dene the cut (C1, C2) which is
                to correspond to the result of the operation, . I conne myself here to the
                discussion of the simplest case, that of addition.
                      If c is any rational number, we put it into the class C1, provided there are
                  two numbers one a1in A1and one b1in B1such that their sum a1+ b1= c;
                  all other rational numbers shall be put into the class C2. This separation of
                  all rational numbers into the two classes C1, C2evidently forms a cut, since
                  every number c1in C1is less than every number c2in C2. If both   and  are
                  rational, then every number c1contained in C1is 5   + , because a15  ,
                  b15 , and therefore a1+ b15   + ; further, if there were contained in C2a
                  number c2<  +, hence  + = c2+p, where p is a positive rational number,
            then we should have
                                           1 1
                                  c2= ( p) + (p),
                                          22

                  which contradicts the denition of the number c2, because   1p is a number
                                                                  2
                  in A1, and  1p a number in B1; consequently every number c2contained in
                        2
                  C2is =   + . Therefore in this case the cut (C1, C2) is produced by the sum
                   +. Thus we shall not violate the denition which holds in the arithmetic of
                  rational numbers if in all cases we understand by the sum  + of any two real
                  numbers  ,  that number  by which the cut (C1, C2) is produced. Further,
                if only one of the two numbers  ,  is rational, e. g.,  , it is easy to see that it


                                            10                  makes no di erence with the sum  =   +  whether the number   is put into
            the class A1or into the class A2.
                      Just as addition is dened, so can the other operations of the so-called el-
                    ementary arithmetic be dened, viz., the formation of di erences, products,
                    quotients, powers, roots, logarithms, and in this way we arrive at real proofs of
                            ppp
                    theorems (as, e. g.,2 ·3 =6), which to the best of my knowledge have
                  never been established before. The excessive length that is to be feared in the
                    denitions of the more complicated operations is partly inherent in the nature of
                    the subject but can for the most part be avoided. Very useful in this connection
                  is the notion of an interval, i. e., a system A of rational numbers possessing the
                    following characteristic property: if a and a0are numbers of the system A, then
                  are all rational numbers lying between a and a0contained in A. The system
                  R of all rational numbers, and also the two classes of any cut are intervals. If
                  there exist a rational number a1which is less and a rational number a2which
                  is greater than every number of the interval A, then A is called a nite inter-
                  val; there then exist innitely many numbers in the same condition as a1and
                    innitely many in the same condition as a2; the whole domain R breaks up into
                    three parts A1, A, A2and there enter two perfectly denite rational or irrational
                  numbers  1,  2which may be called respectively the lower and upper (or the
                  less and greater) limits of the interval; the lower limit  1is determined by the
                  cut for which the system A1forms the rst class and the upper  2by the cut
                    for which the system A2forms the second class. Of every rational or irrational
                    number   lying between  1and  2it may be said that it lies within the interval
                  A. If all numbers of an interval A are also numbers of an interval B, then A is
            called a portion of B.
                  Still lengthier considerations seem to loom up when we attempt to adapt the
                    numerous theorems of the arithmetic of rational numbers (as, e. g., the theorem
                (a + b)c = ac + bc) to any real numbers. This, however, is not the case. It is
                    easy to see that it all reduces to showing that the arithmetic operations possess
                  a certain continuity. What I mean by this statement may be expressed in the
              form of a general theorem:
                      “If the number   is the result of an operation performed on the numbers  ,
                    , , . . . and   lies within the interval L, then intervals A, B, C, . . . can be
                  taken within which lie the numbers  , , , . . . such that the result of the same
                    operation in which the numbers  , , , . . . are replaced by arbitrary numbers of
                  the intervals A, B, C, . . . is always a number lying within the interval L.” The
                    forbidding clumsiness, however, which marks the statement of such a theorem
                  convinces us that something must be brought in as an aid to expression; this
                  is, in fact, attained in the most satisfactory way by introducing the ideas of
                    variable magnitudes, functions, limiting values, and it would be best to base the
                    denitions of even the simplest arithmetic operations upon these ideas, a matter
                which, however, cannot be carried further here.





                                            11                                          VII.

                                    INFINITESIMAL ANALYSIS.

                        Here at the close we ought to explain the connection between the preceding
                  investigations and certain fundamental theorems of innitesimal analysis.
                    We say that a variable magnitude x which passes through successive denite
                    numerical values approaches a xed limiting value   when in the course of the
                    process x lies nally between two numbers between which   itself lies, or, what
                    amounts to the same, when the di erence x  taken absolutely becomes nally
              less than any given value di erent from zero.
                        One of the most important theorems may be stated in the following manner:
                  “If a magnitude x grows continually but not beyond all limits it approaches a
            limiting value.”
                      I prove it in the following way. By hypothesis there exists one and hence
                    there exist innitely many numbers  2such that x remains continually <  2;
                  I designate by A2the system of all these numbers  2, by A1the system of all
                  other numbers  1; each of the latter possesses the property that in the course
                    of the process x becomes nally =  1, hence every number  1is less than every
                    number  2and consequently there exists a number   which is either the greatest
                in A1or the least in A2(V, iv). The former cannot be the case since x never
                  ceases to grow, hence   is the least number in A2. Whatever number  1be
                  taken we shall have nally  1< x <  , i. e., x approaches the limiting value  .
                      This theorem is equivalent to the principle of continuity, i. e., it loses its
                  validity as soon as we assume a single real number not to be contained in the
                    domain R; or otherwise expressed: if this theorem is correct, then is also theorem
            iv. in V. correct.
                    Another theorem of innitesimal analysis, likewise equivalent to this, which
                is still oftener employed, may be stated as follows: “If in the variation of a
                    magnitude x we can for every given positive magnitude   assign a corresponding
                  position from and after which x changes by less than   then x approaches a
            limiting value.”
                        This converse of the easily demonstrated theorem that every variable mag-
                    nitude which approaches a limiting value nally changes by less than any given
                    positive magnitude can be derived as well from the preceding theorem as directly
                  from the principle of continuity. I take the latter course. Let   be any positive
                  magnitude (i. e.,   > 0), then by hypothesis a time will come after which x will
                  change by less than  , i. e., if at this time x has the value a, then afterwards we
                  shall continually have x > a  and x < a+ . I now for a moment lay aside the
                    original hypothesis and make use only of the theorem just demonstrated that
                    all later values of the variable x lie between two assignable nite values. Upon
                  this I base a double separation of all real numbers. To the system A2I assign
                  a number  2(e.g., a +  ) when in the course of the process x becomes nally
                  5  2; to the system A1I assign every number not contained in A2; if  1is such
                    a number, then, however far the process may have advanced, it will still happen
                  innitely many times that x >  2. Since every number  1is less than every


                                            12                    number  2there exists a perfectly denite number   which produces this cut
                  (A1,A2) of the system R and which I will call the upper limit of the variable x
                    which always remains nite. Likewise as a result of the behavior of the variable
                  x a second cut (B1,B2) of the system R is produced; a number 2(e. g., a )
                    is assigned to B2when in the course of the process x becomes nally = ; every
                  other number 2, to be assigned to B2, has the property that x is never nally
                  = 2; therefore innitely many times x becomes < 2; the number  by which
                  this cut is produced I call the lower limiting value of the variable x. The two
                  numbers  ,  are obviously characterised by the following property: if   is an
                    arbitrarily small positive magnitude then we have always nally x <   +   and
                  x >   , but never nally x <     and never nally x >  +  . Now two
                  cases are possible. If   and  are di erent from each other, then necessarily
                      > , since continually  2= 2; the variable x oscillates, and, however far the
                    process advances, always undergoes changes whose amount surpasses the value
                (  ) 2  where   is an arbitrarily small positive magnitude. The original
                    hypothesis to which I now return contradicts this consequence; there remains
                    only the second case   =  since it has already been shown that, however small
                be the positive magnitude  , we always have nally x <   +   and x >   , x
                  approaches the limiting value  , which was to be proved.
                    These examples may su ce to bring out the connection between the principle
              of continuity and innitesimal analysis.























                                            13                  THE NATURE AND MEANING OF NUMBERS


                            PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

                      In science nothing capable of proof ought to be accepted without proof.
                    Though this demand seems so reasonable yet I cannot regard it as having been
                    met even in the most recent methods of laying the foundations of the simplest
                  science; viz., that part of logic which deals with the theory of numbers.4In
                    speaking of arithmetic (algebra, analysis) as a part of logic I mean to imply that I
                      consider the number-concept entirely independent of the notions or intuitions of
                    space and time, that I consider it an immediate result from the laws of thought.
                    My answer to the problems propounded in the title of this paper is, then, briey
                  this: numbers are free creations of the human mind; they serve as a means of
                    apprehending more easily and more sharply the di erence of things. It is only
                    through the purely logical process of building up the science of numbers and by
                    thus acquiring the continuous number-domain that we are prepared accurately
                    to investigate our notions of space and time by bringing them into relation with
                    this number-domain created in our mind.5If we scrutinise closely what is done
                    in counting an aggregate or number of things, we are led to consider the ability
                  of the mind to relate things to things, to let a thing correspond to a thing, or to
                  represent a thing by a thing, an ability without which no thinking is possible.
                    Upon this unique and therefore absolutely indispensable foundation, as I have
                    already a rmed in an announcement of this paper,6must, in my judgment, the
                  whole science of numbers be established. The design of such a presentation I
                    had formed before the publication of my paper on Continuity, but only after its
                      appearance and with many interruptions occasioned by increased o cial duties
                  and other necessary labors, was I able in the years 1872 to 1878 to commit to
                    paper a rst rough draft which several mathematicians examined and partially
                  discussed with me. It bears the same title and contains, though not arranged
                  in the best order, all the essential fundamental ideas of my present paper, in
                    which they are more carefully elaborated. As such main points I mention here
                    the sharp distinction between nite and innite (64), the notion of the number
                    [Anzahl] of things (161), the proof that the form of argument known as complete
                    induction (or the inference from n to n+ 1) is really conclusive (59), (60), (80),
                    and that therefore the denition by induction (or recursion) is determinate and
            consistent (126).

            4
                          Of the works which have come under my observation I mention the valuable Lehrbuch
                      der Arithmetik und Algebra of E. Schr¨oder (Leipzig, 1873), which contains a bibliography of
                      the subject, and in addition the memoirs of Kronecker and von Helmholtz upon the Number-
                      Concept and upon Counting and Measuring (in the collection of philosophical essays published
                    in honor of E. Zeller, Leipzig, 1887). The appearance of these memoirs has induced me to
                      publish my own views, in many respects similar but in foundation essentially di erent, which
                      I formulated many years ago in absolute independence of the works of others.
            5
                    See Section III. of my memoir, Continuity and Irrational Numbers (Braunschweig, 1872),
                translated at pages 4 et seq. of the present volume.
            6
                    Dirichlet’s Vorlesungen ¨uber Zahlentheorie, third edition, 1879, § 163, note on page 470.


                                            14                        This memoir can be understood by any one possessing what is usually called
                    good common sense; no technical philosophic, or mathematical, knowledge is in
                    the least degree required. But I feel conscious that many a reader will scarcely
                    recognise in the shadowy forms which I bring before him his numbers which all
                  his life long have accompanied him as faithful and familiar friends; he will be
                    frightened by the long series of simple inferences corresponding to our step-by-
                    step understanding, by the matter-of-fact dissection of the chains of reasoning
                    on which the laws of numbers depend, and will become impatient at being com-
                    pelled to follow out proofs for truths which to his supposed inner consciousness
                  seem at once evident and certain. On the contrary in just this possibility of
                    reducing such truths to others more simple, no matter how long and apparently
                    articial the series of inferences, I recognise a convincing proof that their posses-
                    sion or belief in them is never given by inner consciousness but is always gained
                    only by a more or less complete repetition of the individual inferences. I like to
                  compare this action of thought, so di cult to trace on account of the rapidity
                    of its performance, with the action which an accomplished reader performs in
                    reading; this reading always remains a more or less complete repetition of the
                    individual steps which the beginner has to take in his wearisome spelling-out; a
                  very small part of the same, and therefore a very small e ort or exertion of the
                    mind, is su cient for the practised reader to recognise the correct, true word,
                    only with very great probability, to be sure; for, as is well known, it occasionally
                    happens that even the most practised proof-reader allows a typographical error
                    to escape him, i. e., reads falsely, a thing which would be impossible if the chain
                  of thoughts associated with spelling were fully repeated. So from the time of
                    birth, continually and in increasing measure we are led to relate things to things
                  and thus to use that faculty of the mind on which the creation of numbers de-
                    pends; by this practice continually occurring, though without denite purpose,
                    in our earliest years and by the attending formation of judgments and chains of
                    reasoning we acquire a store of real arithmetic truths to which our rst teachers
                    later refer as to something simple, self-evident, given in the inner consciousness;
                  and so it happens that many very complicated notions (as for example that
                  of the number [Anzahl] of things) are erroneously regarded as simple. In this
                  sense which I wish to express by the word formed after a well-known saying
                  ‚eÈ å Šnjrwpoc ‚rijmhtÐzai, I hope that the following pages, as an attempt to
                    establish the science of numbers upon a uniform foundation will nd a generous
                    welcome and that other mathematicians will be led to reduce the long series of
              inferences to more moderate and attractive proportions.
                      In accordance with the purpose of this memoir I restrict myself to the con-
                    sideration of the series of so-called natural numbers. In what way the gradual
                    extension of the number-concept, the creation of zero, negative, fractional, irra-
                    tional and complex numbers are to be accomplished by reduction to the earlier
                      notions and that without any introduction of foreign conceptions (such as that of
                      measurable magnitudes, which according to my view can attain perfect clearness
                  only through the science of numbers), this I have shown at least for irrational
                    numbers in my former memoir on Continuity (1872); in a way wholly similar, as


                                            15                    I have already shown in Section III. of that memoir,7may the other extensions
                    be treated, and I propose sometime to present this whole subject in systematic
                    form. From just this point of view it appears as something self-evident and not
                    new that every theorem of algebra and higher analysis, no matter how remote,
                    can be expressed as a theorem about natural numbers,—a declaration I have
                    heard repeatedly from the lips of Dirichlet. But I see nothing meritorious–and
                    this was just as far from Dirichlet’s thought—in actually performing this weari-
                    some circumlocution and insisting on the use and recognition of no other than
                    rational numbers. On the contrary, the greatest and most fruitful advances in
                    mathematics and other sciences have invariably been made by the creation and
                    introduction of new concepts, rendered necessary by the frequent recurrence of
                  complex phenomena which could be controlled by the old notions only with
                    di culty. On this subject I gave a lecture before the philosophic faculty in the
                    summer of 1854 on the occasion of my admission as privat-docent in G¨ottingen.
                  The scope of this lecture met with the approval of Gauss; but this is not the
              place to go into further detail.
                        Instead of this I will use the opportunity to make some remarks relating to
                    my earlier work, mentioned above, on Continuity and Irrational Numbers. The
                  theory of irrational numbers there presented, wrought out in the fall of 1853,
                    is based on the phenomenon (Section IV.)8occurring in the domain of rational
                  numbers which I designate by the term cut [Schnitt] and which I was the rst
                  to investigate carefully; it culminates in the proof of the continuity of the new
                  domain of real numbers (Section V., iv.).9It appears to me to be somewhat
                  simpler, I might say easier, than the two theories, di erent from it and from
                    each other, which have been proposed by Weierstrass and G. Cantor, and which
                    likewise are perfectly rigorous. It has since been adopted without essential mod-
                  ication by U. Dini in his Fondamenti per la teorica delle funzioni di variabili
                  reali (Pisa, 1878); but the fact that in the course of this exposition my name
                    happens to be mentioned, not in the description of the purely arithmetic phe-
                    nomenon of the cut but when the author discusses the existence of a measurable
                    quantity corresponding to the cut, might easily lead to the supposition that my
                  theory rests upon the consideration of such quantities. Nothing could be fur-
                    ther from the truth; rather have I in Section III.10of my paper advanced several
                    reasons why I wholly reject the introduction of measurable quantities; indeed,
                  at the end of the paper I have pointed out with respect to their existence that
                    for a great part of the science of space the continuity of its congurations is not
                    even a necessary condition, quite aside from the fact that in works on geometry
                    arithmetic is only casually mentioned by name but is never clearly dened and
                    therefore cannot be employed in demonstrations. To explain this matter more
                    clearly I note the following example: If we select three non-collinear points A,
                    B, C at pleasure, with the single limitation that the ratios of the distances AB,

            7
                Pages 4 et seq. of the present volume.
            8
                Pages 6 et seq. of the present volume.
            9
                Page 9 of the present volume.
            10
                Pages 4 et seq. of the present volume.


                                            16                  AC, BC are algebraic numbers,11and regard as existing in space only those
                  points M, for which the ratios of AM, BM, CM to AB are likewise algebraic
                  numbers, then is the space made up of the points M, as is easy to see, every-
                    where discontinuous; but in spite of this discontinuity, and despite the existence
                    of gaps in this space, all constructions that occur in Euclid’s Elements, can, so
                  far as I can see, be just as accurately e ected as in perfectly continuous space;
                    the discontinuity of this space would not be noticed in Euclid’s science, would
                not be felt at all. If any one should say that we cannot conceive of space as
                  anything else than continuous, I should venture to doubt it and to call atten-
                  tion to the fact that a far advanced, rened scientic training is demanded in
                    order to perceive clearly the essence of continuity and to comprehend that be-
                    sides rational quantitative relations, also irrational, and besides algebraic, also
                    transcendental quantitative relations are conceivable. All the more beautiful
                    it appears to me that without any notion of measurable quantities and simply
                  by a nite system of simple thought-steps man can advance to the creation of
                  the pure continuous number-domain; and only by this means in my view is it
                  possible for him to render the notion of continuous space clear and denite.
                        The same theory of irrational numbers founded upon the phenomenon of
                    the cut is set forth in the Introduction `a la th´eorie des fonctions d’une variable
                  by J. Tannery (Paris, 1886). If I rightly understand a passage in the preface
                  to this work, the author has thought out his theory independently, that is, at
                    a time when not only my paper, but Dini’s Fondamenti mentioned in the same
                  preface, was unknown to him. This agreement seems to me a gratifying proof
                  that my conception conforms to the nature of the case, a fact recognised by
                    other mathematicians, e. g., by Pasch in his Einleitung in die Di erential- und
                    Integralrechnung (Leipzig, 1883). But I cannot quite agree with Tannery when
                    he calls this theory the development of an idea due to J. Bertrand and contained
                    in his Trait´e d’arithm´etique, consisting in this that an irrational number is de-
                    ned by the specication of all rational numbers that are less and all those that
                  are greater than the number to be dened. As regards this statement which is
                      repeated by Stolz—apparently without careful investigation—in the preface to
                    the second part of his Vorlesungen ¨uber allgemeine Arithmetik (Leipzig, 1886),
                  I venture to remark the following: That an irrational number is to be consid-
                    ered as fully dened by the specication just described, this conviction certainly
                      long before the time of Bertrand was the common property of all mathematicians
                    who concerned themselves with the notion of the irrational. Just this manner
                    of determining it is in the mind of every computer who calculates the irrational
                  root of an equation by approximation, and if, as Bertrand does exclusively in
                  his book, (the eighth edition, of the year 1885, lies before me,) one regards the
                    irrational number as the ratio of two measurable quantities, then is this manner
                    of determining it already set forth in the clearest possible way in the celebrated
                    denition which Euclid gives of the equality of two ratios (Elements, V., 5). This
                    same most ancient conviction has been the source of my theory as well as that of
                    Bertrand and many other more or less complete attempts to lay the foundations

            11
                    Dirichlet’s Vorlesungen ¨uber Zahlentheorie, § 159 of the second edition, § 160 of the third.


                                            17                    for the introduction of irrational numbers into arithmetic. But though one is so
                    far in perfect agreement with Tannery, yet in an actual examination he cannot
                    fail to observe that Bertrand’s presentation, in which the phenomenon of the
                  cut in its logical purity is not even mentioned, has no similarity whatever to
                    mine, inasmuch as it resorts at once to the existence of a measurable quantity,
                  a notion which for reasons mentioned above I wholly reject. Aside from this
                  fact this method of presentation seems also in the succeeding denitions and
                  proofs, which are based on the postulate of this existence, to present gaps so
                  essential that I still regard the statement made in my paper (Section VI.),12
                          ppp
                that the theorem2·3 =6 has nowhere yet been strictly demonstrated, as
                    justied with respect to this work also, so excellent in many other regards and
              with which I was unacquainted at that time.

                                                                R. Dedekind.

                Harzburg, October 5, 1887.

























            12
                Pages 10 et seq. of this volume.

                                            18                            PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.

                        The present memoir soon after its appearance met with both favorable and
                  unfavorable criticisms; indeed serious faults were charged against it. I have
                    been unable to convince myself of the justice of these charges, and I now issue a
                  new edition of the memoir, which for some time has been out of print, without
                change, adding only the following notes to the rst preface.
                        The property which I have employed as the denition of the innite system
                  had been pointed out before the appearance of my paper by G. Cantor (Ein
                    Beitrag zur Mannigfaltigkeitslehre, Crelle’s Journal, Vol. 84, 1878), as also by
                    Bolzano (Paradoxien des Unendlichen, § 20, 1851). But neither of these authors
                    made the attempt to use this property for the denition of the innite and upon
                    this foundation to establish with rigorous logic the science of numbers, and just
                  in this consists the content of my wearisome labor which in all its essentials I
                    had completed several years before the appearance of Cantor’s memoir and at
                  a time when the work of Bolzano was unknown to me even by name. For the
                    benet of those who are interested in and understand the di culties of such an
                    investigation, I add the following remark. We can lay down an entirely di erent
                    denition of the nite and innite, which appears still simpler since the notion
                  of similarity of transformation is not even assumed, viz.:
                      “A system S is said to be nite when it may be so transformed in itself (36)
                  that no proper part (6) of S is transformed in itself; in the contrary case S is
            called an innite system.”
                        Now let us attempt to erect our edice upon this new foundation! We shall
                  soon meet with serious di culties, and I believe myself warranted in saying
                    that the proof of the perfect agreement of this denition with the former can be
                    obtained only (and then easily) when we are permitted to assume the series of
                      natural numbers as already developed and to make use of the nal considerations
                  in (131); and yet nothing is said of all these things in either the one denition
                or the other! From this we can see how very great is the number of steps in
                thought needed for such a remodeling of a denition.
                        About a year after the publication of my memoir I became acquainted with
                    G. Frege’s Grundlagen der Arithmetik, which had already appeared in the year
                    1884. However di erent the view of the essence of number adopted in that work
                  is from my own, yet it contains, particularly from § 79 on, points of very close
                    contact with my paper, especially with my denition (44). The agreement, to
                  be sure, is not easy to discover on account of the di erent form of expression;
                    but the positiveness with which the author speaks of the logical inference from
                  n to n + 1 (page 47, below) shows plainly that here he stands upon the same
                    ground with me. In the meantime E. Schr¨oder’s Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra
                    der Logik has been almost completed (1890–1891). Upon the importance of this
                    extremely suggestive work, to which I pay my highest tribute, it is impossible
                  here to enter further; I will simply confess that in spite of the remark made on
                  p. 253 of Part I., I have retained my somewhat clumsy symbols (8) and (17);
                    they make no claim to be adopted generally but are intended simply to serve the
                  purpose of this arithmetic paper to which in my view they are better adapted

                                            19              than sum and product symbols.

                                                                R. Dedekind.

                Harzburg, August 24, 1893.





































                                            20                        THE NATURE AND MEANING OF NUMBERS.


                                            I.

                                    SYSTEMS OF ELEMENTS.

                      1. In what follows I understand by thing every object of our thought. In
                  order to be able easily to speak of things, we designate them by symbols, e. g.,
                  by letters, and we venture to speak briey of the thing a or of a simply, when
                we mean the thing denoted by a and not at all the letter a itself. A thing is
                    completely determined by all that can be a rmed or thought concerning it. A
                thing a is the same as b (identical with b), and b the same as a, when all that
                  can be thought concerning a can also be thought concerning b, and when all
                that is true of b can also be thought of a. That a and b are only symbols or
                  names for one and the same thing is indicated by the notation a = b, and also
                  by b = a. If further b = c, that is, if c as well as a is a symbol for the thing
                  denoted by b, then is also a = c. If the above coincidence of the thing denoted
                by a with the thing denoted by b does not exist, then are the things a, b said
                  to be di erent, a is another thing than b, b another thing than a; there is some
                  property belonging to the one that does not belong to the other.

                    2. It very frequently happens that di erent things, a, b, c, . . . for some
                  reason can be considered from a common point of view, can be associated in
                the mind, and we say that they form a system S; we call the things a, b, c,
                  . . . elements of the system S, they are contained in S; conversely, S consists of
                  these elements. Such a system S (an aggregate, a manifold, a totality) as an
                  object of our thought is likewise a thing (1); it is completely determined when
                  with respect to every thing it is determined whether it is an element of S or
                not.13The system S is hence the same as the system T, in symbols S = T,
                when every element of S is also element of T, and every element of T is also
                    element of S. For uniformity of expression it is advantageous to include also the
                  special case where a system S consists of a single (one and only one) element
                a, i. e., the thing a is element of S, but every thing di erent from a is not an
                  element of S. On the other hand, we intend here for certain reasons wholly to
                    exclude the empty system which contains no element at all, although for other
                  investigations it may be appropriate to imagine such a system.

                  3. Denition. A system A is said to be part of a system S when every
                  element of A is also element of S. Since this relation between a system A and

            13
                        In what manner this determination is brought about, and whether we know a way of
                      deciding upon it, is a matter of indi erence for all that follows; the general laws to be developed
                      in no way depend upon it; they hold under all circumstances. I mention this expressly because
                    Kronecker not long ago (Crelle’s Journal, Vol. 99, pp. 334–336) has endeavored to impose
                      certain limitations upon the free formation of concepts in mathematics which I do not believe
                    to be justied; but there seems to be no call to enter upon this matter with more detail until
                      the distinguished mathematician shall have published his reasons for the necessity or merely
              the expediency of these limitations.

                                            21                  a system S will occur continually in what follows, we shall express it briey by
                the symbol A3S. The inverse symbol S3A, by which the same fact might
                  be expressed, for simplicity and clearness I shall wholly avoid, but for lack of
                a better word I shall sometimes say that S is whole of A, by which I mean to
                  express that among the elements of S are found all the elements of A. Since
                  further every element s of a system S by (2) can be itself regarded as a system,
                we can hereafter employ the notation s3S.

                4. Theorem. A3A, by reason of (3).

                  5. Theorem. If A3B and B3A, then A = B.
                The proof follows from (3), (2).

                      6. Denition. A system A is said to be a proper [echter] part of S, when A
                is part of S, but di erent from S. According to (5) then S is not a part of A,
                  i. e., there is in S an element which is not an element of A.

                      7. Theorem. If A3B and B3C, which may be denoted briey by
                A3B3C, then is A3C, and A is certainly a proper part of C, if A is a proper
              part of B or if B is a proper part of C.
                The proof follows from (3), (6).

                      8. Denition. By the system compounded out of any systems A, B, C, . . .
                to be denoted by M(A, B, C, . . .) we mean that system whose elements are
                  determined by the following prescription: a thing is considered as element of
                  M(A, B, C, . . .) when and only when it is element of some one of the systems
                    A, B, C, . . . , i. e., when it is element of A, or B, or C, . . . . We include also
                  the case where only a single system A exists; then obviously M(A) = A. We
                  observe further that the system M(A, B, C, . . .) compounded out of A, B, C, . . .
                    is carefully to be distinguished from the system whose elements are the systems
              A, B, C, . . . themselves.

                      9. Theorem. The systems A, B, C, . . . are parts of M(A, B, C, . . .).
                The proof follows from (8), (3).

                      10. Theorem. If A, B, C, . . . are parts of a system S, then is M(A, B, C, . . .)
          3
            S.
                The proof follows from (8), (3).

                      11. Theorem. If P is part of one of the systems A, B, C, . . . then is
            P3M(A, B, C, . . .).
                The proof follows from (9), (7).

                    12. Theorem. If each of the systems P, Q, . . . is part of one of the systems
              A, B, C, . . . then is M(P, Q, . . .)3M(A, B, C, . . .).
                  The proof follows from (11), (10).

                      13. Theorem. If A is compounded out of any of the systems P, Q, . . . then
            is A3M(P, Q, . . .).
                    Proof. For every element of A is by (8) element of one of the systems P,
                  Q, . . . , consequently by (8) also element of M(P, Q, . . .), whence the theorem
            follows by (3).

                                            22                      14. Theorem. If each of the systems A, B, C, . . . is compounded out of any
              of the systems P, Q, . . . then is

                                  M(A, B, C, . . .)3M(P, Q, . . .)

                  The proof follows from (13), (10).

                    15. Theorem. If each of the systems P, Q, . . . is part of one of the systems
                A, B, C, . . . , and if each of the latter is compounded out of any of the former,
          then is
                                  M(P, Q, . . .) = M(A, B, C, . . .).

                  The proof follows from (12), (14), (5).

              16. Theorem. If

                                A = M(P, Q) and B = M(Q, R)

                                  then is M(A, R) = M(P, B).

                  Proof. For by the preceding theorem (15)

                                M(A, R) as well as M(P, B) = M(P, Q, R).

                      17. Denition. A thing g is said to be common element of the systems A,
                B, C, . . . , if it is contained in each of these systems (that is in A and in B and
                    in C . . . ). Likewise a system T is said to be a common part of A, B, C, . . .
                  when T is part of each of these systems; and by the community [Gemeinheit]
                  of the systems A, B, C, . . . we understand the perfectly determinate system
                  G(A, B, C, . . .) which consists of all the common elements g of A, B, C, . . . and
                  hence is likewise a common part of those systems. We again include the case
                  where only a single system A occurs; then G(A) (is to be put) = A. But the case
                  may also occur that the systems A, B, C, . . . possess no common element at all,
                    therefore no common part, no community; they are then called systems without
                    common part, and the symbol G(A, B, C, . . .) is meaningless (compare the end
                    of (2)). We shall however almost always in theorems concerning communities
                  leave it to the reader to add in thought the condition of their existence and
                  to discover the proper interpretation of these theorems for the case of non-
          existence.

                      18. Theorem. Every common part of A, B, C, . . . is part of G(A, B, C, . . .).
                The proof follows from (17).

                      19. Theorem. Every part of G(A, B, C, . . .) is common part of A, B, C, . . . .
                The proof follows from (17), (7).

                    20. Theorem. If each of the systems A, B, C, . . . is whole (3) of one of the
            systems P, Q, . . . then is

                                  G(P, Q, . . .)3G(A, B, C, . . .)

                    Proof. For every element of G(P, Q, . . .) is common element of P, Q, . . . ,
                therefore also common element of A, B, C, . . . , which was to be proved.


                                            23                                            II.

                                TRANSFORMATION OF A SYSTEM.

                    21. Denition.14By a transformation [Abbildung]   of a system S we
                    understand a law according to which to every determinate element s of S there
                  belongs a determinate thing which is called the transform of s and denoted by
                   (s); we say also that  (s) corresponds to the element s, that  (s) results or
                  is produced from s by the transformation  , that s is transformed into  (s) by
                the transformation  . If now T is any part of S, then in the transformation
                    of S is likewise contained a determinate transformation of T, which for the
                  sake of simplicity may be denoted by the same symbol   and consists in this
                  that to every element t of the system T there corresponds the same transform
                   (t), which t possesses as element of S; at the same time the system consisting
                of all transforms  (t) shall be called the transform of T and be denoted by
                 (T), by which also the signicance of  (S) is dened. As an example of a
                    transformation of a system we may regard the mere assignment of determinate
                  symbols or names to its elements. The simplest transformation of a system is
                  that by which each of its elements is transformed into itself; it will be called
                    the identical transformation of the system. For convenience, in the following
                    theorems (22), (23), (24), which deal with an arbitrary transformation   of an
                  arbitrary system S, we shall denote the transforms of elements s and parts T
                  respectively by s0and T0; in addition we agree that small and capital italics
                without accent shall always signify elements and parts of this system S.

                  22. Theorem.15If A3B then A03B0.
                      Proof. For every element of A0is the transform of an element contained in
                A, and therefore also in B, and is therefore element of B0, which was to be
          proved.

                    23. Theorem. The transform of M(A, B, C, . . .) is M(A0, B0, C0, . . .).
                    Proof. If we denote the system M(A, B, C, . . .) which by (10) is likewise
                part of S by M, then is every element of its transform M0the transform m0
                of an element m of M; since therefore by (8) m is also element of one of the
                  systems A, B, C, . . . and consequently m0element of one of the systems A0, B0,
                C0, . . . , and hence by (8) also element of M(A0, B0, C0, . . .), we have by (3)

                                    0000
                                    M3M(A, B, C, . . .).

                On the other hand, since A, B, C, . . . are by (9) parts of M, and hence A0, B0,
              C0, . . . by (22) parts of M0, we have by (10)

                                      0000
                                    M(A, B, C, . . .)3M.

                By combination with the above we have by (5) the theorem to be proved

                                    0000
                                    M= M(A, B, C, . . .).

            14
                    See Dirichlet’s Vorlesungen ¨uber Zahlentheorie, 3d edition, 1879, § 163.
            15
                See theorem 27.

                                            24                      24. Theorem.16The transform of every common part of A, B, C, . . . , and
                therefore that of the community G(A, B, C, . . .) is part of G(A0, B0, C0, . . .).
                      Proof. For by (22) it is common part of A0, B0, C0, . . . , whence the theorem
            follows by (18).

                    25. Denition and theorem. If   is a transformation of a system S, and   a
                      transformation of the transform S0=  (S), there always results a transformation
                of S, compounded17out of   and  , which consists of this that to every element
            s of S there corresponds the transform

                                            0 
                                   (s) =  (s) =   (s),

                where again we have put  (s) = s0. This transformation   can be denoted
            briey by the symbol       or   , the transform  (s) by   (s) where the order
            of the symbols  ,   is to be considered, since in general the symbol    has no
                interpretation and actually has meaning only when  (s0)3s. If now   signies a
              transformation of the system  (s0) =   (s) and   the transformation    of the
              system S0compounded out of   and  , then is   (s) =   (s0) =  (s0) =   (s);
                    therefore the compound transformations    and    coincide for every element
                s of S, i. e.,    =   . In accordance with the meaning of   and   this theorem
            can nally be expressed in the form

                                             =       ,

                and this transformation compounded out of  ,  ,   can be denoted briey by
             .

                                          III.

                      SIMILARITY OF A TRANSFORMATION. SIMILAR SYSTEMS.

                        26. Denition. A transformation   of a system S is said to be similar [¨ahn-
                  lich] or distinct, when to di erent elements a, b of the system S there always
                  correspond di erent transforms a0=  (a), b0=  (b). Since in this case con-
                  versely from s0= t0we always have s = t, then is every element of the system
                  S0=  (S) the transform s0of a single, perfectly determinate element s of the
                  system S, and we can therefore set over against the transformation   of S an
                  inverse transformation of the system S0, to be denoted by , which consists in
                  this that to every element s0of S0there corresponds the transform (s0) = s,
                    and obviously this transformation is also similar. It is clear that (S0) = S, that
                    further   is the inverse transformation belonging to  and that the transforma-
                  tion   compounded out of   and  by (25) is the identical transformation of
                  S (21). At once we have the following additions to II., retaining the notation
          there given.

            16
                See theorem 29.
            17
                          A confusion of this compounding of transformations with that of systems of elements is
            hardly to be feared.

                                            25                  27. Theorem.18If A03B0, then A3B.
                    Proof. For if a is an element of A then is a0an element of A0, therefore
                also of B0, hence = b0, where b is an element of B; but since from a0= b0we
                  always have a = b, then is every element of A also element of B, which was to
            be proved.

                28. Theorem. If A0= B0, then A = B.
                The proof follows from (27), (4), (5).

                29. Theorem.19If G = G(A, B, C, . . .), then

                                    0000
                                    G= G(A, B, C, . . .).

                        Proof. Every element of G(A0, B0, C0, . . .) is certainly contained in S0, and is
                    therefore the transform g0of an element g contained in S; but since g0is common
                element of A0, B0, C0, . . . then by (27) must g be common element of A, B,
                  C, . . . therefore also element of G; hence every element of G(A0, B0, C0, . . .) is
                  transform of an element g of G, therefore element of G0, i. e., G(A0, B0, C0, . . .)3
                  G0, and accordingly our theorem follows from (24), (5).

                        30. Theorem. The identical transformation of a system is always a similar
            transformation.

                    31. Theorem. If   is a similar transformation of S and   a similar transfor-
                mation of  (S), then is the transformation    of S, compounded of   and  , a
                    similar transformation, and the associated inverse transformation   =  .
                      Proof. For to di erent elements a, b of S correspond di erent transforms
              a0=  (a), b0=  (b), and to these again di erent transforms  (a0) =   (a),
 (b0) =   (b) and therefore    is a similar transformation. Besides every
          element   (s) =  (s0) of the system   (S) is transformed by  into s0=  (s)
            and this by  into s, therefore   (s) is transformed by   into s, which was to
            be proved.

                      32. Denition. The systems R, S are said to be similar when there exists
                  such a similar transformation   of S that  (S) = R, and therefore (R) = S.
              Obviously by (30) every system is similar to itself.

                      33. Theorem. If R, S are similar systems, then every system Q similar to
            R is also similar to S.
              Proof. For if  ,   are similar transformations of S, R such that  (S) = R,
 (R) = Q, then by (31)    is a similar transformation of S such that   (S) =
            Q, which was to be proved.

                  34. Denition. We can therefore separate all systems into classes by putting
                    into a determinate class all systems Q, R, S, . . . , and only those, that are similar
                    to a determinate system R, the representative of the class; according to (33) the
                    class is not changed by taking as representative any other system belonging to
          it.
            18
                See theorem 22.
            19
                See theorem 24.

                                            26                        35. Theorem. If R, S are similar systems, then is every part of S also similar
                    to a part of R, every proper part of S also similar to a proper part of R.
                    Proof. For if   is a similar transformation of S,  (S) = R, and T3S, then
                  by (22) is the system similar to T  (T)3R; if further T is proper part of S, and
                  s an element of S not contained in T, then by (27) the element  (s) contained
                  in R cannot be contained in  (T); hence  (T) is proper part of R, which was
            to be proved.

                                          IV.

                          TRANSFORMATION OF A SYSTEM IN ITSELF.

                      36. Denition. If   is a similar or dissimilar transformation of a system
                S, and  (S) part of a system Z, then   is said to be a transformation of S in
                Z, and we say S is transformed by   in Z. Hence we call   a transformation
                  of the system S in itself, when  (S)3S, and we propose in this paragraph to
                  investigate the general laws of such a transformation  . In doing this we shall
                use the same notations as in II. and again put  (s) = s0,  (T) = T0. These
                  transforms s0, T0are by (22), (7) themselves again elements or parts of S, like
                all things designated by italic letters.

                    37. Denition. K is called a chain [Kette], when K03K. We remark
                  expressly that this name does not in itself belong to the part K of the system S,
                    but is given only with respect to the particular transformation  ; with reference
                to another transformation of the system S in itself K can very well not be a
          chain.

                38. Theorem. S is a chain.

                    39. Theorem. The transform K0of a chain K is a chain.
                      Proof. For from K03K it follows by (22) that (K0)03K0, which was to be
          proved.

                  40. Theorem. If A is part of a chain K, then is also A03K.
                    Proof. For from A3K it follows by (22) that A03K0, and since by (37)
                K03K, therefore by (7) A03K, which was to be proved.

                      41. Theorem. If the transform A0is part of a chain L, then is there a chain
                K, which satises the conditions A3K, K03L; and M(A, L) is just such a
          chain K.
                    Proof. If we actually put K = M(A, L), then by (9) the one condition
                A3K is fullled. Since further by (23) K0= M(A0, L0) and by hypothesis
                A03L, L03L, then by (10) is the other condition K03L also fullled and
                    hence it follows because by (9) L3K, that also K03K, i. e., K is a chain,
            which was to be proved.

                      42. Theorem. A system M compounded simply out of chains A, B, C, . . .
            is a chain.


                                            27                    Proof. Since by (23) M0= M(A0, B0, C0, . . .) and by hypothesis A03A,
                  B03B, C03C, . . . therefore by (12) M03M, which was to be proved.

                      43. Theorem. The community G of chains A, B, C, . . . is a chain.
                      Proof. Since by (17) G is common part of A, B, C, . . . , therefore by (22) G0
                common part of A0, B0, C0, . . . , and by hypothesis A03A, B03B, C03C, . . . ,
                  then by (7) G0is also common part of A, B, C, . . . and hence by (18) also part
            of G, which was to be proved.

                      44. Denition. If A is any part of S, we will denote by A0the community
                  of all those chains (e. g., S) of which A is part; this community A0exists (17)
                    because A is itself common part of all these chains. Since further by (43) A0is a
                  chain, we will call A0the chain of the system A, or briey the chain of A. This
                      denition too is strictly related to the fundamental determinate transformation
                    of the system S in itself, and if later, for the sake of clearness, it is necessary
                    we shall at pleasure use the symbol  0(A) instead of A0, and likewise designate
                  the chain of A corresponding to another transformation ! by !0(A). For this
                  very important notion the following theorems hold true.

                45. Theorem. A3A0.
                      Proof. For A is common part of all those chains whose community is A0,
              whence the theorem follows by (18).

                46. Theorem. (A0)03A0.
                Proof. For by (44) A0is a chain (37).

                  47. Theorem. If A is part of a chain K, then is also A03K.
                      Proof. For A0is the community and hence also a common part of all the
              chains K, of which A is part.

                      48. Remark. One can easily convince himself that the notion of the chain
                    A0dened in (44) is completely characterised by the preceding theorems, (45),
          (46), (47).

              49. Theorem. A03(A0)0.
                  The proof follows from (45), (22).

              50. Theorem. A03A0.
                  The proof follows from (49), (46), (7).

                  51. Theorem. If A is a chain, then A0= A.
                    Proof. Since A is part of the chain A, then by (47) A03A, whence the
            theorem follows by (45), (5).

                  52. Theorem. If B3A, then B3A0.
                The proof follows from (45), (7).

                    53. Theorem. If B3A0, then B03A0, and conversely.
                      Proof. Because A0is a chain, then by (47) from B3A0, we also get B03A0;
                  conversely, if B03A0, then by (7) we also get B3A0, because by (45) B3B0.

                  54. Theorem. If B3A, then is B03A0.

                                            28                  The proof follows from (52), (53).

                55. Theorem. If B3A0, then is also B03A0.
                    Proof. For by (53) B03A0, and since by (50) B03B0, the theorem to be
                  proved follows by (7). The same result, as is easily seen, can be obtained from
            (22), (46), (7), or also from (40).

                  56. Theorem. If B3A0, then is (B0)03(A0)0.
                  The proof follows from (53), (22).

                    57. Theorem and denition. (A0)0= (A0)0, i. e., the transform of the
                chain of A is at the same time the chain of the transform of A. Hence we can
                    designate this system in short by A0and at pleasure call it the chain-transform
                                        0
                  or transform-chain of A. With the clearer notation given in (44) the theorem
                                        
                might be expressed by   0(A)=  0 (A).
                      Proof. If for brevity we put (A0)0= L, L is a chain (44) and by (45) A03L;
                  hence by (41) there exists a chain K satisfying the conditions A3K, K03L;
                  hence from (47) we have A03K, therefore (A0)03K0, and hence by (7) also
            (A0)03L, i. e.,
                                          00
                                        (A0)3(A)0.

                    Since further by (49) A03(A0)0, and by (44), (39) (A0)0is a chain, then by (47)
          also
                                        00
                                        (A)03(A0),

                whence the theorem follows by combining with the preceding result (5).

                      58. Theorem. A0= M(A, A0), i. e., the chain of A is compounded out of A
                                      0
              and the transform-chain of A.
                Proof. If for brevity we again put

                                000
                                L = A= (A0)= (A)0and K = M(A, L),
                                0

                then by (45) A03L, and since L is a chain, by (41) the same thing is true of
                K; since further A3K (9), therefore by (47)

                                          A03K.

                  On the other hand, since by (45) A3A0, and by (46) also L3A0, then by (10)
          also
                                          K3A0,

                  whence the theorem to be proved A0= K follows by combining with the pre-
            ceding result (5).

                      59. Theorem of complete induction. In order to show that the chain A0is
                  part of any system  —be this latter part of S or not—it is su cient to show,
               . that A3 , and
                     . that the transform of every common element of A0and   is likewise
            element of  .


                                            29                      Proof. For if   is true, then by (45) the community G = G(A0, ) certainly
              exists, and by (18) A3G; since besides by (17)

                                          G3A0,

                  then is G also part of our system S, which by   is transformed in itself and at
                    once by (55) we have also G03A0. If then   is likewise true, i. e. if G03 ,
                then must G0as common part of the systems A0,   by (18) be part of their
                  community G, i. e. G is a chain (37), and since, as above noted, A3G, then by
            (47) is also
                                          A03G,

                    and therefore by combination with the preceding result G = A0, hence by (17)
              also A03 , which was to be proved.

                        60. The preceding theorem, as will be shown later, forms the scientic basis
                  for the form of demonstration known by the name of complete induction (the
                inference from n to n + 1); it can also be stated in the following manner: In
                    order to show that all elements of the chain A0possess a certain property E (or
                    that a theorem S dealing with an undetermined thing n actually holds good for
              all elements n of the chain A0) it is su cient to show
                     . that all elements a of the system A possess the property E (or that S
            holds for all a’s) and
                       . that to the transform n0of every such element n of A0possessing the
                  property E, belongs the same property E (or that the theorem S, as soon as it
                  holds for an element n of A0, certainly must also hold for its transform n0).
                        Indeed, if we denote by   the system of all things possessing the property E
                    (or for which the theorem S holds) the complete agreement of the present man-
                    ner of stating the theorem with that employed in (59) is immediately obvious.

                      61. Theorem. The chain of M(A, B, C, . . .) is M(A0, B0, C0, . . .).
                    Proof. If we designate by M the former, by K the latter system, then by
                (42) K is a chain. Since then by (45) each of the systems A, B, C, . . . is part
                of one of the systems A0, B0, C0, . . . , and therefore by (12) M3K, then by
            (47) we also have
                                          M03K.

                On the other hand, since by (9) each of the systems A, B, C, . . . is part of M,
                  and hence by (45), (7) also part of the chain M0, then by (47) must also each
                of the systems A0, B0, C0, . . . be part of M0, therefore by (10)

                                          K3M0

                  whence by combination with the preceding result follows the theorem to be
            proved M0= K (5).

                    62. Theorem. The chain of G(A, B, C, . . .) is part of G(A0, B0, C0, . . .).
                    Proof. If we designate by G the former, by K the latter system, then by
                (43) K is a chain. Since then each of the systems A0, B0, C0, . . . by (45) is

                                            30                whole of one of the systems A, B, C, . . . , and hence by (20) G3K, therefore
              by (47) we obtain the theorem to be proved G03K.

                    63. Theorem. If K03L3K, and therefore K is a chain, L is also a chain.
                If the same is proper part of K, and U the system of all those elements of K
                  which are not contained in L, and if further the chain U0is proper part of K,
                    and V the system of all those elements of K which are not contained in U0, then
                is K = M(U0, V ) and L = M(U0, V ). If nally L = K0then V3V0.
                                      0
                      The proof of this theorem of which (as of the two preceding) we shall make
            no use may be left for the reader.

                                            V.

                                  THE FINITE AND INFINITE.

                    64. Denition.20A system S is said to be innite when it is similar to a
                proper part of itself (32); in the contrary case S is said to be a nite system.

                    65. Theorem. Every system consisting of a single element is nite.
                  Proof. For such a system possesses no proper part (2), (6).

                66. Theorem. There exist innite systems.
                      Proof.21My own realm of thoughts, i. e., the totality S of all things, which
                  can be objects of my thought, is innite. For if s signies an element of S, then
                  is the thought s0, that s can be object of my thought, itself an element of S. If
                  we regard this as transform  (s) of the element s then has the transformation
                    of S, thus determined, the property that the transform S0is part of S; and
                  S0is certainly proper part of S, because there are elements in S (e. g., my own
                    ego) which are di erent from such thought s0and therefore are not contained in
                  S0. Finally it is clear that if a, b are di erent elements of S, their transforms a0,
                    b0are also di erent, that therefore the transformation   is a distinct (similar)
                  transformation (26). Hence S is innite, which was to be proved.

                  67. Theorem. If R, S are similar systems, then is R nite or innite
              according as S is nite or innite.
                      Proof. If S is innite, therefore similar to a proper part S0of itself, then if R
                  and S are similar, S0by (33) must be similar to R and by (35) likewise similar
                  to a proper part of R, which therefore by (33) is itself similar to R; therefore R
              is innite, which was to be proved.

            20
                        If one does not care to employ the notion of similar systems (32) he must say: S is said
                  to be innite, when there is a proper part of S (6) in which S can be distinctly (similarly)
                      transformed (26), (36). In this form I submitted the denition of the innite which forms the
                    core of my whole investigation in September, 1882, to G. Cantor and several years earlier to
                    Schwarz and Weber. All other attempts that have come to my knowledge to distinguish the
                  innite from the nite seem to me to have met with so little success that I think I may be
              permitted to forego any criticism of them.
            21
                          A similar consideration is found in § 13 of the Paradoxien des Unendlichen by Bolzano
            (Leipzig, 1851).


                                            31                      68. Theorem. Every system S, which possesses an innite part is likewise
                  innite; or, in other words, every part of a nite system is nite.
                    Proof. If T is innite and there is hence such a similar transformation   of
          T, that  (T) is a proper part of T, then, if T is part of S, we can extend this
            transformation   to a transformation   of S in which, if s denotes any element
            of S, we put  (s) =  (s) or  (s) = s according as s is element of T or not.
                  This transformation   is a similar one; for, if a, b denote di erent elements of
                S, then if both are contained in T, the transform  (a) =  (a) is di erent from
            the transform  (b) =  (b), because   is a similar transformation; if further
                a is contained in T, but b not, then is  (a) =  (a) di erent from  (b) = b,
            because  (a) is contained in T; if nally neither a nor b is contained in T then
                  also is  (a) = a di erent from  (b) = b, which was to be shown. Since further
 (T) is part of T, because by (7) also part of S, it is clear that also  (S)3S.
          Since nally  (T) is proper part of T there exists in T and therefore also in S,
              an element t, not contained in  (T) =  (T); since then the transform  (s) of
                  every element s not contained in T is equal to s, and hence is di erent from t, t
                  cannot be contained in  (S); hence  (S) is proper part of S and consequently
              S is innite, which was to be proved.

                      69. Theorem. Every system which is similar to a part of a nite system, is
            itself nite.
                  The proof follows from (67), (68).

                  70. Theorem. If a is an element of S, and if the aggregate T of all the
                  elements of S di erent from a is nite, then is also S nite.
                        Proof. We have by (64) to show that if   denotes any similar transformation
                of S in itself, the transform  (S) or S0is never a proper part of S but always
                = S. Obviously S = M(a, T) and hence by (23), if the transforms are again
                  denoted by accents, S0= M(a0, T0), and, on account of the similarity of the
                  transformation  , a0is not contained in T0(26). Since further by hypothesis
                  S03S, then must a0and likewise every element of T0either = a, or be element
                  of T. If then—a case which we will treat rst—a is not contained in T0, then
                must T03T and hence T0= T, because   is a similar transformation and
                  because T is a nite system; and since a0, as remarked, is not contained in T0,
                  i. e., not in T, then must a0= a, and hence in this case we actually have S0= S
                  as was stated. In the opposite case when a is contained in T0and hence is the
                  transform b0of an element b contained in T, we will denote by U the aggregate
                  of all those elements u of T, which are di erent from b; then T = M(b, U) and
                by (15) S = M(a, b, U), hence S0= M(a0, a, U0). We now determine a new
            transformation   of T in which we put  (b) = a0, and generally  (u) = u0,
            whence by (23)  (T) = M(a0, U0). Obviously   is a similar transformation,
                because   was such, and because a is not contained in U and therefore also
                  a0not in U0. Since further a and every element u is di erent from b then (on
                  account of the similarity of  ) must also a0and every element u0be di erent
                from a and consequently contained in T; hence  (T)3T and since T is nite,



                                            32            therefore must  (T) = T, and M(a0, U0) = T. From this by (15) we obtain

                                      00
                                    M(a, a, U) = M(a, T)

                  i. e., according to the preceding S0= S. Therefore in this case also the proof
            demanded has been secured.

                                          VI.

                        SIMPLY INFINITE SYSTEMS. SERIES OF NATURAL NUMBERS.

                      71. Denition. A system N is said to be simply innite when there exists a
                  similar transformation   of N in itself such that N appears as chain (44) of an
                    element not contained in  (N). We call this element, which we shall denote in
                    what follows by the symbol 1, the base-element of N and say the simply innite
                  system N is set in order [geordnet] by this transformation  . If we retain the
                    earlier convenient symbols for transforms and chains (IV) then the essence of a
                  simply innite system N consists in the existence of a transformation   of N
                  and an element 1 which satisfy the following conditions  , , ,  :

                 . N03N.

                . N = 10.

                  . The element 1 is not contained in N0.

                   . The transformation   is similar.

                    Obviously it follows from  , ,   that every simply innite system N is actually
                an innite system (64) because it is similar to a proper part N0of itself.

                    72. Theorem. In every innite system S a simply innite system N is
            contained as a part.
                      Proof. By (64) there exists a similar transformation   of S such that  (S)
                or S0is a proper part of S; hence there exists an element 1 in S which is not
                  contained in S0. The chain N = 10, which corresponds to this transformation
                    of the system S in itself (44), is a simply innite system set in order by  ; for
                the characteristic conditions  , , ,   in (71) are obviously all fullled.

                    73. Denition. If in the consideration of a simply innite system N set
                  in order by a transformation   we entirely neglect the special character of the
                      elements; simply retaining their distinguishability and taking into account only
                    the relations to one another in which they are placed by the order-setting trans-
                    formation  , then are these elements called natural numbers or ordinal numbers
                  or simply numbers, and the base-element 1 is called the base-number of the
                    number-series N. With reference to this freeing the elements from every other
                    content (abstraction) we are justied in calling numbers a free creation of the hu-
                    man mind. The relations or laws which are derived entirely from the conditions
                     , , ,   in (71) and therefore are always the same in all ordered simply innite

                                            33                    systems, whatever names may happen to be given to the individual elements
                  (compare 134), form the rst object of the science of numbers or arithmetic.
                  From the general notions and theorems of IV. about the transformation of a
                    system in itself we obtain immediately the following fundamental laws where a,
                b, . . . m, n, . . . always denote elements of N, therefore numbers, A, B, C, . . .
                parts of N, a0, b0, . . . m0, n0, . . . A0, B0, C0. . . the corresponding transforms,
                    which are produced by the order-setting transformation   and are always ele-
                  ments or parts of N; the transform n0of a number n is also called the number
            following n.

                      74. Theorem. Every number n by (45) is contained in its chain n0and by
              (53) the condition n3m0is equivalent to n03m0.

                  75. Theorem. By (57) n0= (n0)0= (n0)0.
                                  0

                76. Theorem. By (46) n03n0.
                                  0

                  77. Theorem. By (58) n0= M(n, n0).
                                            0

                        78. Theorem. N = M(1, N0), hence every number di erent from the base-
                number 1 is element of N0, i. e., transform of a number.
                  The proof follows from (77) and (71).

                        79. Theorem. N is the only number-chain containing the base-number 1.
                      Proof. For if 1 is element of a number-chain K, then by (47) the associated
                chain N3K, hence N = K, because it is self-evident that K3N.

                      80. Theorem of complete induction (inference from n to n0). In order to
                  show that a theorem holds for all numbers n of a chain m0, it is su cient to
          show,
                 . that it holds for n = m, and
                       . that from the validity of the theorem for a number n of the chain m0its
                validity for the following number n0always follows.
                        This results immediately from the more general theorem (59) or (60). The
                    most frequently occurring case is where m = 1 and therefore m0is the complete
            number-series N.

                                          VII.

                                GREATER AND LESS NUMBERS.

                      81. Theorem. Every number n is di erent from the following number n0.
                Proof by complete induction (80):
                       . The theorem is true for the number n = 1, because it is not contained in
                    N0(71), while the following number 10as transform of the number 1 contained
            in N is element of N0.
                       . If the theorem is true for a number n and we put the following number
                  n0= p, then is n di erent from p, whence by (26) on account of the similarity
                    (71) of the order-setting transformation   it follows that n0, and therefore p, is

                                            34                  di erent from p0. Hence the theorem holds also for the number p following n,
            which was to be proved.

                    82. Theorem. In the transform-chain n0of a number n by (74), (75) is
                                                  0
                  contained its transform n0, but not the number n itself.
                Proof by complete induction (80):
                       . The theorem is true for n = 1, because 10= N0, and because by (71) the
                                                  0
                base-number 1 is not contained in N0.
                       . If the theorem is true for a number n, and we again put n0= p, then is n
                  not contained in p0, therefore is it di erent from every number q contained in
                  p0, whence by reason of the similarity of   it follows that n0, and therefore p,
                    is di erent from every number q0contained in p0, and is hence not contained in
                                                    0
                  p0. Therefore the theorem holds also for the number p following n, which was
          0
            to be proved.

                    83. Theorem. The transform-chain n0is proper part of the chain n0.
                                              0
                The proof follows from (76), (74), (82).

                  84. Theorem. From m0= n0it follows that m = n.
                  Proof. Since by (74) m is contained in m0, and

                                                    0
                                    m0= n0= M(n, n)
                                                    0

                  by (77), then if the theorem were false and hence m di erent from n, m would
                  be contained in the chain n0, hence by (74) also m03n0, i. e., n03n0; but this
                                  000
                contradicts theorem (83). Hence our theorem is established.

                      85. Theorem. If the number n is not contained in the number-chain K,
          then is K3n0.
                      0
                Proof by complete induction (80):
                   . By (78) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                       . If the theorem is true for a number n, then is it also true for the following
                  number, p = n0; for if p is not contained in the number-chain K, then by (40) n
                  also cannot be contained in K and hence by our hypothesis K3n0; now since
                                                                    0
                by (77) n0= p0= M(p, p0), hence K3M(p, p0) and p is not contained in K,
                  000
              then must K3p0, which was to be proved.
                        0

                        86. Theorem. If the number n is not contained in the number-chain K, but
              its transform n0is, then K = n0.
                                      0
                      Proof. Since n is not contained in K, then by (85) K3n0, and since n03K,
                                                              0
                    then by (47) is also n03K, and hence K = n0, which was to be proved.
                            00

                      87. Theorem. In every number-chain K there exists one, and by (84) only
              one, number k, whose chain k0= K.
                    Proof. If the base-number 1 is contained in K, then by (79) K = N = 10.
                In the opposite case let Z be the system of all numbers not contained in K;
                  since the base-number 1 is contained in Z, but Z is only a proper part of the
                  number-series N, then by (79) Z cannot be a chain, i. e., Z0cannot be part of
                  Z; hence there exists in Z a number n, whose transform n0is not contained in


                                            35                  Z, and is therefore certainly contained in K; since further n is contained in Z,
                and therefore not in K, then by (86) K = n0, and hence k = n0, which was to
                                                0
            be proved.

                    88. Theorem. If m, n are di erent numbers then by (83), (84) one and
                  only one of the chains m0, n0is proper part of the other and either n03m0or
                                                                            0
          m03n0.
                0
                      Proof. If n is contained in m0, and hence by (74) also n03m0, then m can
                  not be contained in the chain n0(because otherwise by (74) we should have
                m03n0, therefore m0= n0, and hence by (84) also m = n) and thence it
                  follows by (85) that n03m0. In the contrary case, when n is not contained in
                                  0
                    the chain m0, we must have by (85) m03n0, which was to be proved.
                                                0

                      89. Denition. The number m is said to be less than the number n and at
                the same time n greater than m, in symbols

                                      m < n, n > m,

            when the condition
                                              0
                                          n03m
                                              0

                is fullled, which by (74) may also be expressed

                                              0
                                          n3m.
                                              0

                    90. Theorem. If m, n are any numbers, then always one and only one of
              the following cases  , µ,   occurs:

                               . m = n, n = m, i. e., m0= n0
                                                          0
                                µ. m < n, n > m, i. e., n03m
                                                          0
                                                          0
                                 . m > n, n < m, i. e., m03n.
                                                          0

                      Proof. For if   occurs (84) then can neither µ nor   occur because by (83)
                we never have n03n0. But if   does not occur then by (88) one and only one
                            0
                of the cases µ,   occurs, which was to be proved.

                91. Theorem. n < n0.
                  Proof. For the condition for the case   in (90) is fullled by m = n0.

                      92. Denition. To express that m is either = n or < n, hence not > n (90)
            we use the symbols
                                    m 5 n or also n = m

              and we say m is at most equal to n, and n is at least equal to m.

                  93. Theorem. Each of the conditions

                                              0
                                  m 5 n, m < n, n03m0

              is equivalent to each of the others.

                                            36                      Proof. For if m 5 n, then from  , µ in (90) we always have n03m0, because
                by (76) m03m. Conversely, if n03m0, and therefore by (74) also n3m0, it
                  0
                  follows from m0= M(m, m0) that either n = m, or n3m0, i. e., n > m. Hence
                                  00
                    the condition m 5 n is equivalent to n03m0. Besides it follows from (22), (27),
                (75) that this condition n03m0is again equivalent to n03m0, i. e., by µ in
                                                            00
                (90) to m < n0, which was to be proved.

                  94. Theorem. Each of the conditions

                                  000
                                  m5 n, m< n, m < n

              is equivalent to each of the others.
                      The proof follows immediately from (93), if we replace in it m by m0, and
            from µ in (90).

                      95. Theorem. If l < m and m 5 n or if l 5 m, and m < n, then is l < n.
              But if l 5 m and m 5 n, then is l 5 n.
                        Proof. For from the corresponding conditions (89), (93) m03l0and n03m0,
                                                                  0
                    we have by (7) n03l0and the same thing comes also from the conditions m03l0
                            0
                  and n03m0, because in consequence of the former we have also m03l0. Finally
                    000
                    from m03l0and n03m0we have also n03l0which was to be proved.

                    96. Theorem. In every part T of N there exists one and only one least
                  number k, i. e., a number k which is less than every other number contained in
                    T. If T consists of a single number, then is it also the least number in T.
                    Proof. Since T0is a chain (44), then by (87) there exists one number k
                  whose chain k0= T0. Since from this it follows by (45), (77) that T3M(k, k0),
                                                                            0
                  then rst must k itself be contained in T (because otherwise T3k0, hence by
                                                                    0
                (47) also T03k0, i. e., k3k0, which by (83) is impossible), and besides every
                        00
                  number of the system T, di erent from k, must be contained in k0, i. e., be > k
                                                                  0
                  (89), whence at once from (90) it follows that there exists in T one and only
                one least number, which was to be proved.

                      97. Theorem. The least number of the chain n0is n, and the base-number
            1 is the least of all numbers.
                    Proof. For by (74), (93) the condition m3n0is equivalent to m = n. Or
                    our theorem also follows immediately from the proof of the preceding theorem,
                  because if in that we assume T = n0, evidently k = n (51).

                      98. Denition. If n is any number, then will we denote by Znthe system of
                  all numbers that are not greater than n, and hence not contained in n0. The
                                                                        0
          condition
                                          m3Zn

                by (92), (93) is obviously equivalent to each of the following conditions:

                                              0
                                  m 5 n, m < n, n03m0.

                99. Theorem. 13Znand n3Zn.

                                            37                  The proof follows from (98) or from (71) and (82).

                  100. Theorem. Each of the conditions equivalent by (98)

                                                  0
                                m3Zn, m 5 n, m < n, n03m0

              is also equivalent to the condition

                                        Zm3Zn.

                  Proof. For if m3Zn, and hence m 5 n, and if l3Zm, and hence l 5 m,
                then by (95) also l 5 n, i. e., l3Zn; if therefore m3Zn, then is every element
                  l of the system Zmalso element of Zn, i. e., Zm3Zn. Conversely, if Zm3Zn,
                    then by (7) must also m3Zn, because by (99) m3Zm, which was to be proved.

                      101. Theorem. The conditions for the cases  , µ,   in (90) may also be put
            in the following form:

                               . m = n, n = m, Zm= Zn

                              µ. m < n, n > m, Zm03Zn

                               . m > n, n < m, Zn03Zm

                      The proof follows immediately from (90) if we observe that by (100) the
                conditions n03m0and Zm3Znare equivalent.

                102. Theorem. Z1= 1.
                        Proof. For by (99) the base-number 1 is contained in Z1, while by (78) every
                  number di erent from 1 is contained in 10, hence by (98) not in Z1, which was
                                              0
            to be proved.

                  103. Theorem. By (98) N = M(Zn, n0).
                                              0

                      104. Theorem. n = G(Zn, n0), i. e., n is the only common element of the
            system Znand n0.
                      Proof. From (99) and (74) it follows that n is contained in Znand n0; but
                  every element of the chain n0, di erent from n by (77) is contained in n0, and
                                                                          0
                hence by (98) not in Zn, which was to be proved.

                    105. Theorem. By (91), (98) the number n0is not contained in Zn.

                    106. Theorem. If m < n, then is Zmproper part of Znand conversely.
                      Proof. If m < n, then by (100) Zm3Zn, and since the number n, by (99)
                    contained in Zn, can by (98) not be contained in Zmbecause n > m, therefore
                  Zmis proper part of Zn. Conversely if Zmis proper part of Znthen by (100)
                  m 5 n, and since m cannot be = n, because otherwise Zm= Zn, we must have
              m < n, which was to be proved.

                  107. Theorem. Znis proper part of Zn0.
                    The proof follows from (106), because by (91) n < n0.

                108. Theorem. Zn0= M(Zn, n0).

                                            38                      Proof. For every number contained in Zn0, by (98) is 5 n0, hence either
                  = n0or < n0, and therefore by (98) element of Zn. Therefore certainly Zn03
                  M(Zn, n0). Since conversely by (107) Zn3Zn0and by (99) n03Zn0, then by
          (10) we have
                                            0
                                        M(Zn, n)3Zn0,

              whence our theorem follows by (5).

                      109. Theorem. The transform Z0of the system Znis proper part of the
                                          n
            system Zn0.
                      Proof. For every number contained in Z0is the transform m0of a number
                                                n
                m contained in Zn, and since m 5 n, and hence by (94) m05 n0, we have by
                  (98) Z03Zn0. Since further the number 1 by (99) is contained in Zn0, but by
                n
                  (71) is not contained in the transform Z0, then is Z0proper part of Zn0, which
                                              nn
            was to be proved.

                110. Theorem. Zn0= M(1, Z0).
                                      n
                    Proof. Every number of the system Zn0di erent from 1 by (78) is the
                    transform m0of a number m and this must be 5 n, and hence by (98) contained
                  in Zn(because otherwise m > n, hence by (94) also m0> n0and consequently
                  by (98) m0would not be contained in Zn0); but from m3Znwe have m03Z0,
                                                                              n
            and hence certainly
                                                0
                                        Zn03M(1, Z).
                                                n

                  Since conversely by (99) 13Zn, and by (109) Z03Zn0, then by (10) we have
                                                    n
                M(1, Z0)3Zn0and hence our theorem follows by (5).
                n

                    111. Denition. If in a system E of numbers there exists an element g,
                  which is greater than every other number contained in E, then g is said to be
                  the greatest number of the system E, and by (90) there can evidently be only
                  one such greatest number in E. If a system consists of a single number, then is
                this number itself the greatest number of the system.

                  112. Theorem. By (98) n is the greatest number of the system Zn.

                    113. Theorem. If there exists in E a greatest number g, then is E3Zg.
                        Proof. For every number contained in E is 5 g, and hence by (98) contained
              in Zg, which was to be proved.

                      114. Theorem. If E is part of a system Zn, or what amounts to the same
                  thing, there exists a number n such that all numbers contained in E are 5 n,
                then E possesses a greatest number g.
                      Proof. The system of all numbers p satisfying the condition E3Zp—and
                    by our hypothesis such numbers exist—is a chain (37), because by (107), (7) it
                  follows also that E3Zp0, and hence by (87) = g0, where g signies the least of
                  these numbers (96), (97). Hence also E3Zg, therefore by (98) every number
                contained in E is 5 g, and we have only to show that the number g is itself
                  contained in E. This is immediately obvious if g = 1, for then by (102) Zg, and
                  consequently also E consists of the single number 1. But if g is di erent from
                  1 and consequently by (78) the transform f0of a number f, then by (108) is

                                            39                  E3M(Zf, g); if therefore g were not contained in E, then would E3Zf, and
                  there would consequently be among the numbers p a number f by (91) < g,
                  which is contrary to what precedes; hence g is contained in E, which was to be
          proved.

                    115. Denition. If l < m and m < n we say the number m lies between l
              and n (also between n and l).

                      116. Theorem. There exists no number lying between n and n0.
                    Proof. For as soon as m < n0, and hence by (93) m 5 n, then by (90) we
              cannot have n < m, which was to be proved.

                    117. Theorem. If t is a number in T, but not the least (96), then there
                exists in T one and only one next less number s, i. e., a number s such that
                  s < t, and that there exists in T no number lying between s and t. Similarly, if
                t is not the greatest number in T (111) there always exists in T one and only
                one next greater number u, i. e., a number u such that t < u, and that there
                exists in T no number lying between t and u. At the same time in T t is next
            greater than s and next less than u.
                  Proof. If t is not the least number in T, then let E be the system of all
                  those numbers of T that are < t; then by (98) E3Zt, and hence by (114) there
                  exists in E a greatest number s obviously possessing the properties stated in
                  the theorem, and also it is the only such number. If further t is not the greatest
                  number in T, then by (96) there certainly exists among all the numbers of T,
                  that are > t, a least number u, which and which alone possesses the properties
                  stated in the theorem. In like manner the correctness of the last part of the
            theorem is obvious.

                      118. Theorem. In N the number n0is next greater than n, and n next less
          than n0.
                The proof follows from (116), (117).

                                          VIII.

                        FINITE AND INFINITE PARTS OF THE NUMBER-SERIES.

                  119. Theorem. Every system Znin (98) is nite.
                Proof by complete induction (80).
                   . By (65), (102) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                       . If Znis nite, then from (108) and (70) it follows that Zn0is also nite,
            which was to be proved.

                      120. Theorem. If m, n are di erent numbers, then are Zm, Zndissimilar
          systems.
                      Proof. By reason of the symmetry we may by (90) assume that m < n; then
                  by (106) Zmis proper part of Zn, and since by (119) Znis nite, then by (64)
                Zmand Zncannot be similar, which was to be proved.


                                            40                      121. Theorem. Every part E of the number-series N, which possesses a
              greatest number (111), is nite.
                  The proof follows from (113), (119), (68).

                      122. Theorem. Every part U of the number-series N, which possesses no
              greatest number, is simply innite (71).
                    Proof. If u is any number in U, there exists in U by (117) one and only
                  one next greater number than u, which we will denote by  (u) and regard as
                  transform of u. The thus perfectly determined transformation   of the system
            U has obviously the property
                                       .  (U)3U,
            i. e., U transformed in itself by  . If further u, v are di erent numbers in U, then
                  by symmetry we may by (90) assume that u < v; thus by (117) it follows from
            the denition of   that  (u) 5 v and v <  (v), and hence by (95)  (u) <  (v);
              therefore by (90) the transforms  (u),  (v) are di erent, i. e.,
                                 . the transformation   is similar.
                    Further, if u1denotes the least number (96) of the system U, then every number
                u contained in U is = u1, and since generally u <  (u), then by (95) u1<  (u),
              and therefore by (90) u1is di erent from  (u), i. e.,
                          . the element u1of U is not contained in  (u).
          Therefore  (U) is proper part of U and hence by (64) U is an innite system.
              If then in agreement with (44) we denote by  0(V ), when V is any part of U,
              the chain of V corresponding to the transformation  , we wish to show nally
          that
                                      . U =  0(u1).
              In fact, since every such chain  0(V ) by reason of its denition (44) is a part of
              the system U transformed in itself by  , then evidently is  0(u1)3U; conversely
                    it is rst of all obvious from (45) that the element u1contained in U is certainly
            contained in  0(u1); but if we assume that there exist elements of U, that are
            not contained in  0(u1), then must there be among them by (96) a least number
                  w, and since by what precedes this is di erent from the least number u1of the
                  system U, then by (117) must there exist in U also a number v which is next less
                than w, whence it follows at once that w =  (v); since therefore v < w, then
                must v by reason of the denition of w certainly be contained in  0(u1); but
              from this by (55) it follows that also  (v), and hence w must be contained in
 0(u1), and since this is contrary to the denition of w, our foregoing hypothesis
            is inadmissible; therefore U3 0(u1) and hence also U =  0(u1) as stated. From
                   , , ,   it then follows by (71) that U is a simply innite system set in order
          by  , which was to be proved.

                      123. Theorem. In consequence of (121), (122) any part T of the number-
                  series N is nite or simply innite, according as a greatest number exists or
            does not exist in T.





                                            41                                          IX.

                      DEFINITION OF A TRANSFORMATION OF THE NUMBER-SERIES BY
                                        INDUCTION.

                  124. In what follows we denote numbers by small Italics and retain through-
                  out all symbols of the previous sections VI. to VIII., while 
 designates an
                arbitrary system whose elements are not necessarily contained in N.

                      125. Theorem. If there is given an arbitrary (similar or dissimilar) trans-
                  formation   of a system 
 in itself, and besides a determinate element ! in 
,
                  then to every number n corresponds one transformation  nand one only of the
                      associated number-system Znexplained in (98), which satises the conditions:22
              I.  nZn3

              II.  n(1) = !
              III.  n(t0) =   n(t), if t < n, where the symbol   nhas the meaning given
          in (25).
                Proof by complete induction (80).
                   . The theorem is true for n = 1. In this case indeed by (102) the sys-
                  tem Znconsists of the single number 1, and the transformation  1is therefore
                  completely dened by II alone so that I is fullled while III drops out entirely.
                     . If the theorem is true for a number n then we show that it is also true
                  for the following number p = n0, and we begin by proving that there can be
              only a single corresponding transformation  pof the system Zp. In fact, if a
            transformation  psatises the conditions
              I0.  p(Zp)3

              II0.  p(1) = !
              III0.  p(m0) =   p(m), when m < p, then there is also contained in it by
                    (21), because Zn3Zp(107) a transformation of Znwhich obviously satises the
              same conditions I, II, III as  n, and therefore coincides throughout with  n; for
                  all numbers contained in Zn, and hence (98) for all numbers m which are < p,
            i. e., 5 n, must therefore
 p(m) =  n(m) (m)

            whence there follows, as a special case,

 p(n) =  n(n); (n)

                    since further by (105), (108) p is the only number of the system Zpnot contained
                in Zn, and since by III0and (n) we must also have

 p(p) =   n(n) (p)

                    there follows the correctness of our foregoing statement that there can be only
            one transformation  pof the system Zpsatisfying the conditions I0, II0, III0,

            22
                      For clearness here and in the following theorem (126) I have especially mentioned condition
                  I., although properly it is a consequence of II. and III.

                                            42              because by the conditions (m) and (p) just derived  pis completely reduced to
 n. We have next to show conversely that this transformation  pof the system
                    Zpcompletely determined by (m) and (p) actually satises the conditions I0,
                  II0, III0. Obviously I0follows from (m) and (p) with reference to I, and because
                   (
)3
. Similarly II0follows from (m) and II, since by (99) the number 1 is
                    contained in Zn. The correctness of III0follows rst for those numbers m which
                are < n from (m) and III, and for the single number m = n yet remaining
                  it results from (p) and (n). Thus it is completely established that from the
                  validity of our theorem for the number n always follows its validity for the
              following number p, which was to be proved.

                      126. Theorem of the denition by induction. If there is given an arbitrary
                  (similar or dissimilar) transformation   of a system 
 in itself, and besides a
                    determinate element ! in 
, then there exists one and only one transformation
  of the number-series N, which satises the conditions
              I.  (N)3

              II.  (1) = !
              III.  (n0) =   (n), where n represents every number.
                    Proof. Since, if there actually exists such a transformation  , there is con-
              tained in it by (21) a transformation  n, of the system Zn, which satises the
                  conditions I, II, III stated in (125), then because there exists one and only one
            such transformation  nmust necessarily

 (n) =  n(n).(n)

            Since thus   is completely determined it follows also that there can exist only
            one such transformation   (see the closing remark in (130)). That conversely
            the transformation   determined by (n) also satises our conditions I, II, III,
                  follows easily from (n) with reference to the properties I, II and (p) shown in
              (125), which was to be proved.

                      127. Theorem. Under the hypotheses made in the foregoing theorem,

                                          0
 (T) =   (T),

              where T denotes any part of the number-series N.
                  Proof. For if t denotes every number of the system T, then  (T0) consists of
            all elements  (t0), and   (T) of all elements   (t); hence our theorem follows
            because by III in (126)  (t0) =   (t).

                      128. Theorem. If we maintain the same hypotheses and denote by  0the
                    chains (44) which correspond to the transformation   of the system 
 in itself,
          then is
 (N) =  0(!).

                    Proof. We show rst by complete induction (80) that

 (N)3 0(!),

            i. e., that every transform  (n) is also element of  0(!). In fact,

                                            43                   . this theorem is true for n = 1, because by (126, II)  (1) = !, and because
            by (45) !3 0(!).
                 . If the theorem is true for a number n, and hence  (n)3 0(!), then by
                         
                                                    0
            (55) also   (n)3 0(!), i. e., by (126, III)  (n)3 0(!), hence the theorem
              is true for the following number n0, which was to be proved.
                        In order further to show that every element   of the chain  0(!) is contained
          in  (N), therefore that
                                         0(!)3 (N)

                    we likewise apply complete induction, i. e., theorem (59) transferred to 
 and
            the transformation  . In fact,
                 . the element ! =  (1), and hence is contained in  (N).
                     . If   is a common element of the chain  0(!) and the system  (N), then
            =  (n), where n denotes a number, and by (126, III) we get  ( ) =   (n) =
 (n0), and therefore  ( ) is contained in  (N), which was to be proved.
                  From the theorems just established,  (N)3 0(!) and  0(!)3 (N), we get
          by (5)  (N) =  0(!), which was to be proved.

                      129. Theorem. Under the same hypotheses we have generally:
                                                   

 (n0) =  0 (n).

                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                   . By (128) the theorem holds for n = 1, since 10= N and  (1) = !.
                 . If the theorem is true for a number n, then
                                           
                                    (n0)=   0 (n);

            since by (127), (75)
                                             
                                                  0
                                      (n0)=  (n),
                                                  0

            and by (57), (126, III)
                                         
                                                            0
                              0 (n)=  0  (n)=  0 (n),

                                                     
          we get (n0) =  0 (n0),
                                        0
                  i. e., the theorem is true for the number n0following n, which was to be proved.

                      130. Remark. Before we pass to the most important applications of the
                    theorem of denition by induction proved in (126), (sections X–XIV), it is worth
                    while to call attention to a circumstance by which it is essentially distinguished
                    from the theorem of demonstration by induction proved in (80) or rather in (59),
                  (60), however close may seem the relation between the former and the latter.
                    For while the theorem (59) is true quite generally for every chain A0where A is
                  any part of a system S transformed in itself by any transformation   (IV), the
                    case is quite di erent with the theorem (126), which declares only the existence
                of a consistent (or one-to-one) transformation   of the simply innite system
                    10. If in the latter theorem (still maintaining the hypotheses regarding 
 and  )
                    we replace the number-series 10by an arbitrary chain A0out of such a system

                                            44              S, and dene a transformation   of A0in 
 in a manner analogous to that in
              (126, II, III) by assuming that
                     . to every element a of A there is to correspond a determinate element  (a)
            selected from 
, and
                         . for every element n contained in A0and its transform n0=  (n), the con-
          dition  (n0) =   (n) is to hold, then would the case very frequently occur that
            such a transformation   does not exist, since these conditions  ,   may prove
                  incompatible, even though the freedom of choice contained in   be restricted
                  at the outset to conform to the condition  . An example will be su cient to
                    convince one of this. If the system S consisting of the di erent elements a and b
                  is so transformed in itself by   that a0= b, b0= a, then obviously a0= b0= S;
                  suppose further the system 
 consisting of the di erent elements  , , and 
                be so transformed in itself by   that  ( ) = ,  () = ,  () =  ; if we now
            demand a transformation   of a0in 
 such that  (a) =  , and that besides for
              every element n contained in a0always  (n0) =   (n), we meet a contradiction;
            since for n = a, we get  (b) =  ( ) = , and hence for n = b, we must have
 (a) =  () = , while we had assumed  (a) =  .
                But if there exists a transformation   of A0in 
, which satises the foregoing
                    conditions  ,   without contradiction, then from (60) it follows easily that it is
                      completely determined; for if the transformation   satises the same conditions,
            then we have, generally,  (n) =  (n), since by   this theorem is true for all
                elements n = a contained in A, and since if it is true for an element n of A0it
                must by   be true also for its transform n0.

                      131. In order to bring out clearly the import of our theorem (126), we will
                    here insert a consideration which is useful for other investigations also, e. g., for
              the so-called group-theory.
                        We consider a system 
, whose elements allow a certain combination such
                    that from an element   by the e ect of an element !, there always results again
                  a determinate element of the same system 
, which may be denoted by !    
                or ! , and in general is to be distinguished from  !. We can also consider
                  this in such a way that to every determinate element !, there corresponds a
                  determinate transformation of the system 
 in itself (to be denoted by _!), in
                  so far as every element   furnishes the determinate transform _!( ) = ! . If to
                    this system 
 and its element ! we apply theorem (126), designating by _! the
                    transformation there denoted by  , then there corresponds to every number n
            a determinate element  (n) contained in 
, which may now be denoted by the
                    symbol !nand sometimes called the nth power of !; this notion is completely
                dened by the conditions imposed upon it

                                          1
                                        II. != !
                                            n0n
                                      III. != ! !,

                and its existence is established by the proof of theorem (126).
                        If the foregoing combination of the elements is further so qualied that for
                  arbitrary elements µ,  , !, we always have !(  µ) = !  (µ), then are true also


                                            45            the theorems
                                  n0nmnnm
                                  != !!, !!= !!,

                  whose proofs can easily be e ected by complete induction and may be left to
            the reader.
                        The foregoing general consideration may be immediately applied to the fol-
                  lowing example. If S is a system of arbitrary elements, and 
 the associated
                  system whose elements are all the transformations   of S in itself (36), then by
                  (25) can these elements be continually compounded, since  (S)3S, and the
                  transformation !  compounded out of such transformations   and ! is itself
                  again an element of 
. Then are also all elements !ntransformations of S in
                    itself, and we say they arise by repetition of the transformation !. We will now
                    call attention to a simple connection existing between this notion and the notion
                  of the chain !0(A) dened in (44), where A again denotes any part of S. If for
                    brevity we denote by Anthe transform !n(A) produced by the transformation
                    !n, then from III and (25) it follows that !(An) = An0. Hence it is easily shown
                  by complete induction (80) that all these systems Anare parts of the chain
          !0(A); for
                   . by (50) this statement is true for n = 1, and
                     . if it is true for a number n, then from (55) and from An0= !(An) it
                  follows that it is also true for the following number n0, which was to be proved.
                  Since further by (45) A3!0(A), then from (10) it results that the system K
                    compounded out of A and all transforms Anis part of !0(A). Conversely, since
                  by (23) !(K) is compounded out of !(A) = A1and all systems !(An) = An0,
                  therefore by (78) out of all systems An, which by (9) are parts of K, then by
                (10) is !(K)3K, i. e., K is a chain (37), and since by (9) A3K, then by (47)
                  it follows also that that !0(A)3K. Therefore !0(A) = K, i. e., the following
                  theorem holds: If ! is a transformation of a system S in itself, and A any part
                    of S, then is the chain of A corresponding to the transformation ! compounded
                    out of A and all the transforms !n(A) resulting from repetitions of !. We advise
                    the reader with this conception of a chain to return to the earlier theorems (57),
          (58).

                                            X.

                            THE CLASS OF SIMPLY INFINITE SYSTEMS.

                        132. Theorem. All simply innite systems are similar to the number-series
                N and consequently by (33) also to one another.
                      Proof. Let the simply innite system 
 be set in order (71) by the transfor-
                  mation  , and let ! be the base-element of 
 thus resulting; if we again denote
                    by  0the chains corresponding to the transformation   (44), then by (71) is the
            following true:
               .  (
)3
.
              . 
 =  0(!).
                . ! is not contained in  (
).

                                            46                   . The transformation   is similar.
          If then   denotes the transformation of the number-series N dened in (126),
              then from  and (128) we get rst

 (N) = 
,

              and hence we have only yet to show that   is a similar transformation, i. e., (26)
                  that to di erent numbers m, n correspond di erent transforms  (m),  (n). On
                  account of the symmetry we may by (90) assume that m > n, hence m3n0,
                                                                              0
              and the theorem to prove comes to this that  (n) is not contained in  (n0), and
                                                                        0
            hence by (127) is not contained in   (n0). This we establish for every number
                n by complete induction (80). In fact,
                   . this theorem is true by  for n = 1, since  (1) = ! and  (10) =  (N) = 
.
                       . If the theorem is true for a number n, then is it also true for the following
            number n0; for if  (n0), i. e.,   (n), were contained in   (n0), then by   and
                                                                0
          (27),  (n) would also be contained in  (n0) while our hypothesis states just the
                                              0
              opposite; which was to be proved.

                      133. Theorem. Every system which is similar to a simply innite system
                and therefore by (132), (33) to the number-series N is simply innite.
                      Proof. If 
 is a system similar to the number-series N, then by (32) there
            exists a similar transformation   of N such that

                                      I.  (N) = 
;

            then we put

                                      II.  (1) = !.

            If we denote, as in (26), by  the inverse, likewise similar transformation of 
,
                then to every element   of 
 there corresponds a determinate number ( ) = n,
              viz., that number whose transform  (n) =  . Since to this number n there
                  corresponds a determinate following number  (n) = n0, and to this again a
            determinate element  (n0) in 
 there belongs to every element   of the sys-
            tem 
 a determinate element  (n0) of that system which as transform of   we
                  shall designate by  ( ). Thus a transformation   of 
 in itself is completely
                    determined,23and in order to prove our theorem we will show that by  
 is set
                in order (71) as a simply innite system, i. e., that the conditions  , , ,  
                    stated in the proof of (132) are all fullled. First   is immediately obvious from
                  the denition of  . Since further to every number n corresponds an element
              =  (n), for which  ( ) =  (n0), we have generally,

                                          0
                                    III.  (n) =   (n),

                  and thence in connection with I, II,   it results that the transformations  ,  
                    fulll all the conditions of theorem (126); therefore  follows from (128) and I.
            Further by (127) and I
                                      0
 (N) =   (N) =  (
),

            23
                Evidently   is the transformation      compounded by (25) out of ,  ,  .

                                            47                  and thence in combination with II and the similarity of the transformation  
            follows , because otherwise  (1) must be contained in  (N0), hence by (27) the
                  number 1 in N0, which by (71, ) is not the case. If nally µ,   denote elements
                  of 
 and m, n the corresponding numbers whose transforms are  (m) = µ,
 (n) =  , then from the hypothesis  (µ) =  ( ) it follows by the foregoing that
 (m0) =  (n0), thence on account of the similarity of  ,   that m0= n0, m = n,
                  therefore also µ =  ; hence also   is true, which was to be proved.

                  134. Remark. By the two preceding theorems (132), (133) all simply innite
                  systems form a class in the sense of (34). At the same time, with reference to
                    (71), (73) it is clear that every theorem regarding numbers, i. e., regarding the
                  elements n of the simply innite system N set in order by the transformation
                     , and indeed every theorem in which we leave entirely out of consideration the
                    special character of the elements n and discuss only such notions as arise from
                    the arrangement  , possesses perfectly general validity for every other simply
                    innite system 
 set in order by a transformation   and its elements  , and that
                  the passage from N to 
 (e. g., also the translation of an arithmetic theorem
                    from one language into another) is e ected by the transformation   considered
                  in (132), (133), which changes every element n of N into an element   of 
, i. e.,
          into  (n). This element   can be called the nth element of 
 and accordingly the
                    number n is itself the nth number of the number-series N. The same signicance
                  which the transformation   possesses for the laws in the domain N, in so far as
                    every element n is followed by a determinate element  (n) = n0, is found, after
            the change e ected by  , to belong to the transformation   for the same laws
                in the domain 
, in so far as the element   =  (n) arising from the change of
              n is followed by the element  ( ) =  (n0) arising from the change of n0; we are
              therefore justied in saying that by    is changed into  , which is symbolically
            expressed by   =    ,   =   . By these remarks, as I believe, the denition
                of the notion of numbers given in (73) is fully justied. We now proceed to
              further applications of theorem (126).

                                          XI.

                                    ADDITION OF NUMBERS.

                      135. Denition. It is natural to apply the denition set forth in theorem
              (126) of a transformation   of the number-series N, or of the function  (n)
                  determined by it to the case, where the system there denoted by 
 in which
            the transform  (N) is to be contained, is the number-series N itself, because
                for this system 
 a transformation   of 
 in itself already exists, viz., that
                  transformation   by which N is set in order as a simply innite system (71),
                (73). Then is also 
 = N,  (n) =  (n) = n0, hence

                                      I.  (N)3N,

              and it remains in order to determine   completely only to select the element !
                from 
, i. e., from N, at pleasure. If we take ! = 1, then evidently   becomes

                                            48                  the identical transformation (21) of N, because the conditions

                                              00
 (1) = 1,  (n) = ( (n))

            are generally satised by  (n) = n. If then we are to produce another trans-
            formation   of N, then for ! we must select a number m0di erent from 1, by
                    (78) contained in N, where m itself denotes any number; since the transforma-
          tion   is obviously dependent upon the choice of this number m, we denote the
            corresponding transform  (n) of an arbitrary number n by the symbol m + n,
                  and call this number the sum which arises from the number m by the addition
                  of the number n, or in short the sum of the numbers m, n. Therefore by (126)
                  this sum is completely determined by the conditions24


                                                0
                                    II. m + 1 = m,
                                            00
                                    III. m + n= (m + n).

                136. Theorem. m0+ n = m + n0.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                     . the theorem is true for n = 1, since by (135, II)

                                  0000
                                  m+ 1 = (m)= (m + 1),

              and by (135, III) (m + 1)0= m + 10.
                       . If the theorem is true for a number n, and we put the following number
                n0= p then is m0+ n = m + p, hence also (m0+ n)0= (m + p)0, whence by
                  (135, III) m0+ p = m + p0; therefore the theorem is true also for the following
            number p, which was to be proved.

                  137. Theorem. m0+ n = (m + n)0.
                The proof follows from (136) and (135, III).

                138. Theorem. 1 + n = n0.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                   . by (135, II) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                     . If the theorem is true for a number n and we put n0= p, then 1 +n = p,
                  therefore also (1 + n)0= p0, whence by (135, III) 1 + p = p0, i. e., the theorem
                is true also for the following number p, which was to be proved.

                139. Theorem. 1 + n = n + 1.
                    The proof follows from (138) and (135, II).

                140. Theorem. m + n = n + m.
            24
                          The above denition of addition based immediately upon theorem (126) seems to me to
                    be the simplest. By the aid of the notion developed in (131) we can, however, dene the sum
                  m + n by  n(m) or also by  m(n), where   has again the foregoing meaning. In order to
                      show the complete agreement of these denitions with the foregoing, we need by (126) only to
              show that if  n(m) or  m(n) is denoted by  (n), the conditions  (1) = m0,  (n0) =   (n)
                    are fullled which is easily done with the aid of complete induction (80) by the help of (131).

                                            49                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                 . by (139) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                       . If the theorem is true for a number n, then there follows also (m+n)0=
                (n + m)0, i. e., by (135, III) m + n0= n + m0, hence by (136) m + n0= n0+ m;
                    therefore the theorem is also true for the following number n0, which was to be
          proved.

                  141. Theorem. (l + m) + n = l + (m + n).
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                     . the theorem is true for n = 1, because by (135, II, III, II) (l + m) + 1 =
            (l + m)0= l + m0= l + (m + 1).

                       . If the theorem is true for a number n, then there follows also(l + m) +
              
            00
              n=l + (m + n), i. e., by (135, III)

                                    000
                            (l + m) + n= l + (m + n)= l + (m + n),

                    therefore the theorem is also true for the following number n0, which was to be
          proved.

                142. Theorem. m + n > m.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                   . by (135, II) and (91) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                     . If the theorem is true for a number n, then by (95) it is also true for the
              following number n0, because by (135, III) and (91)

                                      00
                                    m + n= (m + n)> m + n,

            which was to be proved.

                      143. Theorem. The conditions m > a and m + n > a + n are equivalent.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                   . by (135, II) and (94) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                       . If the theorem is true for a number n, then is it also true for the following
                    number n0, since by (94) the condition m+n > a+n is equivalent to (m+n)0>
              (a + n)0, hence by (135, III) also equivalent to

                                          00
                                      m + n> a + n,

            which was to be proved.

                  144. Theorem. If m > a and n > b, then is also

                                        m + n > a + b.

                  Proof. For from our hypotheses we have by (143) m + n > a + n and
                  n+a > b+a or, what by (140) is the same, a+n > a+b, whence the theorem
            follows by (95).

                  145. Theorem. If m + n = a + n then m = a.


                                            50                    Proof. For if m does not = a, hence by (90) either m > a or m < a, then by
                  (143) respectively m + n > a + n or m + n < a+ n, therefore by (90) we surely
              cannot have m + n = a + n which was to be proved.

                        146. Theorem. If l > n, then there exists one and by (157) only one number
              m which satises the condition m + n = l.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                     . the theorem is true for n = 1. In fact, if l > 1, i. e., (89) if l is contained
                  in N0, and hence is the transform m0of a number m, then by (135, II) it follows
                that l = m + 1, which was to be proved.
                     . If the theorem is true for a number n, then we show that it is also true
                  for the following number n0. In fact, if l > n0, then by (91), (95) also l > n, and
                  hence there exists a number k which satises the condition l = k + n; since by
                  (138) this is di erent from 1 (otherwise l would be = n0) then by (78) is it the
                  transform m0of a number m, consequently l = m0+ n, therefore also by (136)
              l = m + n0, which was to be proved.

                                          XII.

                                  MULTIPLICATION OF NUMBERS.

                      147. Denition. After having found in XI an innite system of new trans-
                  formations of the number-series N in itself, we can by (126) use each of these
                in order to produce new transformations   of N. When we take 
 = N, and
                   (n) = m + n = n + m, where m is a determinate number, we certainly again
          have
                                      I.  (N)3N,

            and it remains, to determine   completely only to select the element ! from N
                  at pleasure. The simplest case occurs when we bring this choice into a certain
                agreement with the choice of  , by putting ! = m. Since the thus perfectly
            determinate   depends upon this number m, we designate the corresponding
            transform  (n) of any number n by the symbol m × n or m   n or mn, and call
                  this number the product arising from the number m by multiplication by the
                    number n, or in short the product of the numbers m, n. This therefore by (126)
              is completely determined by the conditions

                                      II. m   1 = m
                                          0
                                      III. mn= mn + m

                148. Theorem. m0n = mn + n.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                     . by (147, II) and (135, II) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                     . If the theorem is true for a number n, we have

                                  000
                                  mn + m= (mn + n) + m


                                            51                    and consequently by (147, III), (141), (140), (136), (141), (147, III)

                      00000
                          mn= mn + (n + m) = mn + (m+ n) = mn + (m + n)

                                              000
                                  = (mn + m) + n= mn+ n;

                  therefore the theorem is true for the following number n0, which was to be
          proved.

                149. Theorem. 1   n = n.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                   . by (147, II) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                   . If the theorem is true for a number n, then we have 1   n + 1 = n + 1,
                  i. e., by (147, III), (135, II) 1   n0= n0, therefore the theorem also holds for the
              following number n0, which was to be proved.

                150. Theorem. mn = nm.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                     . by (147, II), (149) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                   . If the theorem is true for a number n, then we have

                                      mn + m = nm + m,

                  i. e., by (147, III), (148) mn0= n0m, therefore the theorem is also true for the
              following number n0, which was to be proved.

                  151. Theorem. l(m + n) = lm + ln.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                     . by (135, II), (147, III), (147, II) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                     . If the theorem is true for a number n, we have

                                  l(m + n) + l = (lm + ln) + l;

                but by (147, III), (135, III) we have

                                                00
                                l(m + n) + l = l(m + n)= l(m + n),

              and by (141), (147, III)

                                                            0
                              (lm + ln) + l = lm + (ln + l) = lm + ln,

                    consequently l(m+n0) = lm+ln0, i. e., the theorem is true also for the following
              number n0, which was to be proved.

                  152. Theorem. (m + n)l = ml + nl.
                The proof follows from (151), (150).

                  153. Theorem. (lm)n = l(mn).
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                   . by (147, II) the theorem is true for n = 1.


                                            52                   . If the theorem is true for a number n, then we have

                                    (lm)n + lm = l(mn) + lm,

              i. e., by (147, III), (151), (147, III)

                                    00
                                  (lm)n= l(mn + m) = l(mn),

                  hence the theorem is also true for the following number n0, which was to be
          proved.

                    154. Remark. If in (147) we had assumed no relation between ! and
                     , but had put ! = k,  (n) = m + n, then by (126) we should have had a
              less simple transformation   of the number-series N; for the number 1 would
 (1) = k and for every other number (therefore contained in the form n0) would
 (n0) = mn + k; since thus would be fullled, as one could easily convince
              himself by the aid of the foregoing theorems, the condition  (n0) =   (n), i. e.,
 (n0) = m +  (n) for all numbers n.

                                          XIII.

                                  INVOLUTION OF NUMBERS.

                    155. Denition. If in theorem (126) we again put 
 = N, and further
              ! = a,  (n) = an = na, we get a transformation   of N which still satises the
          condition
                                      I.  (N)3N;

              the corresponding transform  (n) of any number n we denote by the symbol
                  an, and call this number a power of the base a, while n is called the exponent of
                    this power of a. Hence this notion is completely determined by the conditions

                                        1
                                      II. a= a
                                          n0nn
                                      III. a= a   a= a  a.

                  156. Theorem. am+n= am  an.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                     . by (135, II), (155, III), (155, II) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                     . If the theorem is true for a number n, we have

                                    m+nmn
                                    a  a = (a  a)a;

                                                    00
                    but by (155, III), (135, III) am+n  a = a(m+n)= am+n, and by (153), (155,
                                          000
                    III) (am an)a = am(an a) = am an; hence am+n= am an, i. e., the theorem
                  is also true for the following number n0, which was to be proved.

                157. Theorem. (am)n= amn.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For

                                            53                   . by (155, II), (147, II) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                     . If the theorem is true for a number n, we have

                                      mnmmnm
                                    (a)  a= a  a

                                            0
                  but by (155, III) (am)n  am= (am)n, and by (156), (147, III) amn  am=
                        000
                  amn+m= amn; hence (am)n= amn, i. e., the theorem is also true for the
              following number n0, which was to be proved.

                158. Theorem. (ab)n= an  bn
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                   . by (155, II) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                       . If the theorem is true for a number n, then by (150), (153), (155, III) we
                                                    0 
                have also (ab)n  a = a(an  bn) = (a   an)bn= an  bn, and thus(ab)n  ab =
              0 0
                                                            nn
              (an n)b; but by (153), (155, III)(ab)n 
                   b ab = (ab)  (ab) = (ab), and
          likewise
                                n0nn0nn0n0
                              (a  b)b = a  (b  b) = a  b;
                      000
                  therefore (ab)n= an ni. e., the theorem is also true for the following number
                              b
            n0, which was to be proved.

                                          XIV.

                          NUMBER OF THE ELEMENTS OF A FINITE SYSTEM.

                      159. Theorem. If   is an innite system, then is every one of the number-
                  systems Zndened in (98) similarly transformable in   (i. e., similar to a part
            of  ), and conversely.
                    Proof. If   is innite, then by (72) there certainly exists a part T of  ,
                    which is simply innite, therefore by (132) similar to the number-series N, and
                consequently by (35) every system Znas part of N is similar to a part of T,
              therefore also to a part of  , which was to be proved.
                    The proof of the converse—however obvious it may appear—is more compli-
                    cated. If every system Znis similarly transformable in  , then to every number
                    n corresponds such a similar transformation  nof Znthat  n(Zn)3 . From
                    the existence of such a series of transformations  n, regarded as given, but re-
                    specting which nothing further is assumed, we derive rst by the aid of theorem
              (126) the existence of a new series of such transformations  npossessing the
                  special property that whenever m 5 n, hence by (100) Zm3Zn, the transfor-
          mation  mof the part Zmis contained in the transformation  nof Zn(21),
            i. e., the transformations  mand  ncompletely coincide with each other for all
                numbers contained in Zm, hence always

 m(m) =  n(m).

                  In order to apply the theorem stated to gain this end we understand by 
 that
                    system whose elements are all possible similar transformations of all systems Zn

                                            54                  in  , and by aid of the given elements  n, likewise contained in 
, we dene in
                  the following manner a transformation   of 
 in itself. If  is any element of 
,
                    thus, e. g., a similar transformation of the determinate system Znin  , then the
                      system  n0(Zn0) cannot be part of (Zn), for otherwise Zn0would be similar by
                  (35) to a part of Zn, hence by (107) to a proper part of itself, and consequently
                      innite, which would contradict theorem (119); therefore there certainly exists in
                      Zn0one number or several numbers p such that  n0(p) is not contained in (Zn);
                    from these numbers p we select—simply to lay down something determinate—
                  always the least k (96) and, since Zn0by (108) is compounded out of Znand
                  n0, dene a transformation  of Zn0such that for all numbers m contained in
                  Znthe transform (m) = (m) and besides (n0) =  n0(k); this obviously
                  similar transformation  of Zn0in   we consider then as a transform  () of
                  the transformation , and thus a transformation   of the system 
 in itself is
                  completely dened. After the things named 
 and   in (126) are determined
                  we select nally for the element of 
, denoted by ! the given transformation
                   1; thus by (126) there is determined a transformation   of the number-series
                    N in 
, which, if we denote the transform belonging to an arbitrary number n,
          not by  (n) but by  n, satises the conditions

                                      II.  1=  1

                                      III.  n0=  ( n)

                By complete induction (80) it results rst that  nis a similar transformation
            of Znin  ; for
                 . by II this is true for n = 1.
                       . if this statement is true for a number n, it follows from III and from the
                  character of the above described transition   from  to , that the statement
                    is also true for the following number n0, which was to be proved. Afterward we
                  show likewise by complete induction (80) that if m is any number the above
            stated property
 n(m) =  m(m)

                  actually belongs to all numbers n, which are = m, and therefore by (93), (74)
              belong to the chain m0; in fact,
                 . this is immediately evident for n = m, and
                       . if this property belongs to a number n it follows again from III and the
                nature of  , that it also belongs to the number n0, which was to be proved.
                  After this special property of our new series of transformations  nhas been
                    established, we can easily prove our theorem. We dene a transformation   of
                  the number-series N, in which to every number n we let the transform  (n) =
 n(n) correspond; obviously by (21) all transformations  nare contained in this
            one transformation  . Since  nwas a transformation of Znin  , it follows rst
                  that the number-series N is likewise transformed by   in  , hence  (N)3 .
                    If further m, n are di erent numbers we may by reason of symmetry according
                to (90) suppose m < n; then by the foregoing  (m) =  m(m) =  n(m), and
           (n) =  n(n); but since  nwas a similar transformation of Znin  , and m,
              n are di erent elements of Zn, then is  n(m) di erent from  n(n), hence also

                                            55                     (m) di erent from  (n), i. e.,   is a similar transformation of N. Since further
                  N is an innite system (71), the same thing is true by (67) of the system  (N)
                  similar to it and by (68), because  (N) is part of  , also of  , which was to be
          proved.

                      160. Theorem. A system   is nite or innite, according as there does or
              does not exist a system Znsimilar to it.
                    Proof. If   is nite, then by (159) there exist systems Znwhich are not
                    similarly transformable in  ; since by (102) the system Z1consists of the single
                    number 1, and hence is similarly transformable in every system, then must the
                  least number k (96) to which a system Zknot similarly transformable in  
                  corresponds be di erent from 1 and hence by (78) = n0, and since n < n0(91)
                there exists a similar transformation   of Znin  ; if then  (zn) were only
                a proper part of  , i. e., if there existed an element   in   not contained in
 (Zn), then since Zn0= M(Zn, n0) (108) we could extend this transformation
  to a similar transformation   of Zn0in   by putting  (n0) =   while by our
              hypothesis Zn0is not similarly transformable in  . Hence  (Zn) =  , i. e., Zn
                  and   are similar systems. Conversely, if a system   is similar to a system Zn,
                then by (119), (67)   is nite, which was to be proved.

                    161. Denition. If   is a nite system, then by (160) there exists one
                and by (120), (33) only one single number n to which a system Znsimilar
                  to the system   corresponds; this number n is called the number [Anzahl] of
                  the elements contained in   (or also the degree of the system  ) and we say
                  consists of or is a system of n elements, or the number n shows how many
                    elements are contained in  .25If numbers are used to express accurately this
                  determinate property of nite systems they are called cardinal numbers. As
                soon as a determinate similar transformation   of the system Znis chosen by
            reason of which  (Zn) = Z, then to every number m contained in Zn(i. e.,
                every number m which is 5 n) there corresponds a determinate element  (m)
                  of the system  , and conversely by (26) to every element of   by the inverse
            transformation  there corresponds a determinate number m in Zn. Very often
                we denote all elements of   by a single letter, e. g.,  , to which we append
                the distinguishing numbers m as indices so that  (m) is denoted by  m. We
              say also that these elements are counted and set in order by   in determinate
                manner, and call  mthe mth element of  ; if m < n then  m0is called the
                    element following  m, and  nis called the last element. In this counting of the
                  elements therefore the numbers m appear again as ordinal numbers (73).

                    162. Theorem. All systems similar to a nite system possess the same
            number of elements.
                  The proof follows immediately from (33), (161).

                      163. Theorem. The number of numbers contained in Zn, i. e., of those
              numbers which are 5 n, is n.

            25
                            For clearness and simplicity in what follows we restrict the notion of the number through-
                    out to nite systems; if then we speak of a number of certain things, it is always understood
                that the system whose elements these things are is a nite system.

                                            56                Proof. For by (32) Znis similar to itself.

                      164. Theorem. If a system consists of a single element, then is the number
            of its elements = 1, and conversely.
                  The proof follows immediately from (2), (26), (32), (102), (161).

                      165. Theorem. If T is proper part of a nite system  , then is the number
                of the elements of T less than that of the elements of  .
                        Proof. By (68) T is a nite system, therefore similar to a system Zm, where
                    m denotes the number of the elements of T; if further n is the number of elements
                of  , therefore   similar to Zn, then by (35) T is similar to a proper part E
                  of Znand by (33) also Zmand E are similar to each other; if then we were to
                have n 5 m, hence Zn3Zm, by (7) E would also be proper part of Zm, and
                      consequently Zman innite system, which contradicts theorem (119); hence by
              (90), m < n, which was to be proved.

                    166. Theorem. If = M(B, ), where B denotes a system of n elements,
                    and  an element of not contained in B, then consists of n0elements.
              Proof. For if B =  (Zn), where   denotes a similar transformation of Zn,
                    then by (105), (108) it may be extended to a similar transformation   of Zn0,
            by putting  (n0) = , and we get  (Zn0) = , which was to be proved.

                    167. Theorem. If  is an element of a system consisting of n0elements,
              then is n the number of all other elements of .
                      Proof. For if B denotes the aggregate of all elements in di erent from ,
                then is = M(B, ); if then b is the number of elements of the nite system
                  B, by the foregoing theorem b0is the number of elements of , therefore = n0,
              whence by (26) we get b = n, which was to be proved.

                    168. Theorem. If A consists of m elements, and B of n elements, and A
                  and B have no common element, then M(A, B) consists of m + n elements.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                     . by (166), (164), (135, II) the theorem is true for n = 1.
                       . If the theorem is true for a number n, then is it also true for the following
                number n0. In fact, if is a system of n0elements, then by (167) we can put =
                  M(B, ) where  denotes an element and B the system of the n other elements
                of . If then A is a system of m elements each of which is not contained in ,
                  therefore also not contained in B, and we put M(A, B) =  , by our hypothesis
                  m + n the number of elements of  , and since  is not contained in  , then by
                    (166) the number of elements contained in M( , ) = (m+n0), therefore by (135,
                III) = m + n0; but since by (15) obviously M( , ) = M(A, B, ) = M(A,),
                  then is m+n0the number of the elements of M(A,), which was to be proved.

                      169. Theorem. If A, B are nite systems of m, n elements respectively,
                then is M(A, B) a nite system and the number of its elements is 5 m + n.
                    Proof. If B3A, then M(A, B) = A and the number m of the elements of
                this system is by (142) < m + n, as was stated. But if B is not part of A, and
                  T is the system of all those elements of B that are not contained in A, then by


                                            57                (165) is their number p 5 n, and since obviously

                                      M(A, B) = M(A, T),

                then by (143) is the number m + p of the elements of this system 5 m + n,
            which was to be proved.

                    170. Theorem. Every system compounded out of a number n of nite
            systems is nite.
                Proof by complete induction (80). For
                   . by (8) the theorem is self-evident for n = 1.
                     . If the theorem is true for a number n, and if   is compounded out of n0
                    nite systems, then let A be one of these systems and B the system compounded
                  out of all the rest; since their number by (167) = n, then by our hypothesis B
                  is a nite system. Since obviously   = M(A, B), it follows from this and from
              (169) that   is also a nite system, which was to be proved.

              171. Theorem. If   is a dissimilar transformation of a nite system   of n
              elements, then is the number of elements of the transform  ( ) less than n.
                    Proof. If we select from all those elements of   that possess one and the
                    same transform, always one and only one at pleasure, then is the system T of all
                these selected elements obviously a proper part of  , because   is a dissimilar
                  transformation of   (26). At the same time it is clear that the transformation
            by (21) contained in   of this part T is a similar transformation, and that
 (T) =  ( ); hence the system  ( ) is similar to the proper part T of  , and
              consequently our theorem follows by (162), (165).

                      172. Final remark. Although it has just been shown that the number m of
            the elements of  ( ) is less than the number n of the elements of  , yet in many
              cases we like to say that the number of elements of  ( ) = n. The word number
                    is then, of course, used in a di erent sense from that used hitherto (161); for if  
                  is an element of   and a the number of all those elements of  , that possess one
              and the same transform  ( ) then is the latter as element of  ( ) frequently
                      regarded still as representative of a elements, which at least from their derivation
                    may be considered as di erent from one another, and accordingly counted as a-
            fold element of  ( ). In this way we reach the notion, very useful in many cases,
                    of systems in which every element is endowed with a certain frequency-number
                  which indicates how often it is to be reckoned as element of the system. In the
                foregoing case, e. g., we would say that n is the number of the elements of  ( )
                    counted in this sense, while the number m of the actually di erent elements of
                    this system coincides with the number of the elements of T. Similar deviations
                  from the original meaning of a technical term which are simply extensions of
                    the original notion, occur very frequently in mathematics; but it does not lie in
                  the line of this memoir to go further into their discussion.





                                            58                          CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS
                                          OF THE
                              OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO.


            COPE, E. D.
                  THE PRIMARY FACTORS OF ORGANIC EVOLUTION.
                    121 cuts. Pp. xvi, 547. Cloth, $2.00 (10s.).

            M¨ULLER, F. MAX.
                        THREE INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF THOUGHT.
                  128 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.).
                  THREE LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF LANGUAGE.
                    112 pages, 2nd Edition. Cloth, 75c* (3s. 6d.).

              ROMANES, GEORGE JOHN.
                DARWIN AND AFTER DARWIN.
                    Three Vols., $4.00. Singly, as follows:
                        1. The Darwinian Theory. 460 pages. 125 illustrations. Cloth, $2.00
                        2. Post-Darwinian Questions. Heredity and Utility. Pp. 338. $1.50
                            3. Post-Darwinian Questions. Isolation and Physiological Selection. Pp. 181. $1.00.

                  AN EXAMINATION OF WEISMANNISM.
                  236 pages. Cloth, $1.00.
                THOUGHTS ON RELIGION.
                    Third Edition, Pages, 184. Cloth, gilt top, $1.25.

              SHUTE, DR. D. KERFOOT.
                  FIRST BOOK IN ORGANIC EVOLUTION.
                      9 colored plates, 39 cuts. Pp. xvi + 285. Price, $2.00 (7s. 6d.).

            MACH, ERNST.
                THE SCIENCE OF MECHANICS.
                        Translated by T. J. McCormack. 250 cuts. 534 pages. $2.50 (12s. 6d.)
                  POPULAR SCIENTIFIC LECTURES.
                    Third Edition. 415 pages. 59 cuts. Cloth, gilt top. $1.50 (7s 6d.).
                THE ANALYSIS OF THE SENSATIONS.
                  Pp. 208. 37 cuts. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.).

            LAGRANGE, JOSEPH LOUIS.
                    LECTURES ON ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS.
                    With portrait of the author. Pp. 172. Price, $1.00 (5s.).

            DE MORGAN, AUGUSTUS.
                    ON THE STUDY AND DIFFICULTIES OF MATHEMATICS.
                    New Reprint edition with notes. Pp. viii + 288. Cloth, $1.25 (5s.).
                  ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE DIFFERENTIAL AND
                    INTEGRAL CALCULUS.
                  New reprint edition. Price, $1.00 (5s.).

            FINK, KARL.
                A BRIEF HISTORY OF MATHEMATICS.
                        Trans. by W. W. Beman and D. E. Smith. Pp., 333. Cloth, $1.50 (5s. 6d.)

            SCHUBERT, HERMANN.
                    MATHEMATICAL ESSAYS AND RECREATIONS.
                    Pp. 149. Cuts, 37. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.).            HUC AND GABET, MM.
                  TRAVELS IN TARTARY, THIBET AND CHINA.
                      100 engravings. Pp. 28 + 660. 2 vols. $2.00 (10s.), One vol., $1.25 (5s.)

            CARUS, PAUL.
                  THE HISTORY OF THE DEVIL, AND THE IDEA OF EVIL.
                    311 Illustrations. Pages, 500. Price, $6.00 (30s.).
              EROS AND PSYCHE.
                        Retold after Apuleius. With Illustrations by Paul Thumann. Pp. 125. Price, $1.50
                  (6s.).
                WHENCE AND WHITHER?
                      An Inquiry into the Nature of the Soul. 196 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.)
                THE ETHICAL PROBLEM.
                        Second edition, revised and enlarged. 351 pages. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.)
              FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS.
                    Second edition, revised and enlarged. 372 Pp. Cl., $1.50 (7s. 6d.).
                HOMILIES OF SCIENCE.
                  317 pages. Cloth, Gilt Top, $1.50 (7s. 6d.).
                THE IDEA OF GOD.
                  Fourth edition. 32 pages. Paper, 15c (9d.).
              THE SOUL OF MAN.
                    2nd ed. 182 cuts. 482 pages. Cloth, $1.50 (6s.).
                    TRUTH IN FICTION. Twelve Tales With a Moral.
                    White and gold binding, gilt edges. Pp. 111. $1.00 (5s.).
                THE RELIGION OF SCIENCE.
                    Second, extra edition. Pp. 103. Price, 50c (2s. 6d.).
                PRIMER OF PHILOSOPHY.
                      240 pages. Second Edition. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.).
                      THE GOSPEL OF BUDDHA. According to Old Records.
                      Fifth Edition. Pp. 275. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). In German, $1.25 (6s. 6d.)
                    BUDDHISM AND ITS CHRISTIAN CRITICS.
                    Pages, 311. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.).
                  KARMA. A Story of Early Buddhism.
                      Illustrated by Japanese artists. Crˆepe paper, 75c (3s. 6d.).
                  NIRVANA: A Story of Buddhist Psychology.
                      Japanese edition, like Karma, $1.00 (4s. 6d.).
                LAO-TZE’S TAO-TEH-KING.
                      Chinese-English. Pp. 360. Cloth, $3.00 (15s.).

              CORNILL, CARL HEINRICH.
                THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL.
                  Pp., 200. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.).
                HISTORY OF THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL.
                  Pp. vi + 325. Cloth, $1.50 (7s. 6d.).

            POWELL, J. W.
                  TRUTH AND ERROR; or, the Science of Intellection.
                  Pp. 423. Cloth, $1.75 (7s. 6d.).

            RIBOT, TH.
                  THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ATTENTION.                THE DISEASES OF PERSONALITY.
                THE DISEASES OF THE WILL.
                    Cloth, 75 cents each (3s. 6d.). Full set, cloth, $1.75 (9s.).
                EVOLUTION OF GENERAL IDEAS.
                  Pp. 231. Cloth, $1.25 (5s.).

              WAGNER, RICHARD.
                  A PILGRIMAGE TO BEETHOVEN.
                      A Story. With portrait of Beethoven. Pp. 40. Boards, 50c (2s. 6d.).

            HUTCHINSON, WOODS.
                  THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO DARWIN.
                    Pp. xii + 241. Price, $1.50 (6s.).

            FREYTAG, GUSTAV.
                  THE LOST MANUSCRIPT. A Novel.
                    2 vols. 953 pages. Extra cloth, $4.00 (21s). One vol., cl., $1.00 (5s.)
              MARTIN LUTHER.
                  Illustrated. Pp. 130. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.).

            AC¸ VAGHOSHA.
                  DISCOURSE ON THE AWAKENING OF FAITH in the Mahˆayˆana.
                          Translated for the rst time from the Chinese version by Tietaro Suzuki. Pages, 176.
                  Price, cloth, $1.25 (5s. 6d.).

            TRUMBULL, M. M.
                  THE FREE TRADE STRUGGLE IN ENGLAND.
                      Second Edition. 296 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.).
                      WHEELBARROW: Articles and Discussions on the Labor Question,
                      With portrait of the author. 303 pages. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.).
                  GOETHE AND SCHILLER’S XENIONS.
                    Translated by Paul Carus. Album form. Pp. 162. Cl., $1.00 (5s.).

            OLDENBERG, H.
                      ANCIENT INDIA: ITS LANGUAGE AND RELIGIONS.
                  Pp. l00. Cloth, 50c (2s. 6d.).

                CONWAY, DR. MONCURE DANIEL.
                  SOLOMON, AND SOLOMONIC LITERATURE.
                  Pp. 243. Cloth, $1.50 (6s.).

            GARBE, RICHARD.
                        THE REDEMPTION OF THE BRAHMAN. A Tale of Hindu Life.
                    Laid paper. Gilt top. 96 pages. Price, 75c (3s. 6d.).
                THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANCIENT INDIA.
                  Pp. 89. Cloth, 50c (2s. 6d.).

              HUEPPE, FERDINAND.
                  THE PRINCIPLES OF BACTERIOLOGY.
                    28 Woodcuts. Pp. x + 467. Price, $1.75 (9s.).

            L´EVY-BRUHL, PROF. L.
                    HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY IN FRANCE.
                        23 Portraits. Handsomely bound. Pp. 500. Price, $3.00 (12s.).            TOPINARD, DR. PAUL.
                    SCIENCE AND FAITH, or Man as an Animal and Man as a Member of
                    Society.
                  Pp. 374. Cloth, $1.50 (6s. 6d.).

            BINET, ALFRED.
                  THE PSYCHOLOGY OF REASONING.
                  Pp. 193. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.).
                  THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF MICRO-ORGANISMS.
                  Pp. 135. Cloth, 75 cents.
                ON DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS.
                  See No. 8, Religion of Science Library.

            THE OPEN COURT.
                      A Monthly Magazine Devoted to the Science of Religion, the Religion of Science,
                and the Extension of the Religious Parliament Idea.
                          Terms: $1.00 a year; 5s. 6d. to foreign countries in the Postal Union. Single Copies, 10
                cents (6d.).

            THE MONIST.
                    A Quarterly Magazine of Philosophy and Science.
                        Per copy, 50 cents; Yearly, $2.00. In England and all countries in U.P.U. per copy,
                  2s. 6d.: Yearly, 9s. 6d.


                                        CHICAGO:

                        THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO.,
                                Monon Building, 324 Dearborn St.
                            LONDON: Kegan Paul, Trench, Tr¨ubner & Company, Ltd.                            The Religion of Science Library.


                      A collection of bi-monthly publications, most of which are reprints of books pub-
                lished by The Open Court Publishing Company. Yearly, $1.50. Separate copies ac-
                      cording to prices quoted. The books are printed upon good paper, from large type.
                      The Religion of Science Library, by its extraordinarily reasonable price will place
                  a large number of valuable books within the reach of all readers.
                    The following have already appeared in the series:

                  No. 1. The Religion of Science. By Paul Carus. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                        2. Three Introductory Lectures on the Science of Thought, By F. Max M¨uller. 25c
                (1s. 6d.).

                    3. Three Lectures on the Science of Language. F. Max M¨uller. 25c (1s. 6d.)

                4. The Diseases of Personality, By Th. Ribot. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                5. The Psychology of Attention. By Th. Ribot. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                  6. The Psychic Life of Micro-Organisms, By Alfred Binet. 25c (1s. 6d.)

                  7. The Nature of the State. By Paul Carus. 15c (9d.).

                8. On Double Consciousness. By Alfred Binet. 15c (9d.).

                9. Fundamental Problems. By Paul Carus. 50c (2s. 6d.).

                    10. The Diseases of the Will, By Th. Ribot. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                11. The Origin of Language, By Ludwig Noire. 15c (9d.).

                  12. The Free Trade Struggle in England. M. M. Trumbull. 25c (1s. 6d.)

                  13. Wheelbarrow on the Labor Question, By M. M. Trumbull. 35c (2s.).

                  14. The Gospel of Buddha. By Paul Carus. 35c (2s.).

                  15. The Primer of Philosophy. By Paul Carus. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                16. On Memory, and The Specic Energies of the Nervous System. By Prof. Ewald
                  Hering. 15c (9d.).

                      17. The Redemption of the Brahman. Tale of Hindu Life. By Richard Garbe. 25c
                (1s. 6d.).

                18. An Examination of Weismannism. By G. J. Romanes. 35c (2s.).

                    19. On Germinal Selection. By August Weismann. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                    20. Lovers Three Thousand Years Ago, By T. A. Goodwin. (Out of print.)

                  21. Popular Scientic Lectures. By Ernst Mach, 50c (2s. 6d.).

                      22. Ancient India: Its Language and Religions. By H. Oldenberg. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                    23. The Prophets of Israel. By Prof. C. H. Cornill. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                24. Homilies of Science, By Paul Carus. 35c (2s.).

                25. Thoughts on Religion. By G. J. Romanes. 50c (2s. 6d.).

                    26. The Philosophy of Ancient India. By Prof. Richard Garbe. 25c (1s. 6d.)

                  27. Martin Luther. By Gustav Freytag. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                28. English Secularism. By George Jacob Holyoake. 25c (1s. 6d.).                29. On Orthogenesis. By Th. Eimer. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                  30. Chinese Philosophy. By Paul Carus. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                31. The Lost Manuscript. By Gustav Freytag. 60c (3s.).

                  32. A Mechanico-Physiological Theory of Organic Evolution. By Carl von Naegeli.
                15c (9d.).

                  33. Chinese Fiction. By Dr. George T. Candlin. 15c (9d.).

                  34. Mathematical Essays and Recreations. By H. Schubert. 25c (1s. 6d.)

                  35. The Ethical Problem. By Paul Carus. 50c (2s. 6d.).

                  36. Buddhism, and Its Christian Critics. By Paul Carus. 50c (2s. 6d.).

                    37. Psychology for Beginners. By Hiram M. Stanley. 20c (1s.).

                  38. Discourse on Method. By Descartes. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                  39. The Dawn of a New Era. By Paul Carus. 15c (9d.).

              40. Kant and Spencer. By Paul Carus. 20c (1s.).

                41. The Soul of Man. By Paul Carus. 75c (3s. 6d.).

                  42. World’s Congress Addresses. By C. C. Bonney. 15c (9d.).

                    43. The Gospel According to Darwin. By Woods Hutchinson. 50c (2s. 6d.)

              44. Whence and Whither. By Paul Carus. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                      45. Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. By David Hume. 25c (1s. 6d.).

                      46. Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals. By David Hume. 25c (1s. 6d.)



                          THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO.,
                                  CHICAGO: 324 Dearborn Street.
                            LONDON: Kegan Paul, Trench, Tr¨ubner & Company, Ltd.                    Typographical Errors corrected in Project Gutenberg edition

                      p. 28 “A03B, B03B, C03C” in original, amended to “A03A” etc.
                p. 42 “the transformation  , is therefore completely dened” in original,
            amended to “ 1”.                    End of Project Gutenberg’s Essays on the Theory of Numbers,
            by Richard Dedekind

                *** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THEORY OF NUMBERS ***

                *** This file should be named 21016-t.tex or 21016-t.zip ***
                  *** or 21016-pdf.pdf or 21016-pdf.pdf ***
                  This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
                        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/0/1/21016/


                  Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Keith Edkins and the Online
                  Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


                  Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
            will be renamed.

                  Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
                  one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
                  (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
                    permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
                  set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
                    copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
                  protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project
                Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
                  charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If
                  you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with
                    the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any
                    purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances
                  and research. They may be modified and printed and given away--you
                  may do practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.
                  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially
              commercial redistribution.



              *** START: FULL LICENSE ***

                THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU
              DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

                  To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
                    distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
                  (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
                Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
                    Project Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
              http://gutenberg.net/license).                    Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
              Gutenberg-tm electronic works

                1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
                    electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree
                    to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual
                  property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to
                  abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and
                  return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
                  works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of
                  or access to a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not
                agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a
                refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
              forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

                  1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
                  used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people
                who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a
                    few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
                  works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
                See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with
                  Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of
                this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project
                    Gutenberg-tm electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

                1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
                    Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the
                    collection of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the
                  individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the
                  United States. If an individual work is in the public domain in the
                United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
                    claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
                  displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
                  all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
                    that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
                    free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
                  Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of this agreement
                    for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work.
                  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping
                    this work in the same format with its attached full Project
                  Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

                1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also
                    govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most
                  countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the
                United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the
                  terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying,
                    performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this
                  work or any other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes                  no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in
              any country outside the United States.

                  1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

                1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
                  immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must
                    appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work
                  (any work on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with
                  which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed,
                  displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

                This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
                  almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
                  re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
                with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

                  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
                    derived from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating
                  that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work
                  can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without
                  paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing
                    access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with
                  or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the
                    requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission
                  for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as
              set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

                  1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
                  posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and
                  distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
                    and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder.
                    Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License
                  for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder
              found at the beginning of this work.

                  1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project
                    Gutenberg-tm License terms from this work, or any files containing a
                    part of this work or any other work associated with Project
            Gutenberg-tm.

                  1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute
                  this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
                  prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1
                with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the
              Project Gutenberg-tm License.

                  1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
                      compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
                any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide                  access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a
                  format other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the
                  official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web
                  site (www.gutenberg.net), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
                  expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or
                  a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its
                  original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format
                  must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in
            paragraph 1.E.1.

                1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
                    performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
                  unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

                  1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
                  access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
            provided that

                - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
                        the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
                      you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is
                      owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
                    has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
                  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments
                    must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
                      prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
                      returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
                        sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
                        address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
                      the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

                  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
                      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
                    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
                  License. You must require such a user to return or
                      destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
                    and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
                  Project Gutenberg-tm works.

                  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
                    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in
                      the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90
                days of receipt of the work.

                    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
                    distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

                  1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
                  Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms
                  than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in                    writing from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
                  and Michael Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.
                Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

          1.F.

                    1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend
                considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on,
                    transcribe and proofread public domain works in creating the Project
                    Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project
                  Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the medium on which they may be
                    stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to,
                  incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a
                    copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective
                  or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes
                that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

                  1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the
                  "Right of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the
                  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the
                    Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a
                    Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim
                  all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
                legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE,
                  STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT
                  THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
                  TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT
                BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
                PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
              POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

                  1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
                  defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you
                  can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by
                  sending a written explanation to the person you received the work
                    from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must
                return the medium with your written explanation. The person or
                entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to
                  provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
                  work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may
                    choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work
                electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also
                defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
              opportunities to fix the problem.

                  1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set
                  forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS’, WITH
                  NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
                  NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY
          PURPOSE.                1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
                warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
                    damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
                violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
                  agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
                    limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
                  unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void
              the remaining provisions.

                  1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation,
                    the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
                providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
                    accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with
                    the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
                    electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
                  including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
                  the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
                    this or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification,
                  or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c)
              any Defect you cause.


                  Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

                  Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
                electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
                    computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.
                It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and
                  donations from people in all walks of life.

                  Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
                    assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
                  goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
                remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the
                    Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide
                  a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
                  generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
                  Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
              Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
              http://www.pglaf.org.


                    Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
            Foundation

                  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
                  501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
                  state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
                    Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification                  number is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
                  http://pglaf.org/fundraising. Contributions to the Project
                    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
                extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

                  The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
                Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are
                  scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business office is
                located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801)
                  596-1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to
                  date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s web site
              and official page at http://pglaf.org

              For additional contact information:
                Dr. Gregory B. Newby
                  Chief Executive and Director
                gbnewby@pglaf.org

                  Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
              Literary Archive Foundation

                  Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
                spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
                  increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can
                  be freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the
                    widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small
                    donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining
              tax exempt status with the IRS.

                  The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
                  charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
                States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
                  considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep
                    up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in
                locations where we have not received written confirmation of
                    compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance
                  for any particular state visit http://pglaf.org

                  While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where
                    we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no
                    prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in
                  such states who approach us with offers to donate.

                    International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
                    any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
                  outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

                  Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
                  methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
                  ways including including checks, online payments and credit card                  donations. To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


                Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm
            electronic works.

                    Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project
                  Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
                freely shared with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and
                    distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
            volunteer support.

                    Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
                  editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
                  unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily
                keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

                    Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
            facility:

                  http://www.gutenberg.net

                  This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
                  including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
                  Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
                    subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

              *** END: FULL LICENSE ***