                      Table of Contents


    Introduction

          Why Buy This Book?

          Why Electronics?

          Foolish Assumptions

          Safety Is Number 1

          How This Book Is Organised

                Part I: Understanding the Fundamentals of Electronics

                Part II: Getting Your Hands Dirty

                Part III: Putting Theory into Practice

                Part IV: The Part of Tens

          Icons Used in This Book

    Part I

    Chapter 1: What Is Electronics and What Can It Do for You?

          Just What Is Electronics?

            Understanding Electric Current

                Getting a charge out of electrons

                Moving electrons in conductors

          Harnessing Electricity to Do Work

          Where Electrical Energy Comes From

                Tapping into electrical energy

                Giving electrons a nudge

                Using conductors to make the circuit

          Oh, the Things Electrons Can Do!

                Creating good vibrations

                Seeing is believing

                Sensing and alarming

                  Controlling motion

                Solving problems (aka computing)

                  Communicating with each other

    Chapter 2: Manipulating Electricity to Make Something Happen

          Supplying Electrical Energy

                Getting direct current from a battery

                Using alternating current from the power station                  Transforming light into electricity

            Understanding Directions: Real Electron Flow versus Conventional

          Current Flow

            Examining a Simple Light Bulb Circuit

          Controlling Electrical Current with Basic Components

                Ways to control current

                Active versus passive components

          Making Connections: Series and Parallel

                Series connections

                Parallel connections

                  Combination circuits

          Creating Electronic Systems

                Making sound appear out of thin air

                Painting pictures with electrons

    Chapter 3: Meeting Up with Resistance

          Resisting the Flow of Current

          Resistors: Passive Yet Powerful

                  Discovering the usefulness of resistors

                Choosing a type: fixed or variable

                Decoding fixed resistors

                Dialling with potentiometers

                Rating resistors according to power

          Combining Resistors

                Using resistors in series

                Employing resistors in parallel

                Combining series and parallel resistors

          Obeying Ohm's Law

                Driving current through a resistance

                  Understanding a relationship that's constantly proportional!

                Working with one law, three equations

          Using Ohm's Law to Analyse Circuits

                  Calculating current through a component

                Working out voltage across a component

                  Determining an unknown resistance

          What is Ohm's Law Really Good For?

                Analysing complex circuits

                Designing and altering circuits          The Power of Joule's Law

                Using Joule's Law to choose components

                Going perfectly together: Joule and Ohm

          Trying Your Hand at Circuits with Resistors

    Chapter 4: Getting a Charge Out of Capacitors

          Reservoirs for Electrical Energy

                Charging and discharging

                Opposing voltage change

                Allowing alternating current

                Shining a light on capacitors

          Characterising Capacitors

                  Calculating the charge a capacitor can store

                Reading capacitor values

                Keeping an eye on the working voltage

                Selecting dielectrics

                Sizing up capacitor packaging

                  Connecting with polarity

                Varying capacitance

          Combining Capacitors

                Capacitors in parallel

                Capacitors in series

            Understanding Capacitive Reactance

                Using Ohm's Law for capacitive reactance

                  Understanding that behaviour depends on frequency

          So What Have Capacitors Ever Done for Us?

                Storing electrical energy

                Blocking DC current

                Smoothing out voltage

                Creating timers

                Tuning in (or out) frequencies

          Teaming Up with Resistors

                Timing is everything

                  Calculating RC time constants

                Creating a timer

          Selecting Frequencies with Simple RC Filters

                Looking at low-pass filters

                  Encountering high-pass filters                Cutting off frequencies at the knees

                Filtering frequency bands

          Trying Out Simple Capacitive Circuits

    Chapter 5: Curling Up with Coils and Crystals

          Working Both Ways: Magnetism and Electricity

                Drawing the (flux) lines with magnets

                Producing a magnetic field with electricity

                Inducing current with a magnet

          Introducing the Inductor: A Coil with a Magnetic Personality

                Measuring inductance

                Opposing current changes

                Alternating current gets nowhere fast

            Understanding Inductive Reactance

                Using Ohm's Law for inductive reactance

                  Discovering that behaviour depends on frequency (again!)

          Using Inductors in Circuits

                Insulating and shielding inductors

                Reading inductance values

                Combining shielded inductors

                Filtering signals with inductors

                  Calculating the RL time constant

          Now Introducing Impedance!

          Tuning in to Radio Broadcasts

                  Resonating with RLC circuits

                Ensuring crystal-clear resonance

          Calling on the Coil Next Door: Transformers

                Letting unshielded coils interact

                Isolating circuits from a power source

                Stepping up, stepping down voltages

    Chapter 6: The Wide World of Semiconductors

          Are We Conducting, or Aren't We?

                Doping semiconductors

                Combining n-types and p-types to create components

          Forming a Junction Diode

                Biasing the diode

                Conducting current through a diode

                Rating your diode                  Discovering what's in a name

                Orientating yourself: Which way is up?

          Using Diodes in Circuits

                Rectifying AC

                Regulating voltage with Zener diodes

                Seeing the light with LEDs

                Using diodes in other ways

          Trillions of Transistors

                Shrinking circuits

                Examining the anatomy of a transistor

                Operating a transistor

          How Transistors Really Work

                Emitting and collecting electrons

                Gaining current

                Saturating the transistor

          Using a Model to Understand Transistors

            Amplifying Signals with a Transistor

                Turning it on

                Turning it up

                Turning it to your needs

          Switching Signals with a Transistor

          Choosing Transistors

                Tackling transistor ratings

                Identifying transistors

                Recognising transistors

            Integrating Components

    Chapter 7: Cramming Components into Chips

            Discovering Integrated Circuits

          Linear, Digital or Both?

          Making Decisions with Logic

                Beginning with bits

                Processing data with gates

                Telling the truth

            Understanding How to Use ICs

                Identifying ICs with part numbers

                Packaging is everything

                  Understanding IC pinouts                Relying on IC datasheets

          Meeting Some Top Chips

                Sounding out operational amplifiers

                Playing with the IC time machine: the 555 timer

                Counting on the 4017 decade counter

          Expanding Your IC Horizons

    Chapter 8: Rounding Out Your Parts List

          Making Connections

                Choosing wires wisely

                Plugging in to connectors

          Powering Up

                Turning on the juice with batteries

                Getting power from the sun

                Working off your wall power (not recommended!)

          Switching Electricity On and Off

                  Controlling the action of a switch

                Making the right contacts

          Using Your Sensors

                Seeing the light

                Capturing sound with microphones

                Feeling the heat

                Trying other energising input transducers

          Sensing Something's Going On

                Speaking of speakers

                Sounding off with buzzers

                Creating good vibrations with DC motors

    Part II

    Chapter 9: Setting Up Shop and Staying Safe

          Picking a Place to Practise Electronics

                Creating a great lab

                Choosing a workbench

          Tooling Up

                Shopping for soldering stuff

                Measuring with a multimeter

                Getting hands-on with hand tools

                Collecting cloths and cleaners

                Oiling the wheels                Sticking with it

                Selecting other tools and supplies

          Picking up Parts

                Practising with solderless breadboards

                Building a circuit-building starter kit

                Adding up the extras

                Organising all your parts

          Protecting You and Your Electronics

                Accepting that electricity can really hurt

                Soldering safely

                Avoiding static like the plague

          Staying Safe: Safety Checklist

    Chapter 10: Sussing out Schematics

            Approaching Schematics

          Seeing the Big Picture

                Following connections

                Looking at a simple battery circuit

          Recognising Symbols of Power

                Showing where the power is

                Marking your ground

          Labelling Circuit Components

                Analogue electronic components

                Digital logic and IC components

                Odds and ends

          Exploring a Schematic

          Alternative Schematic Drawing Styles

    Chapter 11: Constructing Circuits

          Taking a Look at Solderless Breadboards

                Exploring a solderless breadboard, inside and out

                Sizing up the breadboards

          Building Circuits on Solderless Breadboards

                Preparing your parts and tools

                Saving time with pre-stripped wires

                Laying out your circuit

                Avoiding damaged circuits

          Soldering On

                Preparing to solder                Soldering for success

                Inspecting the joint

                  Desoldering when necessary

                Cooling down after soldering

                Ensuring safe soldering

            Committing to a Permanent Circuit

                Moving your circuit to a solder breadboard

                  Prototyping with strip boards

                Wrapping with wires

                Making a custom circuit board

    Chapter 12: Measuring and Analysing Circuits

          Multitasking with a Multimeter

                It's a voltmeter!

                Now, it's an ammeter!

                Ohm my! It's an ohmmeter, too!

          Meeting Your First Multimeter

                Unpacking your digital multimeter

                Homing in on the range

          Setting Up Your Multimeter

          Operating Your Multimeter

                Measuring voltage

                Measuring current

                Measuring resistance

                Running other multimeter tests

          Using a Multimeter to Check Your Circuits

          Introducing Logic Probes and Oscilloscopes

                Probing the depths of logic

                Scoping out signals with an oscilloscope

    Part III

    Chapter 13: Exploring Some Simple Circuits

          Getting Equipped

          Seeing Is Believing: Ohm's Law Really Works!

                Analysing a series circuit

                Dividing up voltage

                Parallel parking resistors

          Charging and Discharging a Capacitor

                Watching your charges go up and down                Varying the RC time constant

          Dropping Voltages across Diodes

                Turning on an LED

                Clipping voltages

          Gaining Experience with Transistors

                Amplifying current

                Measuring tiny currents

                Creating light at your fingertip

          Using Your Logic

                Seeing the light with a logic gate

                Turning three NAND gates into an OR gate

    Chapter 14: Great Projects You Can Build in 30 Minutes or Less

          What to Get and Where to Get It

          Building Brilliant, Blinking, Bright Lights

                Following the 555 fast flasher

                Gathering parts for the LED flasher

          Putting the Squeeze on with Piezoelectricity

                  Experimenting with piezoelectricity

                Getting the parts for the piezoelectric circuit

          Assembling the Amazing See-in-the-Dark Infrared Detector

                Searching for infrared light

                Tracking down parts for the infrared detector

          Keeping People Away with a Siren!

                Making your siren sound

                Sorting the siren parts list

          Lighting the Way with an Electronic Compass

                Checking under the compass bonnet

                Locating your electronic compass parts

          Alarming Way to Sense the Light

                Making your alarm work for you

                Assembling a light alarm parts list

          'Lil but Loud Amp

          Making Music with a Melody Maker

          Building the Pocket Water Tester

                  Understanding how the water tester works

                Gathering water tester parts

          Generating Cool Lighting Effects                Arranging the LEDs

                Chasing down the parts

          Making an Electronic Die

    Part IV

    Chapter 15: Ten Exciting Electronics Extras

          Trying Out Ready-Made Electronics Kits

          Varying Your Voltage

          Counting Up Those Megahertz

          Generating All Kinds of Signals

          Sweeping Frequencies Up and Down

          Taking the Pulse

          Analysing Your Logic

            Simulating with Software

          Buying Testing Tool Deals

          Boxing Your Tricks - With Knobs On

    Chapter 16: Ten Great Sources for Electronics Parts

          Buying British: Suppliers within the UK

                Maplin

                RS Components

                Farnell

                RSH Electronics

                Bitsbox

                ESR Electronic Components

          Ordering from across the Pond

                Digikey

                All Electronics

                B.G. Micro

                Mouser Electronics

    Appendix: Internet Resources

          Finding Guides and Advice

          Working Things Out with Calculators

          Surfing for Circuits

          Asking Questions in Discussion Forums

          Getting Things Surplus                                                              ®
                          Electronics For Dummies

    by Dickon Ross, Cathleen Shamieh, and Gordon McComb




                                ®
          Electronics For Dummies
          Published by
    John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
    The Atrium
    Southern Gate
    Chichester
    West Sussex
    PO19 8SQ
    England
        E-mail (for orders and customer service enquires): cs-books@wiley.co.uk
        Visit our Home Page on www.wiley.com
        Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, West Sussex, England
          Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, West Sussex
        All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
    system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
    recording, scanning or otherwise, except under the terms of the Copyright, Designs and Patents
    Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron
    House, 6-10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS, UK, without the permission in writing of the
    Publisher. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
    Department, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex,
    PO19 8SQ, England, or emailed to permreq@wiley.co.uk, or faxed to (44) 1243 770620.
          Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, For Dummies, the Dummies Man logo, A
    Reference for the Rest of Us!, The Dummies Way, Dummies Daily, The Fun and Easy Way,
      Dummies.com and related trade dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley &
    Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries, and may not be used
    without written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
    Wiley Publishing, Inc., is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
        Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher, the author, AND ANYONE
    ELSE INVOLVED IN PREPARING THIS WORK make no representations or warranties with
    respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all
      warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No
    warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and
    strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the
      understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other
    professional services. If professional assistance is required, the services of a competent
    professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for
    damages arising herefrom. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as
    a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the
    publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or
      recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in
    this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is
    read.
        For general information on our other products and services, please contact our Customer    Care Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-
    572-4002.
        For technical support, please visit www.wiley.com/techsupport.
        Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
    in print may not be available in electronic books.
        British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data: A catalogue record for this book is
    available from the British Library
        ISBN: 978-0-470-68178-7
          Printed and bound in Great Britain by TJ International, Padstow, Cornwall
        10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1



About the Authors

        Dickon Ross, adapting author of the UK edition, has been a science and technology
    journalist for 20 years, working on titles ranging from Electronics Times to Focus. Dickon is
    now Editor-in-Chief of Engineering & Technology magazine and Flipside - the magazine he
    launched for teenagers - for the Institution of Engineering and Technology.
          Cathleen Shamieh is a writer with an engineering background who specialises in creating
      communication materials focused on technology and its business benefits. She received an
    outstanding education in electrical engineering at Manhattan College and MIT, and enjoyed
    working as an engineer for several years in the medical electronics and telecommunications
    industries. Accepting a challenge from a respected colleague, she shifted her career into business
    consulting with a focus on technology implementation, eventually migrating into marketing and
      communications consulting for high-tech companies. Cathleen enjoys leveraging her technical
    and business background to create white papers and other materials for not-so-technical
    audiences.
          Gordon McComb has penned 60 books and over a thousand magazine articles. More than
    a million copies of his books are in print, in over a dozen languages. For 13 years, Gordon wrote
    a weekly syndicated newspaper column on personal computers. When not writing about hobby
    electronics and other fun topics, he serves as a consultant on digital cinema to several notable
    Hollywood clients.


Dedication

        To my parents, Beth and Jim Corbett, who taught me that I can do anything I put my mind
    to; to Sister Eustelle, who made a writer out of me; to my wonderful husband, Bill, who's always
    there to support me; and to my four fantastic sons, Kevin, Peter, Brendan, and Patrick, who make
    life a fun, loving adventure every single day.
                                                                                        C.S.

 
        To my father, Wally McComb, who instilled in me a fascination with electronics; and to
    Forrest Mims, who taught me a thing or two about it.
                                                                                      G.M.

 


Authors' Acknowledgments

        Dickon Ross would like to thank his son Edmund for his help in building and testing the
    circuits in this book.          Cathleen Shamieh extends her thanks to the excellent editors at Wiley, especially Katie
    Feltman and Christopher Morris, for their hard work, support, and gentle reminders, and to Kirk
    Kleinschmidt for his intense technical scrutiny of the material. She is also grateful to Linda
    Hammer and Ken Donoghue, who kindly recommended her work to Wiley. Finally, Cathleen
    thanks her family and friends, whose support, assistance, and understanding helped make her
    goal of becoming a Dummies author a reality.
          Gordon McComb gives heartfelt thanks to Wiley and the hard-working editors at Wiley,
    especially Katie Feldman, Nancy Stevenson, Carol Sheehan, Laura Miller and Amanda
    Foxworth. Many thanks also to Ward Silver, for his excellent and thorough technical review, and
    Matt Wagner at Waterside Productions for always having a positive outlook. Gordon also wishes
    to thank his family, who once again put their lives on hold while he finished another book.


Publisher's Acknowledgments

        We're proud of this book; please send us your comments through our Dummies online
    registration form located at www.dummies.com/register/.
        Some of the people who helped bring this book to market include the following:
          Commissioning, Editorial, and Media Development
          Project Editor: Steve Edwards
          Content Editor: Jo Theedom
          Commissioning Editor: Nicole Hermitage
          Assistant Editor: Jennifer Prytherch
          Development Editor: Andy Finch
        Copy Editor: Anne O'Rorke
        Technical Editor: Roger Dettmer
          Proofreader: Kelly Cattermole
          Production Manager: Daniel Mersey
        Cover Photos: © Tombaky/Fotolia
          Cartoons: Ed McLachlan
          Composition Services
          Project Coordinator: Lynsey Stanford
        Layout and Graphics: Carrie A. Cesavice, Joyce Haughey, Melissa K. Jester, Mark Pinto,
    Christine Williams
          Proofreaders: Melissa Cossell, Rebecca Denoncour
        Indexer: Ty Koontz
        Brand Reviewer: Rev Mengle                              Introduction

  Are you curious to know what makes your iPod tick? How about your mobile phone, laptop,
stereo system, digital camera, plasma TV - or, well, just about every piece of electronics you use for
work or play, in the office, at home or on the move?
  Perhaps you've even thought that you could design and build your own little electronic circuit or
gadget to do something you want it to do?
  If you've ever wondered how transistors, capacitors and other building blocks of electronics work,
or if you've been tempted to try building your own electronic devices, you've come to the right place!
    Electronics For Dummies is your entry into the electrifying world of modern electronics. No dry,
boring or incomprehensible tome, this; what you hold in your hands is the book that enables you to
understand, create and troubleshoot your own electronic devices. We're getting excited already!


Why Buy This Book?

  All too often, electronics seems like a mystery, because it involves controlling something you can't
see - electric current - which you've been warned repeatedly not to touch. That's enough to scare most
people away. But as you continue to experience the benefits of electronics on a daily basis, you may
begin to wonder how so many incredible things can happen in such tight spaces.
  This book is designed to explain electronics in ways you can relate to. It gives you a basic
understanding of exactly what electronics is, provides down-to-earth explanations of how major
electronic components work and gives you just what you need to build and test working electronic
circuits and projects. Although this book doesn't pretend to answer all your questions about electronics,
it does give you a good grounding in the essentials.
  We hope that when you're done with this book, you'll realise that electronics isn't as complicated
as you may have thought. And we want to arm you with the knowledge and confidence you need to go
deeper into the exciting world of electronics.


Why Electronics?

    Electronics is everywhere. You find electronics in your phones, audio and video systems, and
kitchen appliances. Electronic systems control traffic lights, Internet commerce, medical devices - even
many toys. You can't see most of them, but electronic systems also proliferate throughout your car. Try
for just one minute to imagine your life without electronics; you may as well be living in the Dark
Ages!
  So what does all this mean to you as you peruse this book? After all, you don't expect to be able to
design satellite communication systems after a sit-down session with this humble For Dummies book.
    Remember though that even the most complicated electronics systems consist of no more than a
handful of different electronic component types governed by the same set of rules that make simple
circuits work. So if you want to understand complex electronic systems, you start with the basics - just
like the designers of those systems did when they started out.
  More importantly, understanding the basics of electronics can enable you to create some really
useful, albeit somewhat simple, electronic devices. You can build circuits that flash lights at just the
right time, sound a buzzer upon sensing an intruder or even move an object around the room. And when
you know how to use integrated circuit (IC) chips, which are populated with easy-to-use fully
functioning circuits, you can create some rather clever designs for just a few well-spent pounds.
    Technology development being what it is - lightning fast, smaller and cheaper year after year - you
can now hold the ingredients for very advanced electronic systems in the palm of your hand. With a
little knowledge and a willingness to experiment, you can build a unique musical birthday card,
fantastic flashing decorations or an alarm that senses someone trying to get into your bedroom orbiscuit tin.
  Also, you may have another hobby that can be enriched by electronics. If you're into model
railways, you can build your own automated switching points. If your hobby is racing radio-controlled
cars, electronics know-how may enable you to improve the performance of your car and win the next
championship. Knowing more about electronics can really enhance your hobbies.
  Last but not least, electronics is fun. Finding out about and messing with electronics is its own
reward.


Foolish Assumptions

  This book assumes that you're curious about electronics, but you really don't know much, if
anything, about its inner workings. You chose this book, rather than a book consisting exclusively of
recipes for electronic circuits, and therefore we assume that you want to discover more about how parts
such as resistors, capacitors and transistors actually work.
  So we take the time (and more than half the book) to explain the basics to you, distilling fairly
technical information down into easy-to-understand concepts. You don't need to be well-versed in
physics or mathematics to benefit from reading this book, although a little bit of school algebra is
helpful (but we do our best to refresh that possibly painful memory).
  We assume you may want to jump around this book a bit, diving deep into a topic or two that
holds special interest for you, and possibly skimming through other topics. For this reason, we provide
loads of chapter cross-references to point you to information that can fill in any gaps or refresh your
memory on a topic. And although the first half of the book is devoted to how electronic circuits and
individual parts work, we include cross-references to simple circuits and projects that appear later in the
book. That way, as soon as you find out about a component, you can jump ahead, if you like, and build
a circuit that uses that very component.
  The table of contents at the front of the book provides an excellent resource that you can use to
find quickly exactly what you're looking for. Finally, the good people at Wiley have thoughtfully
provided a thorough index at the back of the book to help you find what you want fast.


Safety Is Number 1

  Reading about electronics is pretty safe. About the worst that can happen is that your eyes get tired
from too many late nights with this book. But actually building electronic projects is another matter.
Lurking behind the fun of your electronics hobby are high voltages that can electrocute you, soldering
irons that can burn you and little bits of wire that can fly into your eyes when you snip them off with
sharp cutters. Aaaagh!
  Safety comes first in electronics. It's so important, in fact, that we devote a major section of
Chapter 9 to it - and continually refer you to this section. If you're brand new to electronics, please be
sure to read this section thoroughly. Don't skip over it, even if you think you're the safest person on
earth. Even if you've dabbled in electronics before, we still say you should read this bit as you may be
surprised by some of the information. When you follow proper precautions, electronics is a very safe
and sane hobby. Be sure to keep it that way!


          Although we try to give you great advice about safety throughout, we can't possibly give
you every safety precaution in the world in one book. In addition to reading our advice, use your own
common sense, read manufacturer's instructions for parts and tools that you work with and always stay
alert.


How This Book Is Organised    Electronics For Dummies is organised so that you can quickly find, read and understand the
information that you want. Also, if you have some experience with electronics, or want to deepen your
knowledge of one particular topic, you can skip around and focus on the chapters that interest you.
  The chapters in this book are divided into parts to help you zero in on the information that you're
looking for quickly and easily.


Part I: Understanding the Fundamentals of Electronics
  Turn to Part I if you want to get a thorough grounding in basic electronics theory. Chapter 1 gives
you the big picture of exactly what electronics is and the amazing things it can do for you. You
discover the fundamentals of electronic circuits and get introduced to voltage, current and sources of
electrical energy in Chapter 2.
  In Chapters 3-6, you dive deep into the heart of all the major electronic components, including
resistors, capacitors, inductors, transformers, diodes and transistors. You find out how each component
works, how it handles electric current and what role it plays in electronic circuits.
  Chapter 7 introduces you to integrated circuits (ICs) and explains a bit about digital logic and how
three popular ICs function. Chapter 8 covers sensors, speakers, buzzers, switches, wires and
connectors.
    Throughout Part I, we point you to introductory circuits you can build in Part III to see what each
component does.


Part II: Getting Your Hands Dirty
  Part II is all about tooling-up, constructing real circuits and probing around working (and non-
working) circuits - without electrocuting yourself.
  In Chapter 9, you find out how to set up an electronics workbench, what electronic components,
tools and other supplies you need to build circuits, and how to protect yourself and your electronic
components as you work on circuits. Chapter 10 explains how to interpret circuit diagrams (known as
schematics) so that you know how to connect components together when you build a circuit.
  You discover various methods of wiring up temporary and permanent circuits in Chapter 11,
including how to solder. Finally, Chapter 12 explains how to use the most important testing tool in
electronics - the multimeter - to explore and analyse your circuits. This chapter also introduces you very
briefly to two other tools: the logic probe and oscilloscope.


Part III: Putting Theory into Practice
  If you're anxious to wire up some circuits and get your electronic juices flowing, Part III is the
place to be.
  Chapter 13 shows you some elementary circuits that you can build to demonstrate the principles of
electronics and observe specific electronic components functioning as advertised. Turn to this chapter if
you want to reinforce your theoretical knowledge of electronics or gain experience building simple
circuits.
  When you're ready for more involved circuits, explore Chapter 14. Here, you find several projects
that you can have fun building and exploring. You may even decide to put one or two of them to good
use in your home or office.


Part IV: The Part of Tens
  As you may expect, Part IV is where you can find further information laid out in top-ten list
format.
  Chapter 15 offers pointers to help you expand your electronics horizons. Here, you can find
information on all-inclusive project kits and circuit simulation software, suggestions for additionaltesting tools and tips on how to get great deals on electronics supplies.
  When you're ready to shop for all things electronic, turn to Chapter 16 for a list of the top
electronics suppliers in the UK and abroad.


Icons Used in This Book

  We can't place dozens of Post-it notes in each and every copy of Electronics For Dummies, so we
use icons to draw your attention to critical information.


          Tips alert you to information that can really save you time, headaches or money (or all
three!). If you use our tips, your electronics experience is that much more enjoyable.


          When you tinker with electronics, you're bound to encounter situations that call for
extreme caution. Enter the Warning icon: a not-so-gentle reminder to take extra precautions to avoid
personal injury or prevent damage to your tools, components, circuits - or your bank balance.


          This icon reminds you of important ideas or facts that you really need to keep in mind.
Occasionally, we use this icon to note where in the book an important concept is originally introduced,
so that you can flick back to more detailed information for a refresher, if you need one.


          Even though this entire book is about technical stuff, we flag up some mini topics to alert
you to deeper techie info that may require a little more brain power to digest. Of course, if you choose
to skip over this info, that's absolutely fine; you can still follow along with no problem. Think of this
techie stuff as extra material - a diversion off the main path, if you will - like bonus questions in a quiz.                                      Part I

Understanding the Fundamentals of Electronics




















    In this part . . .

  Do you ever wonder what makes electronic devices tick? Are you ever

curious to know how speakers speak, motors move and computers compute?

Well, then, you've come to the right place!

  In the chapters ahead, we explain exactly what electronics is, what it can

(and does) do for you and how all sorts of electronic things work. But don't

worry.  We  don't  bore  you  with  long  essays  involving  physics  and

mathematics.  We  use  analogies  and  down-to-earth  examples  to  make

understanding  electronics  easy  -  fun,  even.  And  while  you're  enjoying

yourself, you're discovering how electronic components work and combine

forces to make amazing things happen.  Chapter 1: What Is Electronics and


              What Can It Do for You?



  In This Chapter
Seeing electric current for what it really is
  Recognising the power of electrons
Using conductors to go with the flow (of electrons)
Making the right connections with a circuit
Controlling the destiny of electrons with electronic components
Applying electrical energy to loads of things
  If you're like most people, you probably have some idea about what electronics is. You've been up
close and personal with lots of so-called consumer electronics devices, such as iPods, stereo equipment,
personal computers, digital cameras and televisions, but to you, they may seem like mysteriously
magical boxes with buttons that respond to your every desire.
  You know that underneath each sleek exterior nestles an amazing assortment of tiny components
connected together in just the right way to make something happen. And now you want to understand
how.
  In this chapter, you discover that electrons moving in harmony constitute electric current, which is
shaped by electronics. You take a look at what you need to keep the juice flowing, and you also get an
overview of some of the things you can do with electronics.


Just What Is Electronics?

  When you turn on a light in your home, you're connecting a source of electrical energy (usually
supplied by your power company) to a light bulb in a complete path, known as an electrical circuit. If
you add a dimmer or a timer to the light bulb circuit, you can control the operation of the light bulb in a
more interesting way than simply switching it on and off.
  Electrical systems, like the circuits in your house, use a standard electric current to make things
such as light bulbs work. Electronic systems take this a step further: they control the electrical current,
changing its fluctuations, direction and timing in various ways in order to accomplish a variety of
functions, from dimming a light bulb to communicating with satellites (take a look at Figure 1-1). This
control is what distinguishes electronic systems from electrical systems.

Figure 1-1: The dimmer electronics in this circuit control the flow of electric current to the light bulb.






  To understand how electronics controls electricity, you need to first understand what electricity is
and how it powers things like light bulbs.


Understanding Electric Current

  Electric current is the flow of electrical charges carried by unbelievably small particles calledelectrons. So what on earth are electrical charges, where exactly do you find electrons and how do they
move around? You find the answers by taking a peek inside the atom.


Getting a charge out of electrons
  Atoms are the natural building blocks of everything. They're so tiny that you can find millions of
them in a single speck of dust - so you can imagine how many exist in your average sumo wrestler!
Electrons are found in every single atom in the universe, outside the atom's centre, or nucleus. All
electrons have a negative electrical charge and are attracted to positively charged particles, known as
protons, which exist inside the nucleus. Electrical charge is a kind of force within a particle, and the
words ‘positive' and ‘negative' are somewhat arbitrary terms used to describe the two different forces
that exhibit opposite effects. (We can call them ‘north' and ‘south' or ‘Tom' and ‘Jerry' instead, but
those names are already taken.)
  Under normal circumstances, an equal number of protons and electrons reside in each atom, and
the atom is said to be electrically neutral. The attractive force between the protons and electrons,
known as an electromagnetic force, acts like invisible glue, holding the atomic particles together, much
as the gravitational force of the earth keeps the moon within sight. The electrons closest to the nucleus
are held to the atom with a stronger force than the electrons farther from the nucleus, and some atoms
hold on to their outer electrons with a vengeance whereas others are a bit more lax.


Moving electrons in conductors
    Materials such as air and plastic, in which the electrons are all tightly bound to atoms, are
insulators - they don't like to let their electrons move and so they don't easily carry an electric current.
However, other materials, like the metal copper, are conductors because they have ‘free' electrons
wandering between the atoms, normally moving around at random. When you give these free electrons
a push, they all tend to move in one direction and, hey presto, you have an electric current. This flow
appears to be instantaneous because all those free electrons, including those at the ends, move at the
same time.


 A coulomb is defined as the charge carried by 6.24 x 1018 (that's 624 followed by 16
zeros) electrons. If a coulomb of charge moves past a point within a second, we say that the strength of
the electric current is one ampere, or one amp (abbreviated to 1 A). That's a whole lot of electrons
moving simultaneously, and much more than is typically found in electronic systems. You're more
likely to see current measured in milliamps (mA). A milliamp is one one-thousandth of an amp.


                                Experiencing electricity

    You can personally experience the flow of electrons  by shuffling your feet across a carpet on a
    dry day and touching a doorknob; that zap you feel (and the spark you may see) is the result of
    electrical charges jumping from your fingertip to the doorknob, a form of electricity known as
    static electricity.

 
    If you can get enough charges to move around and you can harness the energy they release, you
    can use that energy to power light bulbs and other things.

 
    Lightning  is  another  example  of  static  electricity  (but  not  one  you  want  to  experience
    personally), with electrical charges travelling from one cloud to another or from a cloud to the
    ground.  When  electrical  charges  move  around,  they  release  energy  (hence  the  zaps  and  the
    sparks). 
    You may have seen in a film how a certain Doctor Frankenstein used this energy to dramatic
    effect, but explaining how to use thunderstorms to animate monsters assembled from human
    body parts is a little beyond the scope of this book!

 

 


Harnessing Electricity to Do Work

    Benjamin Franklin was one of the first people to observe and experiment with electricity, and he
came up with many of the terms and concepts (for instance, current) that we know and love today.
Contrary to popular belief, Franklin didn't actually hold the key at the end of his kite during that storm
in 1752. (If he had, he wouldn't have been around for the American Revolution.) He may have
performed that experiment, but not by holding the key.
  Franklin knew that electricity was both dangerous and powerful, and his work got people
wondering whether a way existed to use the power of electricity for practical applications. Scientists
such as Michael Faraday, Thomas Edison and others took Franklin's work a bit further and figured out
ways to harness electricity and put it to good use.


Where Electrical Energy Comes From

  In this section, we explore where electrical energy comes from and how you can apply that energy
to make things work.


Tapping into electrical energy
  An electric current flowing in a conductor moves energy from its source, such as a battery, to a
place where it can do something useful. That place could be a light bulb, motor or loudspeaker, for
example. These useful objects convert the electrical energy into another form of energy, such as light,
heat or mechanical energy. In this way, you make the filament glow, the motor shaft rotate or the
speaker diaphragm vibrate.


 As you can't see - and don't necessarily want to touch - the masses of flowing electrons,
try thinking about water to help make sense out of harnessing electricity. A single drop of water can't
do much to help (or hurt) anyone, but get a whole group of water drops to work in unison, funnel them
through a conduit, direct the flow of water towards an object (for example, a waterwheel) and you can
put the resulting water energy to good use. Just as millions of drops of water moving in the same
direction constitute a current, so too millions of electrons moving in the same direction make an electric
current. In fact, Benjamin Franklin came up with the idea that electricity acts like a fluid and has
similar properties, like current and pressure (but he probably would have cautioned you against
drinking it).


Giving electrons a nudge
  The force that gets the free electrons in a conductor moving is known as voltage, which is
measured in units called volts (abbreviated to V). Think of voltage as electric pressure. Much like water
pressure pushes water through pipes and valves, voltage pushes electrons through wires and other
circuit components. The higher the pressure, the stronger the push, and so the higher the voltage, the
stronger the electric current that is pushed through a circuit. You may also hear the terms potential difference, voltage potential, potential drop or
voltage drop used. Try not to let these different terms confuse you. We discuss this a bit more in
Chapter 2.


Using conductors to make the circuit
  Electric currents don't just flow anywhere. (If they did, you'd be getting shocked all the time.)
Electrons only keep flowing if you provide a closed conductive path, or circuit, for them to move
through and start that flow by applying a source of electrical energy such as a battery. Copper and other
conductors are commonly formed into wire to provide a path for the flow of free electrons, so that you
can direct electrical energy to a light bulb or other part that can use it. Just as with pipes and water, the
wider the wire, the more freely the electrons flow.
  If a break exists in the path (an open circuit), the electrons get stuck in a dead end. Picture water
flowing through an open pipe. The water flows for a short time, but then stops when all the water exits
the pipe. If you pump water through a closed pipe system, the water continues to flow as long as you
keep forcing it to move.To keep the electric current flowing, you need to connect everything together
into one big happy electrical circuit. As shown in Figure 1-2, every circuit needs at least three basic
things to ensure that electrons get energised and deliver their energy to something that needs work
done:
A source of electricity (or electrical energy): The source provides the force that nudges the
electrons in the chain reaction. You may also hear the terms electrical source, power source, voltage
source and energy source used to describe a source of electricity. We discuss sources of electricity in
Chapter 2.

 
A load: The load is the thing that uses the energy in a circuit (for instance, a light bulb or a speaker).
Think of the load as the destination for the electrical energy.

 
A path: A conductive path provides a conduit for electric current to flow between the source and the
load.

 


                        Working electrons create power

    Work is a measure of the energy that a device  like a light bulb or a motor uses over a certain
    amount of time when you apply a voltage to it. The more electrons you push, and the harder you
    push them, the more electrical energy is available and the more work can be done. The total
    energy used in doing work over some period of time is known as power and is measured in
    watts. Power is calculated by multiplying the force (voltage) by the strength of the electron flow
    (current): 

 
    Power calculations are really important in electronics, because they help you understand just
    how much energy electronic parts are willing (and able) to handle without complaining. If you
    energise too many electrons in the same electronic part, you generate a lot of heat energy and
    may fry that part. Many electronic parts come with maximum power ratings so that you can
    avoid getting into a heated situation. We remind you about this in Chapters 3 to 8 when we
    discuss specific components and their power ratings.

  


Figure 1-2: A circuit consists of a power source, a load and a path for electric current to flow.












  An electric current starts with a push from the energy source and flows through the wire path to
the load, where energy is released to make something happen, for instance, emitting light.


Oh, the Things Electrons Can Do!

  Imagine applying an electric current to a pair of speakers without using anything to control or
shape the current. What would you hear? It certainly wouldn't be music! By using the proper
combination of electronics assembled in just the right way, you can control the way each speaker
diaphragm vibrates, producing recognisable sounds, like speech or music (well, certain music anyway).
And you can do so much more with electric current when you know how to control the flow of
electrons.


 Electronics is all about using specialised devices, known as electronic components (for
example, resistors, capacitors, inductors and transistors, which we discuss in Chapters 3, 4, 5 and 6
respectively) to control current (also known as the flow of electrons) in such a way that it performs a
specific function.
  Simple electronic devices use a few components to control current flow. The dimmer switch that
controls current flowing into a light bulb is one such example. But most electronic systems are a lot
more complicated than that; they connect lots of individual components together in one or more circuits
to achieve their ultimate goal. The great thing is that when you understand how a few individual
electronic components work and find out how to apply some basic principles, you can begin to
understand and build interesting electronic circuits.
  This section provides just a sampling of the sorts of things you can do by controlling electrons
with electronic circuits.


Creating good vibrations
  Electronic components in your iPod, car stereo and other audio systems convert electrical energy
into sound energy. In each case, the system's speakers are the load, or destination, for electrical energy,
and the job of the electronic components within the system is to shape the current flowing to the
speakers so that the diaphragm within each speaker moves in such a way as to reproduce the original
sound.Seeing is believing
  In visual systems, electronic components control the timing and intensity of light emissions. Many
remote control devices, such as the one wedged down the back of your sofa, emit invisible infrared
light when you press a button, and the specific pattern of the emitted light acts as a sort of code to the
device you're controlling, telling it what to do.
  Cathode ray tube (CRT) TV sets (the sort we all used before flat-panel sets) are coated with
phosphors that glow when struck by electron beams within the tube. The electronic circuits within the
TV set control the direction and intensity of the electron beams, thus controlling the pattern painted
across the TV screen, which is the image you see. Enlightening, isn't it?


Sensing and alarming
    Electronics can also be used to make something happen in response to a specific level of light,
heat, sound or motion. Electronic sensors generate or change an electrical current in response to a
stimulus. Microphones, motion detectors, temperature sensors and light sensors can be used to trigger
other electronic components to perform some action, such as activating an automatic door opener or
sounding an alarm.


Controlling motion
  A common use of electronics is to control the on/off activity and speed of motors. By attaching
various objects, from wheels to aeroplane flaps, to motors, you can use electronics to control their
motion. Such electronics can be found in robotic systems, aircraft, spacecraft, elevators and lots of
other places.


Solving problems (aka computing)
  Much as the ancients (those living thousands of years ago, not your great-grandparents) used the
abacus to perform arithmetic operations, so you use electronic calculators and computers to perform
computations. With the abacus, beads were used to represent numbers and calculations were performed
by manipulating those beads. In computing systems, different electrical signals are used to represent
numbers, letters and other information, and computations are performed by manipulating those patterns
using electronic components. Of course, the worker-bee electrons inside have no idea they're crunching
numbers!


Communicating with each other
  Electronic circuits in your mobile phone work together to convert the sound of your voice into an
electrical pattern, manipulate the pattern (to compress and encode it for transmission), convert it into a
radio signal and send it out through the air to a communication tower. Other electronic circuits in your
handset detect incoming messages from the tower, decode the messages and convert an electrical
pattern within the message into the sound of your friend's voice (via a speaker).
  Data communication systems, which you use every time you shop online, use electronics to
convert your materialistic desires into shopping orders - and extract money from your bank account.Chapter 2: Manipulating Electricity to


              Make Something Happen



  In This Chapter
Finding a source of electrical force
Being positive about the direction of current
Shedding light on a circuit in action
Taking control of electron flow
Sending current this way and that
    Electronics is all about controlling the flow of electrons through conductors in a complete path
(circuit) in order to shape the electrical energy delivered to a load, such as a light bulb, motor or
speaker, in just the right way. By manipulating the flow of electrons, electronic components enable you
to do some amazing things with electrical energy, such as vary the sound produced by speakers, change
the direction and speed of motors and control the intensity and timing of lights, among many other
things. In other words, electronics doesn't make electricity - it makes electricity better.
  In this chapter, you discover how to get electrons flowing through a circuit and why conventional
current can be thought of as electrons moving in reverse. You also explore the depths of a simple
electronic circuit and look at different ways to connect electronic components so that you can begin to
shape and direct current the way you see fit in your own circuits.


Supplying Electrical Energy

  If you take a copper wire and arrange it in a circle by twisting the ends together, do you think that
the free electrons flow? (Chapter 1 has all about electrons.) Well, the electrons may dance around a bit,
because they're so easy to move, but unless a force is pulling them one way or another, you don't get
current to flow.
  Think about the motion of water that's just sitting in a closed pipe: the water may bounce up and
down a bit, but it's not going to go whooshing through the pipe on its own. You need to introduce a
force in order to deliver the energy needed to get a current flowing through the pipe.
  Just as a car needs petrol to get it going, a circuit needs a source of electrical energy to get the
electrons moving. Batteries and solar cells are common sources. The energy available at your wall
sockets comes from many different power plants. But how do you conjure up electrical energy?
  All sources of electrical energy take another form of energy (for instance, mechanical, chemical,
heat or light) and convert it. Exactly how electrical energy is generated by your favourite source turns
out to be important, because different sources produce different types of electric current: direct current
(known as DC) and alternating current (known as AC).
Direct current is a steady flow of electrons in one direction, with very little variation in the strength
of the current. Cells (commonly known as batteries) produce DC; most electronic circuits use DC.

 
Alternating current is a fluctuating flow of electrons that keeps changing direction back and forth.
Power companies supply AC to your electrical sockets.

 


Getting direct current from a battery
  A battery converts chemical energy into electrical energy through a process called anelectrochemical reaction. When two different metals are immersed in a certain type of chemical, metal
atoms react with chemical atoms to produce charged particles. Negative charges build up on one of the
metal plates, while positive charges build up on the other metal plate. The difference in charge across
the two metal terminals (a terminal is just a piece of metal to which you can hook up wires) creates the
force needed to push electrons around a circuit. We give this electrical force the name voltage, and it's a
measure of how strong a force the electrical energy source can supply.
  To use a battery in a circuit, you connect one side of your load, for instance, a light bulb, to the
negative terminal (known as the anode) and the other side of your load to the positive terminal (known
as the cathode). In this way you create a path that allows the charges to move, and electrons flow from
the anode, through the circuit, to the cathode (as we show in Figure 2-1). The passage of electrons
through the wire filament of the light bulb releases electrical energy and the bulb lights up.

Figure 2-1: Electrons created by a chemical reaction flow from the battery's anode, through the circuit,
to the battery's cathode; because electrons flow in just one direction, this is known as direct current, or
DC.
















  Because the electrons move in only one direction (from the anode, through the circuit, to the
cathode), the electric current generated by a battery is DC. A battery continues to generate current until
all the chemicals inside it have been used up by the electrochemical process. The AAA-, AA-, C-, and
D-size batteries that you can buy almost anywhere each generate about 1.5 volts - regardless of size.
The difference in size amongst those batteries has to do with how much current can be drawn from
them. The larger the battery, the more current can be drawn, and the longer it lasts. Larger batteries can
handle heavier loads, which is just a way of saying that they can produce more power (remember,
power = voltage × current), so that they can do more work.


 Technically speaking, real batteries are only formed from connected sub-batteries called
cells. When you connect several cells together, as you often do in many torches and children's toys, you
create a battery. The battery in your car is made up of six cells, each generating 1.5 volts, connected
together to produce 12 volts in total. We discuss various types of cells and how to connect them to
create higher voltages in Chapter 8.
  The symbol commonly used to represent a battery in a circuit diagram is shown below. The plus
sign signifies the cathode and the minus sign signifies the anode. Usually the voltage is shown
alongside the symbol.Using alternating current from the power station
  When you plug a light into an electrical socket in your home, you're using electrical energy that
originates at a generating plant. Generating plants convert energy from resources like water, coal, oil,
natural gas or uranium into electrical energy. That's why electrical energy is said to be a secondary
energy source: it's generated through conversion of a primary energy source.
  Many plants use the heat energy generated by nuclear reactions or the burning of fossil fuels to
transform water into steam. Then the steam exerts pressure on the fins of a turbine, causing it to turn.
Hydroelectric power plants located at dams use water pressure and windmills use wind energy to rotate
turbines. Power plant turbines are connected to electromechanical generators, which convert
mechanical energy (the motion of the turbine) into electrical energy. A generator contains a coil of wire
inside a huge magnet. As the turbine rotates, it turns the coil of wire, and - hey presto! - electrical
current is induced in the wire. That's just a technical way of saying that something is causing electrons
to flow, without any direct contact with the wire.


          Electron flow can be induced by moving a wire near a magnet, or moving a magnet near a
wire. This technique is called electromagnetic induction, and it works thanks to the close relationship
between magnetism and electricity. We mention this relationship again in Chapter 5 when we discuss
inductors.
  As the coil rotates inside the magnet, the magnet first causes the electrons to flow in one direction,
but when the coil has rotated 180 degrees, the magnet pulls the electrons in the other direction and they
go right back again. This rotation creates alternating current (AC).
  In UK power plants, the coil makes 50 complete rotations each second, so the electron flow
changes direction 100 times per second. One complete rotation is called a cycle. The number of cycles
per second in alternating current is known as frequency and is measured in units called Hertz,
abbreviated to Hz. The UK and most of Europe generate AC at 50 Hertz, whereas the United States and
many other countries use 60 Hertz as a standard.
  AC is stepped up, or transformed to higher voltages, for transmission across long distances. When
the current reaches its destination, it's stepped down to lower voltages (230 volts in the UK, for
example) for distribution to homes and businesses. The symbol used in circuit diagrams for an AC
voltage source is shown below:



                                  Making (sine) waves

    AC is constantly changing, so you can't describe  its strength with a single number, as you can
    with DC. A common way to discuss its variations is to look at a waveform, or the pattern of the
    voltage over time. The AC waveform shows how the changing voltage causes electrons to flow
    in one direction (the positive region of the graph below) and then the other (the negative area).
    The instantaneous current is the strength of the current at a single point in time, and peak
    current is the magnitude (absolute value) of the current at its highest and lowest point. Because
    you  can  use  the  mathematical  sine  function  to  calculate  the  current  for  a  given  time,  AC
    waveforms are often referred to as sine waves. (If you think that you can smell trigonometry,
    you're right, but don't worry - you don't need to wipe the dust off your school maths books! We
    just want you to be aware of the term ‘sine' as it's used in electronics.) 
    The peak voltage (symbolised by Vp) is the magnitude of the highest voltage. You may hear the
    term peak-to-peak voltage (symbolised by Vpp), which is a measure of the difference between
    the highest and lowest voltage on the waveform, or twice the peak value. Another term thrown
    around is rms voltage (symbolised by Vrms), which is short for root-mean-square voltage and is
    used to work out how much power is in use in AC circuits. To get the rms voltage, you multiply
    the peak value by 0.7071.

 





 

 



 Many electronic devices, such as laptop computers for instance, require a steady DC
supply, so if you're using AC to supply an electronic device or circuit, you need to convert AC to DC.
Regulated power supplies, also known as AC-to-DC adapters, or AC adapters, convert AC to DC and
are commonly included with electronic devices when purchased. Think of your mobile phone charger;
this little device essentially converts AC power into DC power that the battery in your phone uses to
charge itself back up.


Transforming light into electricity
  Solar cells, also known as photovoltaic cells, produce a small voltage when you shine light on
them. They're made from semiconductors, which are materials that are somewhere between conductors
and insulators in terms of their willingness to conduct electrons. (We discuss semiconductors in detail
in Chapter 6.) The amount of voltage produced by a solar cell is fairly constant no matter how much
light you shine on it, but the strength of the current you can draw depends on the intensity of the light:
the brighter the light, the higher the available current.
  Solar cells have wires attached to two terminals for conducting electrons through circuits, so that
you can power your calculator or garden lights. You may notice panels of solar cells powering road
signs or parking meters or see pictures of satellites with large solar cell arrays on each side. Solar
panels are becoming increasingly popular for supplying electrical power to homes and businesses as a
way to reduce utility costs. If you scour the Internet you can find lots of information on how to make
your own solar panels for just a couple of hundred pounds - and a willingness to try. You can read more
about this subject in Solar Power Your Home For Dummies by Rik DeGunther (Wiley).


Understanding Directions: Real Electron Flow versus

Conventional Current Flow

  Early experimenters believed that electric current was the flow of positive charges, and so they
described electric current as the flow of a positive charge from a positive terminal to a negative
terminal. Much later, experimenters discovered electrons and determined that they flow from a negative
terminal to a positive terminal. Doh! The convention became too well used to change, however, and the
standard is to depict the direction of electric current in diagrams with an arrow that points opposite tothe direction of the actual electron flow (see Figure 2-2).

Figure 2-2: Conven-tional current, I, flows from the positive side of a power source to the negative
side and is the reverse of real electron flow.










            Conventional current is the flow of a positive charge from positive to negative voltage and
is just the reverse of real electron flow. All descriptions of electronic circuits use conventional current,
so if you see an arrow depicting current flow in a circuit diagram, you know that it's showing the
direction of conventional current flow. The symbol, I, is used to represent conventional current, which
is measured in amperes (or amps, abbreviated to A). You're more likely to encounter milliamps (mA) in
circuits you build at home. A milliamp is one one-thousandth of an amp.


          In AC circuits, current is constantly reversing direction. So how do you show current flow
in a circuit diagram? Which way should the arrow point? The answer is that it doesn't matter. You
arbitrarily pick a direction for current flow (known as the reference direction), and you label that
current I. The value of I fluctuates up and down as the current alternates. If the value of I is negative,
that just means that the (conventional) current is flowing in the opposite direction to the way the arrow
is pointing.


Examining a Simple Light Bulb Circuit

  The diagram in Figure 2-3 depicts a battery-operated circuit that lights a bulb, much like you find
in a torch. What you see in the figure is a circuit diagram, or schematic, that shows all the components
of the circuit and how they're connected. We discuss schematics in detail in Chapter 10.
  The battery is supplying 1.5 volts DC to the circuit. That just means it supplies a steady 1.5 volts
(until the battery begins to run out). The plus sign near the battery symbol indicates the positive
terminal of the battery, from which current flows (conventional current, of course). The negative sign
near the battery symbol indicates the negative terminal of the battery, to which the current flows when
it makes its way around the circuit. The arrow in the circuit indicates the reference direction of current
flow, and because it's pointing away from the positive terminal of the battery in a DC circuit, you can
expect the value of the current to be positive all the time.

Figure 2-3: Current from a battery flows through the circuit, delivering electrical energy to the light
bulb as voltage is applied to the bulb.  The lines in the circuit diagram show how the circuit components are connected, using wire or
other connectors. (We discuss various kinds of wire and connectors in Chapter 8.) Switches and other
circuit components are usually made with leads, consisting of protruding wires connected to the innards
of the component that provide the means to connect the component to other circuit elements.
  Next to the battery is a switch, which simply opens and closes the circuit, allowing current to flow
out of the battery or stopping it dead in its tracks. If the switch is closed, current flows out of the battery
through the light bulb, where electrical energy is dissipated as light and heat, and back into the negative
terminal of the battery. If the switch is open, current doesn't flow at all through this open circuit.
  The battery supplies electrical energy and the light bulb uses electrical energy. A give-and-take
relationship exists between the two: voltage is the push the battery gives to get current moving, and the
energy for that push is used up when current moves through the light bulb. As current flows through the
bulb, voltage ‘drops' across the bulb. Think of it as if the bulb is using up the force (voltage) that pushes
the current through it.
  When you drop voltage across a light bulb or other component, the voltage where the current
enters the component is higher (or more positive) than the voltage where the current exits the
component. Voltage is a relative measurement, comparing one point in a circuit to another, which is
why you sometimes see voltage called voltage drop, potential difference, or potential drop.


          The voltage at any point in a circuit is always relative to the voltage at some other point -
usually the negative terminal of the battery.


 An analogy that may help you understand: measuring voltage is much like measuring
distance. If someone asks you, ‘What's the distance?', you probably say, ‘Distance from what?'
Similarly, if you're asked, ‘What's the voltage at the point in the circuit where the current enters the
light bulb?' you should ask, ‘With respect to what point in the circuit?' On the other hand, you may say,
‘I'm five miles from home', stating your distance from a reference point (home). So if you say, ‘The
voltage where the current enters the bulb is 1.5 volts with respect to ground', that makes perfect sense.
(See the sidebar ‘Standing your ground' for more about the term ‘ground'.)
  If you start at the negative terminal of the battery in our simple light bulb circuit and travel all the
way around the circuit measuring voltages, you can see that the voltage at the positive terminal of the
battery is 1.5 volts, and all that 1.5 volts is dropped across the light bulb. (In reality, the switch eats up a
tiny bit of voltage, because even the best conductors use up some energy, but the amount is negligible
compared to the voltage drop across the light bulb.)


          The important thing to notice here is that as you travel around a DC circuit, you gain
voltage going from the negative terminal of the battery to the positive terminal (that's known as a
voltage rise), and you lose or drop voltage as you continue in the same direction across circuit
components. By the time you get back to the negative terminal of the battery, all the battery voltage has
been dropped and you're back to 0 volts. With all circuits (AC or DC), if you start at any point in thecircuit and add up the voltage rises and drops going around the circuit, you end up back where you
started. The net sum of the voltage rises and drops around a circuit is zero.
  Keep in mind that these voltage drops have real physical meaning. The energy that a battery
supplies is used up by the light bulb. The battery keeps supplying energy and pushing out current, and
the light bulb keeps using up that energy, until the battery dies (runs out of energy). The battery runs
out when all the chemicals inside it have been consumed in the chemical reactions that produced the
positive and negative charges. When that happens, you know that all the chemical energy supplied by
the battery has been converted into electrical energy and used up by the circuit.


                                Standing your ground

    In electronics, the word ground can have two  different meanings. Earth ground means pretty
    much what it says: it's a direct connection to the ground - real ground. The top pin in a three-pin
    plug is connected to earth ground. Behind each wall socket is a wire that runs through your
    house or office and eventually connects to a metal post that makes good contact with the ground.
    This provides extra protection for circuits that use large amounts of current, by providing a path
    to sink dangerous current directly into the earth. Benjamin Franklin's lightning rod provided a
    direct path for dangerous lightning to hit the ground - instead of a house or person (see Chapter
    1). The term floating ground refers to a circuit that's not connected to earth ground and may be
    dangerous. You're wise to stay away from such a circuit until it's safely earthed!

 
    The other type of ground is called a common ground, or simply common. Unlike earth ground,
    common ground isn't a physical ground; it's a just a reference point within a circuit for voltage
      measurements. Certain types of circuits, particularly the circuits commonly used in computers,
    label the negative terminal of a DC power supply the common ground, and connect the positive
    terminal of another DC power supply to the same point. That way, the circuit is said to have both
    positive and negative power supplies. The two physical power supplies may be identical, but the
    way you connect them in a circuit and the point you choose for the zero voltage reference
    determines whether a supply voltage is positive or negative. It's all relative!

 

 

  You can measure the voltage drop across the light bulb using a voltmeter (which we discuss in
detail in Chapter 12). And if you multiply the voltage across the bulb (that's a common way of saying
voltage drop) by the strength of the current running through it, you get the power dissipated in the bulb
(power = voltage × current) in watts.


Controlling Electrical Current with Basic Components

  If you start to build the simple light bulb circuit discussed in the preceding section and you don't
have a 1.5-volt battery available, you may think that it's okay to use the 9-volt battery you found in the
kitchen drawer. After all, 9 volts is more than 1.5 volts, so the battery should provide enough energy to
light the bulb. If you do use the 9-volt battery, however, your little circuit draws a lot more current -
and you may overload your light bulb. If too many electrons are allowed to flow through a filament, the
electrical energy dissipated in the filament creates so much heat that the bulb bursts.


                  Empowering you to make the right choices

    Light bulbs and other electronic components have  maximum power ratings for good reason.
    Send too much current through them, and they overheat and burn or melt. Remember that power    is the product of voltage and current, so when you understand how to figure out voltage drops
    and current through these components, you have the ability to estimate the power rating (how
    many watts the part can handle before blowing up in your face) you need for the components
    you select for your circuits.

 

 

  What you can do is insert a little electronic device called a resistor in between the battery and the
light bulb. Resistors restrict the flow of current through a circuit and are commonly used to protect
other circuit elements, such as light bulbs, from receiving more electrons than they can handle. The
resistor is just one electronic component that controls the flow of current in a circuit, but many more
exist.


Ways to control current
    Controlling electrical current is similar in many ways to controlling water current. How many
different ways can you control the flow of water using various plumbing devices and other
components? Among the things you can do are restrict the flow, cut off the flow completely, adjust the
pressure, allow water to flow in one direction only and store water. (Although this water analogy may
help, it isn't 100 per cent valid because you don't need a closed system for water to flow, as you do with
electricity.)
  Many, many electronic components help control the electrical energy in circuits (see Figure 2-4).
Among the most popular components are:
  Resistors, which restrict current flow. (We discuss resistors in Chapter 3.)

 
Capacitors, which store electrical energy. (We discuss capacitors in Chapter 4.)

 
Inductors and transformers, which are devices that store electrical energy in magnetic fields. (You
can find out more about inductors and transformers in Chapter 5.)

 
Diodes, used to restrict current flow in one direction, much like valves. (We discuss diodes in
Chapter 6.)

 
  Transistors, which are versatile components that you can use to switch circuits on and off, or to
amplify current. We cover transistors in Chapter 6.)

 

Figure 2-4: Electronic components come in a variety of shapes and packages.Active versus passive components
  You may see the terms active components and passive components used as category headings for
types of electronic components. Active components are parts that provide gain or direction, such as
transistors and diodes. (They may also be categorised as semiconductors, which is the type of material
they're made from.) Passive components provide neither gain (amplification) nor direction, so resistors,
capacitors, inductors and transformers are all passive components. A circuit that contains only passive
components is called a passive circuit, and one that contains at least one active component is an active
circuit.


Making Connections: Series and Parallel

  Just as you can build structures of all shapes and sizes by connecting Lego bricks or Meccano
parts together in various ways, so too you can build many different kinds of circuits by connecting
electronic components in various ways. Exactly how you connect components together dictates how
current flows through your circuit and how voltage is dropped throughout the circuit.


Series connections
  In the simple light bulb circuit we examined earlier in this chapter (Figure 2-3), current flows from
the positive battery terminal through the closed switch and then through the light bulb and back to the
negative terminal of the battery. You call this arrangement a series circuit, which just means that the
current runs through each component sequentially, or in series.


          Two important things you need to remember about series circuits are:
Each component has the same current.

 
Voltage supplied by the source is divided (not necessarily evenly) among the components. If you add
up the voltage drops across each component, you get the total supply voltage.

 


          You may run into a problem with series circuits: if one component fails, it creates an open
circuit, stopping the flow of current to every component in the circuit. So, if your flash new sign sports
200 light bulbs wired together in series to say ‘GREAT PUB GRUB' and a stray cricket ball from the
village green knocks one bulb for six, every one of the light bulbs goes out.


Parallel connections
  You can fix the problem of all components in a series circuit blacking out when one component
fails by wiring the components using parallel connections, such as in the circuit in Figure 2-5. With a
parallel circuit, if several cricket balls take out a few bulbs in your sign, the rest of it stays lit. (You may
be left with a sign advertising ‘EAT PU RUB' but you can't have everything!)

Figure 2-5: Light bulbs are often arranged in a parallel circuit so that if one burns out, the rest stay lit.  Here's how the parallel circuit in Figure 2-5 works: current flows from the positive battery
terminal and then splits at each branch of the circuit, so that each light bulb gets a share of the supply
current. The current flowing through one light bulb doesn't flow through the other light bulbs. So, if
your restaurant sign has 200 light bulbs wired together in parallel and one burns out, light still shines
from the other 199 bulbs.
  In parallel circuits, the voltage across each parallel branch of the circuit is the same. And when
you know how to calculate the current flowing in each branch of the circuit (which we discuss in
Chapter 3), you can see that if you add up all the branch currents, you get the total current supplied by
the battery.
  Two important things you need to remember about parallel circuits are:
 Voltage across each branch is the same.

 
 Current supplied by the source is divided among the branches. The currents in each branch add up to
the total supply current.

 


          For the same circuit components, connecting them in parallel draws more current from
your source than connecting them in series. If your circuit is powered by a battery, you need to be
aware of just how long your battery can supply the necessary current to your circuit. As we discuss in
Chapter 8, batteries have ratings of amp-hours. A battery with a rating of one amp-hour lasts for just
one hour in a circuit drawing one amp of current. Therefore, when you decide what power source to use
for a circuit, you must take into account both the current a circuit draws and how long you want to run
the circuit.


Combination circuits
  Most circuits are combinations of series and parallel connections. How you arrange components in
a circuit depends on what you're trying to do.
  Take a look at the series-parallel circuit in Figure 2-6. You see a resistor (the zigzag symbol in the
diagram) in series with the battery, and then three parallel branches, each containing a switch in series
with a light bulb. If you close all three switches, the supply current travels through the resistor and then
splits three different ways, with some current passing through each of the three bulbs. If you open all
three switches, no complete path exists for current to flow, so no current flows out of the battery at all.
If you close only one switch, all the supply current flows through just one bulb, and the other bulbs are
off. By alternating which switch is open at any time, you can control which bulb is lit.
  You can imagine such a circuit controlling the operation of a three-stage traffic light (with a few
more parts to control the timing and sequencing of the switching action).
  To analyse combination circuits, you have to apply voltage and current rules one step at a time,
using series rules for components in series and parallel rules for components in parallel. At this point,
you don't quite have enough information to calculate all the currents and voltages in the light bulb
circuits we show here. You need to know about one more rule, called Ohm's Law, and then you have
everything you need to analyse simple circuits. We cover Ohm's Law and basic circuit analysis in
Chapter 3.

Figure 2-6: By opening and closing switches in this series-parallel circuit, you can control which way
the supply current flows.Creating Electronic Systems

    Advanced electronic devices, such as personal computers, televisions and stereos, consist of a
mind-boggling assortment of electronic components connected together in what appears to be a
complex web of circuitry. All circuits - even ridiculously complicated ones - are designed to manipulate
current in such a way as to perform one or more specific functions. Most complex electronic systems
are made up of several stages, with each stage performing a specific function and the output of one
stage feeding into the input of another stage.
  In this section, we take a broad look at two such systems: your radio and your television set.


Making sound appear out of thin air
  Electronic components in a radio control the current going to your speakers so that you hear the
sounds your favourite radio station transmits. To get your speakers to reproduce the sounds originally
created in the studio, several stages of electronics in your stereo system perform distinct functions:
Antenna: Detects radio waves (invisible signals transmitted from many different radio stations) in
the air and transforms them into an electrical signal, which is a variable flow of electric current.

 
Tuner: Picks out just one radio signal from all the signals detected by the antenna, rejecting all the
others.

 
Detector: Separates the audio signal (a replica of the original sound) from the radio signal (which, in
addition to the audio signal, includes a carrier signal that transports the audio signal through the air).

 
Amplifier: Boosts the tiny audio signal so that you can hear it.

 
  Each stage contains a bunch of electronic components combined in a way that manipulates or
shapes the signal. After all that signal manipulation, the signal is sent to the speakers to be turned into
sound. The specific pattern and intensity with which the electrical signal moves the diaphragm
determines what exactly you're hearing and its volume.
  Technical types often use block diagrams to describe the functionality of complex electronic
systems, such as the radio receiver shown in Figure 2-7. Each block represents a circuit that takes the
output of the previous block as its input signal, performs some function and produces an output signal,
which is fed into another stage of the system.

Figure 2-7: Block diagram representation of a radio receiver system. The electronics in the system
perform several functions to shape the electric current that powers the speakers.                          Deciphering electrical signals

    An electrical signal is the pattern over time of an  electrical current. Often, the way an electrical
    signal changes its shape conveys information about something physical, such as the intensity of
    light, heat or sound, or the position of an object, such as the diaphragm in a microphone or the
    shaft of a motor. Think of an electrical signal as a code, such as Morse code, sending and
    receiving secret messages that you can figure out - if you know the key.

 
    An analogue electrical signal, or simply analogue signal, is so-named because it's an analogue,
    or one-to-one mapping, of the real physical quantity it represents. For instance, when a sound
    studio records a song, fluctuations in air pressure (that's what sound is) move the diaphragm of a
      microphone,  which  produces  corresponding  variations  in  electrical  current.  That  fluctuating
    current is a representation of the original sound, or an analogue electrical signal.

 
    Digital  systems,  such  as  computers,  can't  handle  continuous  analogue  signals,  so  electrical
    signals must be converted into digital format before entering the depths of a digital system.
    Digital format is just another coding scheme, which uses only the binary values 1 and 0 to
    represent information. (Hey! That's just like Morse code's dot and dash!) A digital signal is
    created by sampling the value of an analogue signal at regular intervals in time and converting
    each value into a string of bits, or binary digits.

 

 


Painting pictures with electrons
  Your television set, whether an old-fashioned cathode ray tube (CRT) device or a newer plasma or
liquid crystal display (LCD) version, uses electronics to control which picture elements (pixels) on the
screen should get fired up at any given time in order to paint a picture. The electrical signal that enters
your set carries information about the picture to be displayed. (It may get that signal from your
broadcast TV provider or the output of another electronic device, such as a DVD player). Electronic
components within the set decode that electrical signal and apply the information carried by the signal
to control the colour and intensity of each pixel.
  Different types of TVs activate display pixels in different ways. For example, the electronics in a
colour CRT TV steers three separate electron beams, positioning them to strike coloured phosphors on
the inside surface of the screen. The electronics also controls whether each beam is on or off as it
sweeps past each pixel, so that the phosphor it's aimed at gets bombarded by electrons or is left alone.
When a beam of electrons strikes a phosphor, it glows. By co-ordinating the movement and on/off state
of the so-called ‘red', ‘blue' and ‘green' electron beams, the electronics in your TV creates colourful
images on the screen.Chapter 3: Meeting Up with Resistance



  In This Chapter
Using resistance to your advantage
Creating just the right amount of resistance with fixed and variable resistors
Understanding how current, voltage and resistance are governed by Ohm's Law
Practising Ohm's Law by analysing circuits
Using power to guide you in choosing circuit components
  If you toss a marble into a sandpit, the marble doesn't go very far. But if you toss a marble onto the
surface of a large frozen lake, the marble enjoys a nice little ride before eventually coming to a stop. A
mechanical force called friction stops the marble on both surfaces - however, the sand provides more
friction than the ice.
    Resistance in electronics is a lot like friction in mechanical systems: it puts the brakes on electrons
(those teeny-tiny moving particles that make up electrical current, or electricity) as they move through
materials.
  In this chapter, you find out exactly what resistance is, where you can find resistance (everywhere)
and how you can use it to your advantage by selecting resistors (controlled amounts of resistance) for
your electronic circuits. You explore the intimate relationship between voltage (the electrical force that
pushes electrons) and current in components that have resistance, which is summed up quite nicely in a
very simple equation with an authoritative name: Ohm's Law. We put Ohm's Law to work in analysing
the goings-on in some basic circuits. Finally, you look at the role of Ohm's Law and related power
calculations in the design of electronic circuits.


Resisting the Flow of Current

    Resistance is a measure of an object's opposition to the flow of electrons. This opposition may
sound like a bad thing, but in fact it's very useful. Resistance is what makes it possible to generate heat
and light, restrict the flow of electrical current when necessary and ensure that the correct voltage is
supplied to a device. For instance, as electrons travel through the filament of a light bulb, they meet up
with so much resistance that they slow down a lot. Working to overcome resistance produces heat, as
anyone who has burnt their hands sliding down a climbing rope knows. The filament has a very high
resistance and produces so much heat that it lights up.
    Everything - even the best conductor - exhibits a certain amount of resistance to the flow of
electrons. The higher the resistance, the more restrictive the flow of current. So what determines how
much resistance an object has? Resistance depends on several factors:
 Material: Some materials allow free electrons to roam freely, which makes them conductors,
whereas others hold on tight to all their electrons, making them insulators. Conductors have lower
resistivity than insulators because they provide less resistance to the flow of current in the same volume
of material.

 
 Cross-sectional area: The larger the diameter, the more easily electrons move and the lower the
resistance to their movement. Think of water flowing through a pipe: the wider the pipe, the easier the
water flows. Resistance varies inversely with cross-sectional area. A copper wire with a large diameter
has a lower resistance than a copper wire with a small diameter.

 
 Length: The longer the material, the more resistance it has because more opportunities exist for
electrons to bump into other particles along the way. Resistance varies directly with length. 
 Temperature: For most materials, the higher the temperature, the higher the resistance. Higher
temperatures mean that the particles inside have more energy, so they move around a lot more, making
it harder for the electrons to get through. Imagine trying to make your way through a crowded train
station - doing so is always much harder if everyone there is rushing about. One notable exception is a
device called a thermistor: increase the temperature of a thermistor, and it lowers its resistance in a very
predictable way. (You can imagine how useful that is in temperature-sensing circuits.)

 
  You use the symbol R to represent resistance in an electronic circuit. Sometimes you see a
subscript next to a resistance, for instance, Rbulb. That just means that Rbulb represents the resistance
of the light bulb (or whatever the subscript refers to). Resistance is measured in units called ohms,
abbreviated with the Greek letter omega (Ω): the higher the ohm value, the higher the resistance.


          An ohm is so small a resistance that you're likely to see resistance measured in larger
quantities, such as kilohms (kilo + ohm), which is thousands of ohms and is abbreviated kΩ, or
megohm (mega + ohm), which is millions of ohms and is abbreviated MΩ. So, 1 kΩ = 1000 Ω and 1
MΩ = 1,000,000 Ω.


Resistors: Passive Yet Powerful

  Resistors are passive electronic components that are specially designed to have controlled amounts
of resistance (for instance, 470 Ω or 1 kΩ). Although a resistor doesn't amplify or shape the electric
current in any fancy way, it can be a powerful little device because it enables you to put the brakes on
current flow in a very controlled way. By carefully choosing and arranging resistors in different parts of
your circuit, you can control just how much - or how little - current each part of your circuit gets.


Discovering the usefulness of resistors
  Resistors are among the most popular electronic components in town because they're simple and
yet versatile. One of the most common uses of a resistor is to limit the amount of current in part of a
circuit, but resistors can also be used to control the amount of voltage provided to part of a circuit.


Limiting current
  The circuit in Figure 3-1 shows a 9-volt battery supplying current to a little device called a light-
emitting diode (LED) through a resistor (shown as a zigzag). LEDs (like many other electronic parts)
love current like children love chocolate: they try to gobble up as much as you give them. But LEDs
run into a problem - they burn themselves out if they draw too much current. The resistor in the circuit
serves the very useful function of limiting the amount of current sent to the LED (like a good parent
restricts the intake of sweets).

Figure 3-1: The resistor limits the amount of current flowing into sensitive components, such as the
LED in this circuit.






  Too much current can destroy many sensitive electronic components, such as transistors (whichwe discuss in Chapter 6) and integrated circuits (which we talk about in Chapter 7). By putting a
resistor at the input to a sensitive part, you limit the current that reaches the part. This simple technique
can save you a lot of time and money that you otherwise lose fixing accidental blow-ups of your
circuits.


Reducing and controlling voltage
  You can also use resistors to reduce the voltage supplied to different parts of a circuit. Say, for
instance, you have a 9-volt power supply, but you need to provide 5 volts to power a particular
integrated circuit you're using. You can set up a circuit, such as the one shown in Figure 3-2, to divide
the voltage in a way that provides 5 volts at the output. Then - voilà - you can use the output voltage,
Vout, of this voltage divider as the supply voltage for your integrated circuit. (We discuss exactly how
this works in the later section ‘Working out voltage across a component'.)

Figure 3-2: Using two resistors to create a voltage divider, a common technique for producing different
voltages for different parts of a circuit.





  You can also put a resistor to work with another popular component - a capacitor, which we
discuss in Chapter 4 - to create up and down voltage swings in a predictable way. You'll find that the
resistor-capacitor combo helps you create a kind of hourglass timer, which comes in handy for circuits
that have time dependencies (for instance, a three-way traffic light). We show how this dynamic duo
operates in Chapter 4.


Choosing a type: fixed or variable
  Resistors come in two basic flavours: fixed and variable. You can see them in Figure 3-3. Here's
the low-down on each type and why you would choose one or the other:
A fixed resistor supplies a constant factory-determined resistance (no surprise there - that's what
‘fixed' means). But the actual resistance of any given resistor may vary (up or down) from its nominal
value by some percentage, known as the resistor tolerance. Therefore, when you choose a 1000Ω
resistor with a 5 per cent tolerance, the actual resistance it provides can be anywhere from 950Ω to
1050Ω (because 5 per cent of 1000 is 50). Think of this as a resistance of 1000Ω, give or take 5 per
cent. Two categories of fixed resistors exist:

 
        • High-precision resistors come within just 1 per cent of their nominal value. You use these
    in circuits where you need a resistor of a very specific value, such as in a precision timing
    circuit.

 
        • Standard-precision resistors can vary from 2 per cent to (gulp) 20 per cent of their
    nominal values. Markings on the resistor package tell you just how far off the actual resistance
    may be (for instance, ±2%, ±5%, ±10% or ±20%). Using standard-precision resistors in your
    circuits is okay 99 per cent of the time, because you're usually using resistors to limit current and
    don't need to ensure a precise current. Resistors with 5 or 10 per cent tolerance are commonly
    used in electronic circuits.

 
A variable resistor, either a potentiometer (pot for short) or a rheostat, allows you to continuallyadjust the resistance from virtually zero ohms to a factory-determined maximum value. You use a
potentiometer when you want to vary the amount of current you're supplying to part of your circuit.
You can find potentiometers in light dimmer switches, audio system volume controls and joystick
controls (for games and on aircraft).

 


                                  What's in a name?

    The word potentiometer is often used to categorise  all variable resistors, but a difference exists
    between  rheostats  and  potentiometers.  Rheostats  are  two-terminal  devices,  with  one  lead
    connected  to  the  wiper  and  the  other  lead  connected  to  one  end  of  the  resistance  track.
    Technically, a potentiometer is a three-terminal device, with leads connecting to the wiper and to
    both ends of the resistance track. You can use a potentiometer as a rheostat by connecting up
    only two leads, or you can connect all three leads in your circuit - and get a fixed and variable
    resistor for the price of one!

 


 


Figure 3-3: Colour-coded bands are used to denote the value of a fixed resistor, whereas variable
resistors, known as potentiometers, are usually stamped with the highest value of resistance you can
dial up.
















          In circuit diagrams, also called schematics, which we discuss in Chapter 10, you use a
zigzag symbol to represent a fixed resistor. Resistors don't have polarity indicators (+ or -) on them,
because current is happy to flow either way through a resistor. You add an arrow through the zigzag to
create the schematic symbol for a rheostat (two-terminal variable resistor), and add an arrow pointing
into the zigzag to create the symbol for a potentiometer (three-terminal variable resistor). We explain
the difference between rheostats and potentiometers in the sidebar ‘What's in a name?'.


Decoding fixed resistors
  Most fixed resistors come in a cylindrical package with two leads sticking out so that you can
connect them to other circuit elements. (See the later sidebar ‘Recognising resistors on printed circuitboards' for exceptions to this.) You'll be happy to know that you can insert a fixed resistor either way in
a circuit - no left or right, up or down, to or from, to worry about with these pleasant little two-terminal
devices.
  The attractive rainbow colours adorning most resistors serve a purpose beyond catching your eye
(see Figure 3-3). Colour coding identifies the nominal value and tolerance of most resistors, whereas
others are drab and boring, and have their values stamped on them. The colour code starts near the edge
of one side of the resistor and consists of several stripes, or bands, of colour. Each colour represents a
number and the position of the band indicates how you use that number. Standard-precision resistors
use four colour bands: the first three bands indicate the nominal value of the resistor and the fourth
indicates the tolerance. High-precision resistors use five colour bands: the first four bands indicate the
value and the fifth indicates the tolerance (typically ±1%).
  Using a special decoder ring (or the colour code shown in the first two columns of Table 3-1), you
can decipher the nominal value of a standard-precision resistor as follows:
The first band gives you the first digit.

 
The second band gives you the second digit.

 
The third band gives you the multiplier as a number of zeros, except when it's gold or silver.

 
        • If the third band is gold, you multiply by 0.1 (divide by 10).

 
        • If the third band is silver, you multiply by 0.01 (divide by 100).

 
Result: You get the nominal value of the resistance by putting the first two digits together (side by side)
and applying the multiplier.

 
  The fourth band (tolerance) uses a different colour code, as shown in the third column of Table 3-
1. If no fourth band exists, you can assume the tolerance is ±20%.  Take a look at the following examples:
  Red-red-yellow-gold: A resistor with red (2), red (2), yellow (4 zeros) and gold (±5%) bands
represents a nominal resistance of 220,000Ω, or 220 kΩ, which can vary up or down by as much as 5
per cent of that value. So it can have a resistance of anywhere between 209 kΩ and 231 kΩ.

 
  Orange-white-gold-silver: A resistor with orange (3), white (9), gold (0.1) and silver (±10%) bands
represents a value of 39× 0.1, or 3.9Ω, which can vary by up to 10 per cent of that value. So the actual
resistance can be anywhere from 3.5Ω to 4.3Ω.

 
  For high-precision resistors, the first three bands of colour give you the first three digits, the fourth
band gives you the multiplier and the fifth band represents the tolerance.


          Most circuit designs tell you the safe resistor tolerance to use, whether for each individual
resistor or for all the resistors in the circuit. Look for a notation in the parts list or as a footnote at the
bottom of the circuit diagram. If the schematic doesn't state a tolerance, you can assume that using
standard-precision resistors (±5% or ±10%) is okay.


Dialling with potentiometers
    Potentiometers consist of a resistance track with connections at both ends and a wiper that moves
along the track as you adjust the resistance across a range from 0 (zero) ohms to some maximum value
(see Figure 3-4). Most often, potentiometers are marked with their maximum value - 10 K, 50 K, 100
K, 1 M and so forth - and they don't always include the little ohm symbol (Ω). For example, with a 50
K potentiometer, you can dial in any resistance from 0 to 50,000 ohms.          Bear in mind that the range on the potentiometer is approximate only. If the potentiometer
lacks markings, you need to use a multimeter to figure out the component's value. (You can read about
how to test resistances using a multimeter in Chapter 12.)
    Potentiometers are available in various packages:
Dial pots contain rotary resistance tracks and are controlled by turning a spindle or knob. Commonly
used in electronics projects, dial pots are designed to be mounted through a hole cut in a case that
houses a circuit, with the knob accessible from the outside of the case. They're popular for adjusting
volume in sound circuits.

 
Slide pots contain a linear resistance track and are controlled by moving a slide along the track. You
see them on stereo equipment and some dimmer switches.

 
Trim pots (also known as preset pots) are smaller, designed to be mounted on a circuit board and
provide a screw for adjusting resistance. They're typically used to fine-tune a circuit design, for
instance, to set the sensitivity of a light-sensitive circuit rather than to allow for variations, like volume
adjustments, during the operation of a circuit.

 

Figure 3-4: Potenti-ometers allow you to adjust resistance continuously and are available in various
packages known as dial pots, trim pots and slide pots.










          If you use a potentiometer (or rheostat) in a circuit, bear in mind that if the wiper is dialled
down all the way, you've got zero resistance, and you're not limiting current at all with this device.
Common practice is to insert a fixed resistor in series with a potentiometer as a safety net to limit
current. You just choose a value for the fixed resistor so that it works together with your variable
resistor to produce the range of resistances you need. (We discuss how to figure out the total resistance
of multiple resistors in series in the later section ‘Combining Resistors'.)


          You can always use a multimeter to measure the resistance of an unknown resistor or the
variable resistance provided by a potentiometer. We describe how to do this in Chapter 12.


Rating resistors according to power
    Question: what do you get when you let too many electrons pass through a resistor at the same
time? Yes, a horrible charred mess. Whenever electrons flow through something with resistance, they
generate heat, and the more electrons, the higher the heat. Electronic components, such as resistors, can
stand only so much heat (just how much depends on the size and type of component) before they have a
meltdown. And because heat is a form of energy, and power is a measure of how much energy is beingused each second, you can use the power rating of an electronic component to tell you how many watts
(watts are units of power) a component can safely handle.
  All resistors come with power ratings. Standard run-of-the-mill resistors are able to handle 1/8
watt or 1/4 watt, but you can easily find 1/2-watt and 1-watt resistors. Of course, you don't see the
power rating indicated on the resistor itself (that would make it too easy), so you have to figure it out by
the size of the resistor (the bigger the resistor, the more power it can handle) or get it from the
manufacturer or your parts supplier.


          So how do you use the power rating to choose a particular resistor for your circuit? You
estimate the peak power that your resistor is expected to handle, and pick a power rating that meets or
exceeds it. Power is calculated as follows:

  In this equation (known as Joule's Law - see the later section ‘The Power of Joule's Law' for more
details), V represents the voltage (in volts) measured across the resistor and I represents the current (in
amps) flowing through the resistor. For example, suppose the voltage is 5 volts and you want to pass 25
milliamps of current through the resistor. To calculate the power, you multiply 5 by 0.025 (remember,
milliamps are thousandths of amps) and you get 0.125 watt, or 1/8 watt. So you know that although a
1/8-watt resistor may be okay, you can be sure that a 1/4-watt resistor can take the heat just fine in your
circuit.


              Recognising resistors on printed circuit boards

    As you find out more about electronics, you may  get curious enough to take a look inside some
    of the electronics in your house. (Warning: Be careful! Follow the guidelines given in Chapter
    9.)  You  may  open  up  the  remote  control  for  your  TV  and  see  some  components  wired  up
    between a touchpad and an LED, for instance. On some printed circuit boards (PCBs), which
    serve as the platform for building mass-produced circuits commonly found in computers and
    other electronic systems, you may have trouble recognising the individual circuit components.
    This is because manufacturers use fancy techniques to populate PCBs with components in order
    to  eke  out  efficiencies  and  save  space  on  the  boards.  One  such  technique,  surface  mount
    technology (SMT), allows components to be mounted directly to the surface of a board. Surface
    mount devices, such as SMT resistors, look a bit different from the components you would use to
    build a circuit in your garage, because they don't require long leads in order to connect them
    within a circuit. Such components use their own coding system to label the value of the part.

 

 

  For most hobby electronics projects, 1/4-watt or 1/8-watt resistors are just fine. You need high-
wattage resistors for high-load applications, where loads, such as a motor or lamp control, require
higher-than-hobby-level currents to operate.
    High-wattage resistors take many forms, but you can bet that they are bigger and bulkier than your
average resistor. Resistors with power ratings of over 5 watts are encased in epoxy or other waterproof
and flameproof coating and have a rectangular rather than cylindrical shape. A high-wattage resistor
may even include its own metal heat sink, with fins that conduct heat away from the resistor.


Combining Resistors

  When you start shopping for resistors, you find that you can't always get exactly what you want.
That's because it's impractical for manufacturers to make resistors with every possible value of
resistance. So they make resistors with a limited set of resistance values, and you discover how to livewith it. For instance, you can search far and wide for a 25 kΩ resistor, but you may never find it;
however, 22 kΩ resistors are as common as muck.
    Fortunately, you can combine resistors in various ways to create an equivalent resistance value
that comes pretty darn close to whatever resistance you need. And because standard-precision resistors
are accurate to 5 or 10 per cent of their nominal value anyway, combining resistors works out just fine.


          Certain rules apply on how to combine resistances, which we cover in this section. You
use these rules not only to help you choose off-the-shelf resistors for your own circuits, but also as a
key part of your effort to analyse other people's electronic circuits. For instance, if you know that a light
bulb has a certain amount of resistance and you place a resistor in series with the bulb to limit the
current, you need to know what the total resistance of the two components is in order to calculate the
current passing through them.


Using resistors in series
  When you combine two resistors (or resistances) in series, you restrict the current somewhat with
the first resistor, and then you restrict it even more with the next resistor. So the effect of the series
combination is an increase in the overall resistance (see Figure 3-5). To calculate the combined
(equivalent) resistance of two resistors in series, you simply add up the values of the two individual
resistances. You can extend this rule to any number of resistances in series:

  R1, R2, R3 and so forth represent the values of the resistors and Rseries represents the total
equivalent resistance. The same current flows through all resistors connected in series.


          You need to be careful with your units when adding up resistance values. For example,
suppose you connect the following resistors in series: 1.2 kΩ, 680Ω and 470Ω. Before you add the
resistances, you need to convert the values to the same units, for instance, ohms. In this case, the total
resistance, Rtotal, is calculated as follows:


Figure 3-5: The combined resistance of two or more resistors in series is the sum of the individual
resistances.






          The combined resistance is always greater than any of the individual resistances.
  This fact comes in handy when you're designing circuits. For example, if you want to limit current
going into a light bulb, but you don't know the resistance of the bulb, you can place a resistor in series
with the bulb and be secure in the knowledge that the total resistance to current flow is at least as much
as the value of the resistor you added.
  For circuits that use variable resistors, such as a light dimmer circuit, putting a fixed resistor in
series with the variable resistor guarantees that the current is limited even if the pot is dialled down to
zero ohms. (We discuss how to calculate just what the current is for a given voltage/resistance combo
in the later section ‘Using Ohm's Law to Analyse Circuits'.)


Employing resistors in parallel  When you combine two resistors in parallel, you provide two different paths for current to flow, so
even though each resistor is restricting current flow through one circuit path, another path still exists
that can draw additional current. From the perspective of the source voltage, the effect of arranging
resistors in parallel is a decrease in the overall resistance. To calculate the equivalent resistance,
Rparallel, of two resistors in parallel, you use the following formula:

  where R1 and R2 are the values of the individual resistors.
  In the example in Figure 3-6, two 2 kΩ resistors are placed in parallel. The equivalent resistance
is:





Figure 3-6: The combined resistance of two or more resistors in parallel is always lower than any of
the individual resistances.






  In this example, connecting two resistors of the same resistance in parallel results in an equivalent
resistance of half the value of either one. Each resistor draws half the supply current. If two resistors of
unequal value are placed in parallel, more current flows through the path with the lower resistance than
the path with the higher resistance.
  If you combine more than one resistor in parallel, the maths gets a little more complicated:


  For multiple resistances in parallel, the amount of current flowing through any given branch is
inversely proportional to the resistance within that branch. The higher the resistance, the less current
goes that way; the lower the resistance, the more current goes that way. Just like water, electrical
current favours the path of least resistance.


          As shorthand in equations, you may see the symbol || used to represent the formula for
resistors in parallel. For example:





Combining series and parallel resistors
  Many circuits combine series resistors and parallel resistors in various ways so as to restrict
current in some parts of the circuit while splitting current in other parts of the circuit. In certain cases,
you can calculate equivalent resistance by combining the equations for resistors in series and resistors
in parallel. For instance, in Figure 3-7 resistor R2 (2 kΩ) is in parallel with resistor R3 (2 kΩ), and that
parallel combination is in series with resistor R1 (1 kΩ). You can calculate the total resistance (in kΩ)
as follows:  In this circuit, the current supplied by the battery is limited by the total resistance of the circuit,
which is 2 kΩ. Supply current flows from the positive battery terminal through resistor R1 and then
splits, with half flowing through resistor R2 and half flowing through resistor R3, and then combines
again to flow into the negative battery terminal.

Figure 3-7: Many circuits include a combination of parallel and series resistances.








          Circuits often have more complex combinations of resistances than simple series or
parallel relationships, and figuring out equivalent resistances isn't always easy. You need to use matrix
mathematics to analyse them, and because this book isn't a maths book, we're not going to get caught
up in a matrix.


Obeying Ohm's Law

  One of the most important concepts to understand in electronics is the relationship involving
voltage, current and resistance in a circuit, summed up in a simple equation known as Ohm's Law.
When you understand this thoroughly, you're well on your way to analysing circuits that other people
have designed, as well as successfully designing your own circuits. Before diving into Ohm's Law, we
take a quick look at the ebbs and flows of current.


Driving current through a resistance
  If you place a voltage source across an electronic component that has measurable resistance, such
as a light bulb or a resistor, the force of the voltage pushes electrons through the component. The
movement of loads of electrons is what constitutes electrical current. By applying a greater voltage,
you're exerting a stronger force on the electrons, so you're going to create a stronger flow of electrons,
or a larger current, through the resistance: the stronger the force (voltage V), the stronger the flow of
electrons (current I).
  This effect is analogous to water flowing through a pipe of a certain diameter. If you exert a
certain water pressure on the water in the pipe, the current flows at a certain rate. If you increase the
water pressure, the current flows faster through that same pipe, and if you decrease the water pressure,
the current flows slower through the pipe.


Understanding a relationship that's constantly proportional!
  The relationship between voltage (V) and current (I) in a component with resistance (R) was
discovered in the early 1800s by Georg Ohm, who gave his name to the unit of resistance. He figured
out that for components with a fixed resistance, voltage and current vary in the same way: double thevoltage, and the current is doubled; halve the voltage, and the current is halved. He summed this
relationship up quite nicely in the simple mathematical equation that bears his name: Ohm's Law.


          Ohm's Law states that voltage equals current multiplied by resistance, or

 
  What this equation really means is that the voltage (V) measured across a component with a fixed
resistance is equal to the product of the current (I) flowing through the component and the value of the
resistance (R).
  For example, in the simple circuit in Figure 3-8, a 9-volt battery applied across a 1 kΩ resistor
produces a current of 9 milliamps (which is 0.009 A) through the circuit:

 

Figure 3-8: A voltage of 9 volts applied to a resistor of 1 kΩ produces a current of 9 milliamps.







                                More than just the law

    Georg Ohm's name is associated with resistance  values as well as the law. The definition of an
    ohm, or unit of resistance, comes from Georg Ohm's work. The ohm is defined as the resistance
    between two points on a conductor when one volt applied across those points produces one amp
    of current through the conductor. We just thought you may like to know that.

 

 

  This little law is so important in electronics that you'd be wise to repeat it over and over again, like
a mantra, until you've been transformed into an Ohm's Law follower. To help you remember, think of
Ohm's Law as a Very Important Rule.


          When using Ohm's Law, watch your units carefully. Make sure that you convert any kilos
and millis before you get out your calculator. If you think of Ohm's Law as volts = amps × ohms, you'll
be okay. And if you're brave, you can also use volts = milliamps × kilohms, which works just as well
(because the millis cancel out the kilos). But if you're not careful and you mix units, you may be in for
a shock! For instance, a lamp with a resistance of 100Ω passes a current of 50 milliamps. If you forget
to convert milliamps to amps, you multiply 100 by 50 to get 5000 volts as the voltage across the lamp!
Ouch! The correct way to perform the calculation is to convert 50 milliamps to 0.05 amps, and then
multiply by 100, to get 5 volts. (Much better!)


Working with one law, three equations
    Remember your school algebra? Remember how you can rearrange the terms of an equation
containing variables (such as the familiar x and y) to solve for one variable, as long as you know the
values of the other variables? Well, the same rules apply to Ohm's Law. You can rearrange its terms to
create two more equations, for a total of three equations from that one law!  These three equations all say the same thing, but in different ways. You can use them to calculate
one quantity when you know the other two. Which one you use at any given time depends on what
you're trying to do. For example:
To calculate an unknown voltage, multiply the current times the resistance (V = I × R). For
instance, if you have a 2 milliamps current running through a 2 kΩ resistor, the voltage across the
resistor is 2 milliamps × 2 kilohms (or 0.002 amps × 2000 ohms) = 4 volts.

 
To calculate an unknown current, take the voltage and divide it by the resistance (I = V/R). For
example, if 9 volts is applied across a 1 kΩ resistor, the current is 9 volts/1000 ohms = 0.009 amps or 9
milliamps.

 
To calculate an unknown resistance, take the voltage and divide it by the current (R = V/I). For
instance, if you have 3.5 volts across an unknown resistor with 10 milliamps of current running through
it, the resistance is 3.5 volts/0.01 amps = 350 ohms.

 


Using Ohm's Law to Analyse Circuits

  When you've mastered the theory of Ohm's Law, you're ready to put it into practice. Ohm's Law is
like a master key, unlocking the secrets to electronic circuits. You can use it to understand circuit
behaviour and to track down problems within a circuit (for instance, why the light isn't shining, the
buzzer isn't buzzing or the resistor isn't resisting because it melted). You can also use it to design
circuits and pick the right parts for use in your circuits. We get to that in the later section ‘What is
Ohm's Law Really Good For?'. In this section, we discuss how to apply Ohm's Law to analyse circuits.


Calculating current through a component
  In the simple circuit in Figure 3-9, a 6-volt battery is applied across a 1 kΩ resistor. You calculate
the current through the resistor as follows:


Figure 3-9: Calculating the current through the resistor in this simple circuit is a straightforward
application of Ohm's Law.






  If you add a 220Ω resistor in series with the 1 kΩ, as shown in Figure 3-10, you're restricting the
current even more. To calculate the current flowing through the circuit, you need to determine the total
resistance that the 6-volt battery is facing in the circuit. Because the resistors are in series, the
resistances add up, for a total equivalent resistance of 1.22 kΩ. The new current is:

  By adding the extra resistor, you've reduced the current in your circuit from 6 milliamps to 4.9
milliamps.


          That double squiggle symbol (≈) in the equation just above means ‘is approximately equal
to', and we use that because we rounded off the current to the nearest tenth of a milliamp. Rounding offthe tiny parts of values in electronics is usually okay - unless you're working on the electronics that
control a sub-atomic particle smasher or other high-precision industrial device.

Figure 3-10: Calculating the current through this circuit requires determining the equivalent resistance
and then applying Ohm's Law.






Working out voltage across a component
  In the circuit in Figure 3-9, the voltage across the resistor is simply the voltage supplied by the
battery: 6 volts. That's because the resistor is the only circuit element other than the battery. By adding
a second resistor in series, as in Figure 3-10, the voltage picture changes. Now, some of the battery
voltage drops across the 1 kΩ resistor and the rest of the battery voltage is dropped across the 220Ω
resistor.
  To calculate how much voltage is dropped across each resistor, you use Ohm's Law for each
individual resistor. You know the value of each resistor, and you know the current flowing through
each resistor. Remember that current is the battery voltage (6 volts) divided by the total resistance
(1.22 kΩ), or approximately 4.9 milliamps. Now you can apply Ohm's Law to each resistor to calculate
its voltage drop:


  Notice that if you add up the voltage drops across the two resistors, you get 6 volts, which is the
total voltage supplied by the battery. That's not a coincidence: the battery supplies voltage to the two
resistors in the circuit, and the supply voltage is divided between the resistors proportionally based on
the values of the resistors. This type of circuit is known as a voltage divider.


 Many electronic systems use voltage dividers to bring down a supply voltage to a lower
level and then feed that reduced voltage into the input of another part of the overall system.


                                  Using Ohm's Law

    Ohm's Law is very useful in analysing voltage  and current for resistors and other components
    that behave like resistors, such as light bulbs. But you have to be careful about applying Ohm's
    Law to other electronic components, such as capacitors (which we discuss in Chapter 4) and
    inductors (covered in Chapter 5), which don't have a constant resistance under all circumstances.
    For  such  components,  the  opposition  to  current,  known  as impedance,  can  and  will  vary
    depending on what's going on in the circuit. So you can't just use a multimeter to measure the
    resistance of a capacitor, for instance, and try to apply Ohm's Law willy-nilly. We discuss this
    subject a bit more in Chapter 4.

 

 


Determining an unknown resistance
  Say you have a large flashlight that you're running off a 12-volt battery, and you measure a current
of 1.3 amps through the circuit (we discuss how to measure current in Chapter 12). You can calculatethe resistance of the bulb by taking the voltage across the bulb (12 volts) and dividing it by the current
through the bulb (1.3 amps):



What is Ohm's Law Really Good For?

  Ohm's Law also comes in handy when you're analysing all kinds of circuits, whether simple or
complex. You can use it in designing and altering electronic circuits, to make sure that you get the right
current and voltage to the right places in your circuit. In fact, you're going to use Ohm's Law so much,
it'll become second nature to you.


Analysing complex circuits
  Ohm's Law really comes in handy when analysing more complex circuits. You often need to
incorporate your knowledge of equivalent resistances in order to apply Ohm's Law and work out
exactly where current is flowing and how voltages are being dropped throughout your circuit.
  For example, imagine that you add to the circuit in Figure 3-10 by placing a 2.2 kΩ resistor in
parallel with the 1 kΩ resistor, as shown in Figure 3-11. You can calculate the current running through
each resistor step by step, as follows:
1. Calculate the equivalent resistance of the circuit.

 
This figure is found by applying the rules for resistors in parallel and resistors in series:

 



2. Calculate the total current supplied by the battery.

 
To do this, you apply Ohm's Law using the battery voltage and the equivalent resistance:

 


3. Calculate the voltage dropped across the parallel resistors.

 
You can do this in one of two ways:

 
        • Apply Ohm's Law to the parallel resistors. You calculate the equivalent resistance of the
    two resistors in parallel, and then multiply that amount by the supply current. The equivalent
    resistance is 688 Ω, as shown in the first step above. So the voltage is:

 

        • Apply Ohm's Law to the 220Ω resistor and subtract its voltage from the supply voltage.
    The voltage across the 220Ω resistor is:

 

        The voltage across the parallel resistors is:

 

4. Calculate the current through each parallel resistor. 
To do this, you apply Ohm's Law to each resistor, using the voltage you just calculated (V2):

 


Notice that the two branch currents, I1 and I2, add up to the total supply current, Itotal: 4.6 milliamps +
2 milliamps = 6.6 milliamps. That's a good thing (and a good way to check that you've done your
calculations correctly).

 

Figure 3-11: Complex circuits can be analysed by applying Ohm's Law and calculating equivalent
resistances.








Designing and altering circuits
  You can use Ohm's Law to determine what components to use in a circuit design. For instance,
you may have a series circuit consisting of a 9-volt power supply, a resistor and an LED, as shown in
Figure 3-1 earlier in this chapter. The voltage drop across an LED remains constant for a certain range
of current passing through it (as we explain in Chapter 6), but if you try to pass too much current
through the LED, it burns out. Say, for example, your LED voltage is 2.0 volts and the maximum
current it can handle is 25 milliamps. What resistance should you put in series with the LED to limit the
current so that it never exceeds 25 milliamps?
  To work this figure out, you first have to calculate the voltage drop across the resistor when the
LED is on. You already know that the supply voltage is 9 volts and the LED eats up 2 volts. The only
other component in the circuit is the resistor, so you know that it eats up the remaining supply voltage,
or 7 volts.
  If you want to limit the current to be no more than 25 milliamps, you need to choose a resistor
that's at least 7 volts/0.025 amps = 280 ohms. Because you can't find a 280Ω resistor, suppose you
choose a 300Ω resistor. The current is 7 volts/300 ohms = 0.023 amps or 23 milliamps. The LED may
burn a little less brightly, but that's okay.
  Ohm's Law also comes in handy when tweaking an existing circuit. Say your spouse is trying to
sleep, but you want to read, so you get out your big flashlight. The bulb in your flashlight has a
resistance of 9Ω and is powered by a 6-volt battery, so you know that the current in the flashlight
circuit is 6 volts/9 ohms = 0.65 amps.
  Your spouse, however, thinks the light is too bright, and so to reduce the brightness (and save your
marriage), you want to restrict the current flowing through the bulb a bit. You think that bringing it
down to 0.45 amps will do the trick, and you know that inserting a resistor in series between the battery
and the bulb is going to restrict the current. But what value of resistance do you need? You can use
Ohm's Law to figure out the resistance value as follows:
        1. Use the desired new current to calculate the desired voltage drop across the bulb:

 
        2. Calculate the portion of the supply voltage you want to apply across the new
    resistor. This voltage is the supply voltage less the voltage across the bulb: 
        3. Calculate the resistor value needed to create that voltage drop given the desired new
    current:

 

        4. Choose a resistor value that's close to the calculated value and make sure that it can
    handle the power dissipation:

 
        Result: As you can't find a 4.2-ohm resistor, you can use a 4.7-ohm 1-watt resistor to
    reduce the brightness of the light. This allows your spouse to sleep soundly, even if the snoring
    stops you reading!

 

The Power of Joule's Law

  Another scientist hard at work in the early 1800s was the energetic James Prescott Joule. Joule is
responsible for coming up with the equation that gives you power (as we discuss in the earlier section
‘Rating resistors according to power'), known as Joule's Law:

  This equation states that the power (in watts) equals the voltage (in volts) across a component,
times the current (in amps) passing through that component. The really nice thing about this equation is
that it applies to every electronic component, whether it's a resistor, a light bulb, a capacitor or
something else.


Using Joule's Law to choose components
  In the earlier section ‘Rating resistors according to power', we show you how to use Joule's Law to
ensure that a resistor is big enough to resist a meltdown in a circuit. But you need to know that it also
comes in handy when selecting other electronic parts. Lamps, diodes (which we discuss in Chapter 6)
and other components also come with maximum power ratings. If you expect them to perform at power
levels higher than their ratings, you're going to be disappointed. When you select the part, you need to
consider the maximum possible power the part needs to handle by determining the maximum current
that you're going to pass through the part and the voltage across the part, and then multiplying those
quantities together. Then you choose a part with a power rating that exceeds that estimated maximum
power.


Going perfectly together: Joule and Ohm
  You can get creative and combine Joule's Law and Ohm's Law to derive more useful equations to
help you calculate power for resistive components and circuits. For instance, if you substitute I × R for
V in Joule's Law, you get:

  which gives you a way to calculate power when you know the current and resistance, but not the
voltage. Similarly, you can substitute V/R for I in Joule's Law to get:

  Using that formula, you can calculate power if you know the voltage and the resistance, but not
the current.
  Joule's Law and Ohm's Law are so often used in combination that Georg Ohm sometimes gets the
credit for both of those laws!


Trying Your Hand at Circuits with Resistors

  If you want to get your hands dirty and experiment with some real resistor circuits, you can take a
look at some of the circuits in the beginning of Chapter 13. These circuits enable you to experienceOhm's Law in action, play with a potentiometer to vary resistance and divide up voltages. But before
you jump that far ahead, we recommend that you read through Part II, which explains how to set up
your electronics workshop, stay safe, read schematics, construct circuits and measure everything in
sight.  Chapter 4: Getting a Charge Out of


                                Capacitors



  In This Chapter
Understanding the importance of capacitors
Saying ‘no' to DC and ‘yes' to AC
Using Ohm's Law (carefully!) for capacitive circuits
Creating the dynamic duo: capacitors and resistors
Exploiting capacitors to affect signals
  Resistors may be the most commonly used electronic component, but capacitors come a close
second. Skilled at storing electrical energy, capacitors are important in so many electronic circuits that
the world would be a duller place without them.
    Capacitors allow you to change the shape of electrical signals carried by current - a task that
resistors alone can't perform. Although not as straightforward to understand as resistors, capacitors are
essential in many of the electronic and industrial systems you enjoy today, such as radios, computer
memory and car airbag systems, so investing your time and brain power in understanding how they
work is worthwhile.
  In this chapter, we look at what capacitors are made of, how they store electrical energy and how
circuits use that energy. We watch a capacitor charge up and later release its energy, and see how it
reacts to signals of different frequencies. We also show you how to use Ohm's Law to analyse
capacitive circuits and how capacitors work closely with resistors to perform useful functions, as well
as describing some uses of capacitors that prove their importance.


Reservoirs for Electrical Energy

  When you're thirsty, you can get a drink of water that flows from the pipes when you turn on the
tap or pour it from a storage container such as a bottle. You can think about electrical energy in a
similar way: you get it from the flow around the circuit, driven by a battery, or from storage devices
known as capacitors.


 A capacitor is a passive electronic device that stores electrical energy transferred from a
voltage source. Capacitors are useful because they can hold on to this energy until other parts of the
circuit need it. A capacitor is made from two metal plates separated by an insulator, which is known as
a dielectric. Two circuit symbols used for capacitors are shown here:



Charging and discharging
  If you supply a DC voltage to a circuit containing a capacitor in series with a light bulb, as shown
in Figure 4-1, current flow can't be sustained because a complete conductive path across the plates
doesn't exist. However, electrons do move around this little circuit - temporarily - in an interesting way.

Figure 4-1: When a battery is placed in a circuit with a capacitor, the capacitor charges up. A charged
capacitor stores electrical energy, much like a battery.          The negative terminal of a battery contains a surplus of electrons. Therefore, in the circuit
in Figure 4-1, the surplus electrons begin to move away from the battery towards one side of the
capacitor. The free electrons move towards one of the plates, where they're stopped in their tracks, with
no conductive path to follow across the capacitor. This process results in an excess of electrons on that
plate.
  At the same time, the positive terminal of the battery attracts electrons from the other capacitor
plate, so they begin to move. As they pass through the light bulb, they light it (but only for a split
second, which we explain in the next paragraph). This activity produces a net positive charge (due to a
deficiency of electrons) on that plate. A net negative charge on one plate and a net positive charge on
the other plate results in a voltage difference across the two plates. This voltage difference represents
the electrical energy stored in the capacitor.
  The battery keeps pushing electrons onto one plate (and pulling electrons off the other plate) until
the plate becomes saturated and can no longer accept any new charges (much like what happens when
you reach the spending limit on your credit card). Electrons stop moving around through the circuit,
and the light bulb goes out.
  When the capacitor is saturated, the voltage drop across the plates then equals the battery voltage,
and the capacitor is said to be fully charged. (In fact, the capacitor plates are charged; the capacitor as a
whole has the same number of charges it started with.) If you remove the battery from the circuit,
current doesn't flow and the charge remains on the capacitor plates. The capacitor looks like a voltage
source, because it holds the charge, storing electrical energy.
  If you replace the battery with a simple wire, you provide a path through the bulb for the surplus
electrons on one plate to follow to the other (electron-deficient) plate. The capacitor plates discharge
through the light bulb, lighting it up again briefly - even without a battery in the circuit - until the
charge on both plates neutralises. The light bulb consumes the electrical energy that had been stored in
the capacitor. When the capacitor is discharged (again, really the plates discharge), no more current
flows.


          A capacitor can store electrical energy for hours on end. You're wise to make sure that a
capacitor is discharged before handling it, lest it discharges through you.
  To discharge a capacitor, carefully place a bulb across its terminals, using insulated alligator clips
(which we discuss in Chapter 9) to make the connection. If the bulb lights up, you know that the
capacitor was charged, and the light should dim and go out in a few seconds as the capacitor
discharges. If you don't have a bulb handy, place a 10-KΩ 1-watt resistor across the terminals and wait
at least 30 seconds.Opposing voltage change
  Charges take time to build up on the capacitor plates when a DC voltage is applied and time to
leave the plates when the DC voltage is replaced with an ordinary connecting wire; for this reason,
capacitors are said to oppose voltage change. This phrase just means that if you suddenly change the
voltage applied to a capacitor, it can't react straight away and the voltage across the capacitor changes
more slowly than the voltage you applied.


          Think of the process this way. Imagine that you've stopped at a red traffic light. When the
light turns green, you set off, building up speed until you reach the speed limit. You take some time to
get to that speed, just as a capacitor takes time to get to a certain voltage level.
  This behaviour is quite different from what happens to resistors (which we discuss in Chapter 3).
If you switch on a battery across a resistor, the voltage across the resistor changes almost instantly.
  The capacitor voltage takes time to catch up to the source voltage, which is a useful attribute; in
fact, many circuits use capacitors because they take time to charge up. For this reason, capacitors can
change the shape of electrical signals.


Allowing alternating current
    Capacitors can pass direct current (DC) only very briefly, because the dielectric provides a barrier
to sustained electron flow. But they can pass alternating current (AC). How can that be?


          An AC voltage source varies up and down, rising from 0 (zero) volts to its peak voltage,
falling back through 0 volts and down to its negative peak voltage, and then rising back up through 0
volts to its peak voltage and so on.
  Now, suppose that you apply an AC voltage source across a capacitor. Imagine being an atom on
one of the capacitor plates and looking at the source terminal nearest you. You sometimes feel a force
pulling your electrons away from you, and other times you feel a force pushing more electrons towards
you. In each case, the strength of the force varies over time. You and the other atoms on the capacitor
plate alternate between giving up electrons and getting electrons as the source voltage swings up and
down.
  What's really happening is that as the source voltage rises from 0 volts to its peak voltage, the
capacitor charges up, just as it does when you apply a DC voltage. When the supply voltage reaches its
peak, the capacitor may or may not be fully charged (depending on a bunch of factors, such as the size
of the capacitor plates). Then the source voltage starts to decrease from its peak down to 0 volts. As it
does, at some point, the source voltage becomes lower than the capacitor voltage. When this happens,
the capacitor starts to discharge through the AC source. Then the source voltage reverses polarity and
the capacitor discharges all the way.
  As the source voltage keeps heading down towards its negative peak voltage, charges start to build
up in reverse on the capacitor plates: the plate that previously held more negative charges now holds
positive charges, and the plate that previously held more positive charges now holds negative charges.
As the source voltage rises from its negative peak, the capacitor again discharges through the AC
source, but in the opposite direction to its original discharge, and the cycle repeats itself.
  The AC source constantly changes direction, and therefore the capacitor goes through a
continuous cycle of charging, discharging and recharging. As a result, electrical charges move back and
forth through the circuit, and even though the dielectric isn't conducting current, the effect is the same
as if current is flowing through the capacitor. So, these amazing capacitors are said to pass AC even
though they block DC.Shining a light on capacitors
  If you add a light bulb to your capacitor circuit powered by an AC voltage source, the bulb lights
up and stays lit as long as the AC source is connected. Current alternates direction through the bulb, but
the bulb doesn't care which way current flows through it. Although no current ever actually passes
through the capacitor, the charging/discharging action of the capacitor creates the effect of current
flowing back and forth through the circuit.


Characterising Capacitors

  You can build capacitors in many ways, using different materials for the plates and dielectric and
varying the size of the plates. The particular make-up of a capacitor determines its characteristics and
influences its behaviour in a circuit.


Calculating the charge a capacitor can store
    Capacitance is the ability of a body to store charge. The same term - capacitance - is used to
describe just how much charge a capacitor can store on either one of its plates.
  The capacitance of a capacitor depends on three things: the surface area of the metal plates, the
thickness of the dielectric between the plates and the type of dielectric used (which we discuss in the
later section ‘Selecting dielectrics'). You don't need to know how to calculate capacitance (and, yes, a
scary-looking formula does exist), because any capacitor worth its salt comes with a documented
capacitance value. But knowing how to work out the capacitance helps you to understand that a
capacitor's capacity to hold charge depends on how it's constructed.
    Capacitance is measured in units called farads. One farad (abbreviated to F) is the capacitance
needed to hold one coulomb of charge (see Chapter 1 for how many trillions of electrons that is) with a
potential difference of 1V. Don't worry about the details of the definition; just know that one farad
represents a very, very, very large amount of capacitance. You're more likely to run across capacitors
with much smaller capacitances hovering in the microfarad (μF) or picofarad (pF) range. A microfarad
is a millionth of a farad, or 0.000001 farad, and a picofarad is a millionth of a millionth of a farad, or
0.000000000001 farad.
  Here are some examples:
A 10-μF capacitor is 10 millionths of a farad.

 
A 1-μF capacitor is 1 millionth of a farad.

 
A 100-pF capacitor is 100 millionths of a millionth of a farad, or you can say that it's 100 millionths
of a microfarad. Phew!

 


Reading capacitor values
  Some capacitors have their values printed directly on them, in farads or portions of a farad,
particularly larger capacitors that have enough space available to print the capacitance and working
voltage.
  Most smaller capacitors, such as 0.1- or 0.01-μF mica disc capacitors, use a three-digit marking
system to indicate capacitance. Most people find the numbering system easy to use. But watch out! The
system is based on picofarads, not microfarads. A number using this marking system, such as 103,
means 10, followed by three zeros, as in 10,000, for a grand total of 10,000 picofarads. Some capacitors
have a two-digit number printed on them that represents its value in picofarads. For instance, a value of
22 means 22 picofarads. No third digit means no zeroes to put on the end.
  For values over 1,000 picofarads, your parts supplier very likely lists the capacitor in microfarads,even when the markings on it indicate picofarads. To convert the picofarad value you read on the
capacitor into microfarads, just move the decimal point six places to the left. So, a capacitor marked
with a 103, as in the example above, has a value of 10,000 pF or 0.01 F.


                          Incredible shrinking capacitors

    Making  farad-range  capacitors  has  become  feasible   only  recently.  Using  older  construction
    techniques, a one-farad capacitor would be bigger than a bread bin.

 
    By  using  other  technologies  and  materials,  such  as  microscopically  small  carbon  granules,
    manufacturers can now build capacitors of one farad and above that fit into the palm of your
    hand. Computer memories, clock radios and other electric devices that need to retain a small
    charge for extended periods of time when they have no access to power often use capacitors as
    substitute batteries.

 

 

  Suppose that you're building a circuit that calls for a 0.1-μF disc capacitor. You can convert
microfarads into picofarads to figure out what marking to look for on the capacitor package. Just move
the decimal point six places to the right, and you get 100,000 pF. Because the three-digit marking
consists of the first two digits of your pF value (10) followed by the additional number of zeros (4), you
need a mica disc capacitor labelled ‘104'.
  You can use Table 4-1 as a reference guide to common capacitor markings that use this numbering
system.





















   Another less-common numbering system uses both numbers and letters, as follows:
4R1

 
  The placement of the letter R tells you the position of the decimal point: 4R1 is really 4.1. This
numbering system doesn't indicate the units of measure, however, which can be in microfarads or
picofarads.
  You can test capacitance with a capacitor meter or a multimeter with a capacitance input. Most
meters require that you plug the capacitor directly into the test instrument, because the capacitance can
increase with longer leads, making the reading less accurate.
  On many capacitors a single letter code indicates the tolerance. You may find that letter placed by
itself on the body of the capacitor or placed after the three digit mark, such as:
103Z

 
  The letter Z denotes a tolerance of +80 per cent to 20 per cent. This tolerance means that the
capacitor, rated at 0.01 μF, may have an actual value as much as 80 per cent higher or 20 per cent lower
than the stated value. Table 4-2 lists the meanings of common code letters used to indicate capacitor
tolerance.


          Capacitors rarely do what they say on the tin. The actual capacitance of the capacitor can
vary quite a bit from the nominal capacitance. Manufacturing variations cause this problem; capacitor
makers aren't trying to cheat you. Fortunately, this issue rarely creates a problem in home-made
circuits. Still, you need to know about these variations so that if a circuit calls for a higher precision
capacitor, you know what to buy. Like resistors, capacitors are rated by their tolerance, and this
tolerance comes as a percentage.Keeping an eye on the working voltage
  The working voltage, sometimes abbreviated as WV, is the highest voltage that the manufacturer
recommends placing across a capacitor safely. If you exceed the working voltage, you can damage the
dielectric, which can result in current arcing between the plates, like a lightning strike during a storm.
That means that you short out your capacitor and allow all sorts of unwanted current to flow - and
maybe even damage other components.
    Capacitors designed for DC circuits are typically rated for a WV of no more than 16-35 volts.
That's plenty for DC circuits, which are usually powered by sources from 3.3 volts to 12 volts.


          When you build circuits that use higher voltages, you need to concern yourself with the
working voltage of a capacitor. If you do, be sure to select a capacitor that has a WV of at least 10-15
per cent more than the supply voltage in your circuit, just to be on the safe side.


Selecting dielectrics
  Suppose that a child asks you to make her a banana split, but you don't have any bananas. So you
improvise and use cucumbers instead. Yuck! It's just not the same. Similarly, designers of electronic
circuitry specify capacitors for projects by the dielectric material in them. Some materials are better in
certain applications: just like bananas in a banana split or cucumber in a sandwich, they provide a better
match.
  The most common dielectric materials are aluminium electrolytic, tantalum electrolytic, ceramic,
mica, polypropylene, polyester (or Mylar), paper and polystyrene. If a circuit diagram calls for a
capacitor of a certain type, you need to be sure to get one that matches.


Sizing up capacitor packaging
    Capacitors come in a variety of shapes and sizes, as shown in Figure 4-2. Aluminium electrolytic
and paper capacitors commonly come in a cylindrical shape. Tantalum electrolytic, ceramic, mica and
polystyrene capacitors have a more bulbous shape because they typically get dipped into an epoxy or
plastic bath to form their outside skin. However, not all capacitors of a particular type (such as mica or
Mylar) get manufactured in the same way, so you can't always tell the component by its cover.  Your favourite parts supplier may label capacitors according to the way their leads are arranged:
axially or radially. Axial leads extend out from each end of a cylindrically shaped capacitor, along its
axis; radial leads extend from one end of a capacitor and are parallel to each other (until you bend them
for use in a circuit).

Figure 4-2: Capacitors come in a variety of shapes and sizes and may be polarised or non-polarised.














  If you go searching for capacitors inside your personal computer (PC), you may not recognise
them when you see them. That's because the capacitors in your PC don't have any leads at all! So-called
surface mount packages for capacitors are extremely small and are designed to be soldered directly to
printed circuit boards (PCBs), such as the ones in your PC.
  Since the 1980s, high-volume manufacturing processes have been using surface mount technology
(SMT) to connect capacitors and other components directly to the surface of PCBs, saving space and
improving circuit performance.


Connecting with polarity
  Some larger-value electrolytic capacitors (1μF and up) are polarised, meaning that the way in
which you insert the capacitor into your circuit matters. Polarised capacitors are designed for use in DC
circuits, and the positive terminal must be kept at a higher voltage than the negative terminal.
  Many polarised capacitors sport a minus (-) sign or a large arrow pointing towards the negative
terminal. For example, as the top capacitor in Figure 4-2 shows, the minus sign and arrow point to the
negative lead of the aluminium electrolytic capacitor. For radial capacitors, the negative lead is often
shorter than the positive lead.
  The fact that capacitor packages generally point out the negative terminal doesn't mean circuit
diagrams follow the same convention. Usually, if a circuit contains a polarised capacitor, you see a plus
sign (+) on one side of the capacitor symbol, as shown below, showing you how to orient the capacitor
in the circuit:



          If a capacitor is polarised, you really, really must be sure to install it in the circuit the right
way round. If you reverse the leads, say, by connecting the + side to the ground rail in your circuit, you
can cause the dielectric inside the capacitor to break down, which can short-circuit the capacitor. You
may damage other components in your circuit (by sending too much current their way), and your
capacitor may even explode.Varying capacitance
  Variable capacitors allow you to adjust capacitance to suit your circuit's needs. The symbols for a
variable capacitor are shown below:

  The most common type of variable capacitor is the air dielectric type, such as the one that you find
in the tuning control of an AM radio.
    Mechanically controlled variable capacitors work by changing the distance between the capacitor
plates or the amount of overlap between the surfaces of the two plates. Specially designed diodes (a
semiconductor device we discuss in Chapter 6) can function as electronically controlled variable
capacitors, known as varactors or varicaps. By changing the DC voltage applied to these devices, you
change the capacitance of the device.
  You probably interact with variable capacitors more often than you think, because they're behind
many touch-sensitive devices, such as the keys on computer keyboards and the buttons on your
favourite remote control.
  One type of microphone uses a variable capacitor to convert sound into electrical signals, with the
diaphragm of the mike acting as a movable capacitor plate. Sound fluctuations make the diaphragm
vibrate, which varies the capacitance, producing voltage fluctuations.


Combining Capacitors

  If multiple capacitors are in a circuit you want to analyse, you can combine them to get the
equivalent capacitance. But the rules for combining capacitors are different from the rules for
combining resistors (which we discuss in Chapter 3).


Capacitors in parallel
  Figure 4-3 shows two capacitors in parallel, with the common connection points labelled A and B.
Notice that point A connects to one plate of capacitor C1 and one plate of capacitor C2. Electrically
speaking, point A connects to a metal plate that's the size of the two plates combined. Likewise for
point B, which connects to both the other plate of capacitor C1 and the other plate of capacitor C2. The
larger the surface area of a capacitor plate, the larger the capacitance. Therefore, capacitors in parallel
add up.

Figure 4-3: Capacitors in parallel add up. Each metal plate of one capacitor is tied electrically to one of
the metal plates of the parallel capacitor. Each pair of plates behaves as a single larger plate, effectively
resulting in a higher capacitance.






  The equivalent capacitance of a set of capacitors in parallel is:

  C1, C2, C3 and so forth represent the values of the capacitors and Cparallel represents the total
equivalent capacitance.
  For the capacitors in Figure 4-3, the total capacitance is:


  If you place the capacitors from Figure 4-3 in a working circuit, the voltage across each capacitor
is the same, and current flowing in to point A splits up to travel through each capacitor and then joinstogether again at point B.


Capacitors in series
  If placing capacitors in parallel increases the total plate area, then connecting capacitors in series
increases the total dielectric thickness. So capacitors in series reduce the effective capacitance in the
same way that resistors in parallel reduce the overall resistance:

  C1 and C2 are the values of the individual capacitors, and Cseries is the equivalent capacitance.
The total capacitance (in μF) of a 100-μF capacitor in series with a 220-μF capacitor, as shown in
Figure 4-4, is:






          You can temporarily ignore the ‘μ' part of ‘μF' while you're performing the calculation
above - as long as all the capacitance values are in μF and you remember that the resulting total
capacitance is also in μF.

Figure 4-4: Capacitors in series work against each other, reducing the overall capacitance.





  The equivalent capacitance of a set of capacitors in series is:


  As for any components in series, the current running through each capacitor in series is the same,
but the voltage dropped across each capacitor may be different.


Understanding Capacitive Reactance

  In Chapter 3, we define resistance as a measure of an object's opposition to the flow of electrons,
and we say that resistors have controlled amounts of resistance that remain the same no matter what the
voltage or current situation. If you could measure a capacitor's opposition to the flow of electrons, you'd
find that it varies, depending on the situation.
  In the earlier section ‘Charging and discharging', we say that capacitors block direct current except
for a short time while they're charging and discharging, and allow AC. When a DC voltage is suddenly
applied to a capacitor, such as in the light bulb circuit in Figure 4-1, at first, while the capacitor is
charging, current flows through the circuit, lighting the bulb. As the capacitor nears its capacity to hold
charges, less current flows until eventually the capacitor is fully charged, and current no longer flows.
At first, when a sudden voltage change is applied, the capacitor provides very little opposition to
electron flow, but it eventually behaves like an open circuit, opposing all electron flow.
    Application of an AC voltage source to a capacitive circuit allows current to flow through the
circuit. The faster the source voltage fluctuates, the less the capacitor opposes electron flow - in the
same way as the sudden application of the battery to the discharged capacitor in Figure 4-1. The slower
the source voltage fluctuates, the more the capacitor opposes electron flow.          The apparent AC resistance to current, known as the capacitive reactance, is measured in
ohms (yes, ohms!). You calculate capacitive reactance, symbolised by Xc, using the following formula:


  In this formula, f represents the frequency in hertz (Hz) of the applied AC voltage, C is the
capacitance in farads (not μF or pF) and Π is that constant you first met in geometry class that starts out
as 3.14 and keeps going without repeating itself. You can approximate 2 × Π as 6.28 and simplify the
formula as follows:

  You can see from this formula that capacitive reactance decreases as the frequency of the applied
voltage increases. (A higher value of frequency makes the denominator bigger, which makes the
overall fraction smaller.) For instance, you can calculate the capacitive reactance of a 0.1-μF capacitor
when an AC voltage source fluctuating at 20 KHz is applied as follows:


  If you slow down the frequency of the source voltage to 1 Hz, the capacitive reactance changes:


  Note that this situation is very different from the done-and-dusted resistance of your average
resistor. For capacitors, the faster the voltage fluctuates (higher frequency), the lower the reactance and
the more freely current flows. The slower the voltage fluctuates (lower frequency), the higher the
reactance and the less easily current flows. If the frequency is zero, which means no voltage
fluctuations (or a constant DC voltage), the denominator is zero, and the reactance is infinite. That's the
open circuit (infinite resistance) situation in which the capacitor blocks DC signals.


Using Ohm's Law for capacitive reactance
  As capacitive reactance is measured in ohms, you may be wondering if you can use Ohm's Law
for capacitors. The answer is yes - sort of. Ohm's Law works for capacitive reactance - but just one
frequency at a time. If you change the frequency of the AC voltage, even if you don't change the
magnitude of the voltage ups and downs, you have to recalculate Ohm's Law given the new frequency.
  Suppose that you apply an AC voltage source with a peak value of 5 volts to your 0.1-μF
capacitor. The current through the circuit alternates at the same frequency as the voltage, and yet Ohm's
Law tells us that the peak value of the current depends on the peak value of the voltage and the
capacitive reactance.
  Say, for example, that the frequency is 1 Hz. From the calculations in the previous section, you
know that the capacitive reactance of a 0.1-μF capacitor at 1 Hz is 1.6 MΩ. Now you can apply Ohm's
Law to calculate the peak AC current ‘through' the capacitor for a 1-Hz signal as follows:




  Now imagine that you change the frequency to 20 KHz, but keep the same peak voltage of 5 volts.
Now the capacitive reactance is 80 Ω (as calculated in the previous section). Using Ohm's Law, the
peak current ‘through' the capacitor when you apply a 20-KHz voltage with a peak value of 5 volts is:




  So for the same capacitor in the circuit, as you increase the frequency of the source voltage, you
decrease the capacitive reactance, resulting in an increase in current flowing through the circuit.Likewise, if you decrease the frequency of the source voltage, you increase the capacitive reactance,
resulting in a decreased current.


Understanding that behaviour depends on frequency
  Unlike resistors, capacitors in an AC circuit act differently depending on the frequency of the
voltage applied to them. This frequency-dependent behaviour means that pretty much everything about
the circuit varies depending on the applied frequency.
  As the following section shows, you can exploit this frequency-dependent behaviour to create
circuits that perform useful functions, such as filters that favour high-frequency signals over low-
frequency signals, and vice versa.


So What Have Capacitors Ever Done for Us?

    Capacitors are in most electronic circuits you encounter every day. Their abilities to store
electrical energy, block DC current and vary their opposition to current depending on applied frequency
are commonly exploited by circuit designers to set the stage for extremely useful functionality.
Capacitors (like the Romans) have made so many things possible that listing them all is difficult. In the
following sections, we just make a start.


Storing electrical energy
  Many devices use capacitors to store energy temporarily for later use. Uninterruptible power
supplies (UPSs) and alarm clocks keep a charged capacitor on hand just in case of a power failure. The
energy stored in the capacitor releases when the charging circuit disconnects (which it does when the
power goes out!).
  Similarly, cameras use capacitors to temporarily store the energy used to generate the flash, and
many electronic devices use capacitors to supply energy while the batteries are being changed. Car
audio systems commonly use a capacitor to supply energy when the amplifier needs more than the car's
electrical system can give. Without that capacitor, every time you hear a heavy bass note, your
headlights would dim!


Blocking DC current
  When connected in series with a signal source, such as a microphone, capacitors block DC current
but pass AC current. This process is known as capacitive coupling or AC coupling, and when used this
way, the capacitor is known as a coupling capacitor. Multi-stage audio systems commonly use this
functionality between stages so that only the AC signal from the first circuit passes to the second
circuit, and any DC offset is removed prior to the amplification stage.


Smoothing out voltage
  Power supplies that convert AC to DC often take advantage of the fact that capacitors don't react
quickly to sudden changes in voltage. These devices use large electrolytic capacitors to smooth out
varying DC supplies. These smoothing capacitors keep the output voltage at a relatively constant level
by discharging through the load when the DC supply falls below a certain level. This situation is a
classic example of using a capacitor to store electrical energy until you need it: when the DC supply
can't maintain the voltage, the capacitor gives up some of its stored energy to take up the slack.


Creating timers
  Because a capacitor takes time to charge and discharge, they're often used in timing circuits to
create ‘ticks' and ‘tocks' when the voltage rises above or falls below a certain level. The value of thecapacitor, in addition to other components in the circuit, controls the timing of the ticking. We discuss
this aspect in more detail in the later section ‘Teaming Up with Resistors'.


Tuning in (or out) frequencies
    Capacitors are often used to help select or reject certain electrical signals, depending upon their
frequency. For instance, a tuning circuit in a radio receiver system relies on capacitors and other
components to allow the signal from just one radio station to pass through to the amplifier stage, while
blocking signals from all other radio stations. Each radio station is assigned a specific broadcast
frequency, and therefore the value of capacitors in tuning circuits is selected so that the target frequency
is tuned in.
  We describe simple filters in the later section ‘Selecting Frequencies with Simple RC Filters'.


Teaming Up with Resistors

    Capacitors are often found working hand in hand with resistors in electronic circuits, combining
their talent for storing electrical energy with a resistor's ability to control the flow of electrons. Put
these two together and you can control how fast electrons fill (or charge) a capacitor and how fast those
electrons empty out (or discharge) from a capacitor. This dynamic duo is very popular, and circuits
containing both resistors and capacitors are known as RC circuits.


Timing is everything
  Take a look at the RC circuit in Figure 4-5. The battery charges the capacitor through the resistor
when the switch is closed. At first, the voltage across the capacitor, Vc, is zero (assuming the capacitor
was discharged to begin with).
  When you close the switch, current starts to flow and charges start to build up on the capacitor
plates. Ohm's Law tells you that the charging current, I, is determined by the voltage across the resistor,
Vr, and the value of the resistor, R (I = Vr/R). And because the voltage drops around a circuit must
equal the supply voltage, you know that the resistor voltage is the difference between the supply
voltage, Vsupply, and the capacitor voltage, Vc (Vr = Vsupply - Vc). Using those two facts, you can
analyse what's going on in this circuit over time, as follows:
Initially: Because the capacitor voltage is initially zero, the resistor voltage initially equals the
supply voltage.

 
Charging: As the capacitor charges, it works together with the resistor to slow the current.

 
Fully charged: When the capacitor is fully charged, current stops flowing, no voltage drops across
the resistor and the entire supply voltage drops across the capacitor.

 

Figure 4-5: In an RC circuit, the capacitor charges up through the resistor. The values of the resistor
and capacitor determine how quickly the capacitor charges.






  If you remove the battery and connect the resistor across the capacitor, the capacitor discharges
through the resistor. This time the voltage across the resistor is equal to the voltage across the capacitor(Vr = Vc), so the current is Vc/R. Here's what happens:
Initially: Because the capacitor is fully charged, its voltage is initially Vsupply. And because Vr =
Vc, the resistor voltage is initially Vsupply, the current jumps up immediately to Vsupply/R. Therefore,
the capacitor shuffles charges from one plate to the other pretty quickly.

 
  Discharging: The capacitor continues to discharge, but at a slower rate, and as the voltage falls so
too does the current.

 
Fully discharged: When the capacitor is fully discharged, current stops flowing, and no voltage
drops across the resistor or the capacitor.

 
  The waveform in Figure 4-6 shows how the capacitor voltage changes over time as it charges and
discharges through the resistor when a constant voltage is applied and then removed from the circuit.
  How fast the capacitor charges (and discharges) depends on the resistance and capacitance of the
RC circuit. The larger the resistance, and the larger the capacitance, the smaller the current that flows
for the same supply voltage, and the longer the capacitor takes to charge.
  During the discharge cycle, a larger resistor slows down the electrons more as they move from one
plate to the other, increasing the discharge time, and a larger capacitor holds more charge, taking longer
to discharge.

Figure 4-6: The voltage across a capacitor changes over time as the capacitor charges and discharges.








Calculating RC time constants
  You can adjust a capacitor's charge and discharge time by picking the values of the capacitor and
the resistor. In fact, a definitive relationship exists between your choice of resistance, R, and
capacitance, C, and the time taken to charge and discharge your selected capacitor through your chosen
resistor. If you multiply R (in ohms) by C (in farads), you get what's known as the RC time constant of
your RC circuit, symbolised by T:



          A capacitor charges and discharges nearly completely after five times its RC time
constant, or 5RC (which really means 5 × R × C). After one time constant, a discharged capacitor
charges to roughly two-thirds of its capacity, and a charged capacitor discharges nearly two-thirds of
the way.
  For instance, suppose that you chose a 2-MΩ resistor and a 15-μF capacitor for the circuit in
Figure 4-5. You calculate the RC time constant as follows:

  Then you know that it's going to take about 150 seconds (or 2 1/2 minutes) to fully charge or
discharge the capacitor. If you want a shorter charge/discharge cycle time, you can reduce the resistor
or the capacitor (or both).
  Suppose that the 15-μF capacitor is the only one you have in the house, and you want to charge it
in five seconds. You can figure out what resistor you need to make this happen as follows:
Find the RC time constant: You know that five times the RC time constant is necessary to chargethe capacitor fully, and you want that to be five seconds. So the RC time constant is one-fifth of five
seconds, or one second.

 
Calculate R: If R × C = 1 second, and C is 15-μF, you know that R = 1 second/0.000015 farads,
which is approximately 66,667 ohms or 67 kΩ.

 


Creating a timer
  Armed with the knowledge of the RC time constant, you can use an RC circuit to create a timer.
Say, for example, your freeloading flatmate keeps raiding your fridge in the middle of the night. You
decide to set up a little noisemaker to scare her off whenever she opens the fridge. Just for fun, you
want to allow her some time to gaze at the lovely cool beers inside before you shock the pants off her
with a few choice decibels of sound from a buzzer, triggered by a switch that closes when she opens the
fridge door.
  If you've got a buzzer that requires a voltage of 6 volts in order to sound off, and you're using a 9-
volt battery to power your little scare circuit, you can build an RC circuit like the one in Figure 4-5 and
use the capacitor voltage to trigger the buzzer. The idea is to charge the capacitor to about 6 volts in the
time you want your flatmate to think about whether she wants a beer or a lager and reach out for one,
but then blast her with the buzzer.
  Suppose that this period is about 10 seconds. You have a 15-μF capacitor handy, so you need to
calculate the resistance necessary to charge the capacitor to 6 volts in 10 seconds. Because the capacitor
keeps charging until it reaches the full power supply voltage of 9 volts, the trigger point (when the
buzzer sounds) is when the capacitor reaches 6/9 of its capacity, or about two-thirds capacity. That
happens after just one time constant. You calculate the resistance for your 10-second delay-to-buzzing
interval as follows:


  You have a 620 Ω resistor handy, so you have an actual RC time constant of about 9.3 seconds
(that's 620 ohms × 15-μF). It takes about 9.3 seconds for the capacitor voltage to reach 6 volts, so your
flatmate has enough time to look - but not enough time to drink - before she gets caught red-handed.


 If you want to fine-tune the delay, use a resistor with a slightly smaller value than you
need and add a potentiometer (pot) in series with the resistor. Because the total resistance is the sum of
the value of the fixed resistor and that of the pot, you can increase or decrease the resistance by
adjusting the pot. Just tweak the pot until you get the delay you want. (We cover potentiometers in
Chapter 3.)


Selecting Frequencies with Simple RC Filters

  Because capacitors behave differently depending on the frequency of the voltage or current in a
circuit, they're often used in special circuits called filters to allow or reject various signals. Capacitors
naturally block DC signals and allow AC signals to pass, but you can control just which AC signals to
allow to pass by carefully choosing the components in filter circuits.
  We discuss here very simple filters and how you can control which frequencies make their way
through them. Electronic filter design, which is a field of study on its own and beyond the scope of this
book, usually involves more complex circuits to control the output precisely. However, the underlying
concepts are the same as for the simple filters we discuss.Looking at low-pass filters
  In the circuit in Figure 4-7, a variable voltage source, labelled Vin, is applied to a series RC
circuit, and the output of the circuit, Vout, is the voltage across the capacitor.
  Suppose that you apply a constant voltage (f = 0 Hz) to this circuit. No current flows, and so the
full input voltage drops across the capacitor: Vout = Vin. At the other end of the frequency spectrum,
the capacitive reactance (1/2 × Π f × C) for a very, very high frequency is a very, very low value. This
high frequency effectively short-circuits the capacitor, so the voltage drop across the capacitor is zero:
Vout = 0.
  As you alter the frequency of the input signal from very low to very high, the capacitive reactance
varies from very high to very low. The higher the reactance, the more voltage drops across the capacitor
(at the expense of voltage dropped across the resistor). The lower the reactance, the less voltage drops
across the capacitor (and the more is dropped across the resistor).
  This circuit tends to allow lower frequencies to pass from input to output while blocking higher
frequencies from getting through and is therefore known as a low-pass filter.

Figure 4-7: A low-pass filter allows input signals with low frequencies to pass through to the output.







Encountering high-pass filters
  By reversing the roles of the resistor and capacitor in the low-pass RC circuit, you can create the
opposite effect: a high-pass filter. In the circuit in Figure 4-8, the output voltage is the voltage across
the resistor. For very low-frequency input signals, the capacitor blocks current from flowing, so no
voltage drops across the resistor: Vout = 0. For very high-frequency input signals, the capacitor acts
like a short, so current flows and all the input voltage drops across the resistor: Vout = Vin.
  As you alter the frequency from low to high, the capacitive reactance varies from high to low. You
can think of this situation as placing an imaginary device - a frequency-controlled potentiometer - in the
circuit in place of the capacitor: as the input frequency increases, the reactance decreases, and more and
more of the input voltage drops across the resistor.

Figure 4-8: A high-pass filter allows input signals with high frequencies to pass through to the output.






Cutting off frequencies at the knees
  Filter circuits are designed to pass certain frequencies while attenuating, or reducing the amplitude
of, other frequencies. No filter is perfect; it can't pass all signals above or below a specific frequency
completely, while totally blocking all other frequencies. Complex filter designs are much better than
simple RC filters at distinguishing which frequencies get through and which don't, but all filters -
simple or complex - share a design parameter known as the cut-off frequency.
  The cut-off frequency, Fc, is the frequency at which the filter starts to restrict the passage of the
input signal. Figure 4-9 shows a graph of the amplitude of the output signal for various input
frequencies for a high-pass filter (notice that this graph is a frequency plot, not a time plot!). The graphshows that frequencies above the cut-off frequency are allowed to pass with little or no attenuation,
while frequencies below the cut-off frequency are attenuated substantially. The cut-off frequency,
which occurs near the knee of the curve, can be found using the following equation:


  Because T = R × C, you can control the cut-off frequency of your simple low- or high-pass filter
by carefully selecting the values of the resistor and capacitor, according to the following equation:


  For instance, say you have a high-pass filter configuration with a 220-Ω resistor and a 0.1-μF
capacitor. The cut-off frequency of your filter is roughly 1/6.28 × 220 ohms × 0.0000001 farads, or
about 7,200 Hz. If you use such a filter in an audio system, don't be surprised when you don't hear
much of your favourite band's voices or their instruments: the sounds they make fall well below 7,000
Hz, and your simple filter attenuates those sounds!

Figure 4-9: The filter cut-off frequency, Fc, is the frequency at which the filter starts to attenuate the
signal.









Filtering frequency bands
  You can design filters to have two cut-off frequencies - one high and one low - to allow a certain
band, or range, of frequencies to pass through or to reject a band of frequencies. Such filters, known
respectively as band-pass and band-reject filters, are constructed by combining low- and high-pass
filters in just the right way.
  Band-pass filters are commonly used in radio receiver systems to select just the right signal from
among many signals transmitted through the air. You can use a band-reject filter to filter out unwanted
hum from a 60-Hz power line - as long as you know the frequency range of the hum. Most of these
complex filters employ inductors, as well as capacitors and resistors (we discuss inductors in Chapter
5).


Trying Out Simple Capacitive Circuits

  If you're anxious to play around with some real capacitive circuits, take a peek at Chapter 13 in
Part III. If you decide to do so, however, we ask that you please read through Part II first, so that you
know how to set up your electronics shop, read schematics and - most importantly - can build circuits
safely.Chapter 5: Curling Up with Coils and


                                    Crystals



  In This Chapter
Inducing currents in coils with a changing magnetic field
Opposing changes in current with an inductor
Using inductors in filter circuits
  Resonating with RLC circuits
Making frequencies crystal clear
Coupling magnetic flux to transfer energy between circuits
  Many of the best inventions in the world, including penicillin, Post-it notes, champagne and the
pacemaker, were the result of pure accidental discovery (in some cases, attributable to utter
carelessness or second-rate science). One such lucky discovery - the interaction between electricity and
magnetism - led to the development of two amazingly useful electronic components: the induction coil
and the transformer.
  The induction coil, or inductor, stores electrical energy in a magnetic field and shapes electrical
signals in a different way to a capacitor. Whether operating alone, in special pairs known as
transformers or as part of a team along with capacitors and resistors, inductors are at the heart of many
modern-day conveniences you may not want to live without, including radios, television and even the
mains electricity network.
  This chapter reveals the relationship between electricity and magnetism and explains how 19th-
century scientists purposely exploited that relationship to create inductors and transformers. We look at
what happens when you try to change the direction of current through an inductor too quickly and how
Ohm's Law can be applied to inductors.
  We also explore how inductors are used in circuits, why crystals do something rather special at
just one frequency and discover how transformers transfer electrical energy from one circuit to another
- without any direct contact between the circuits.


Working Both Ways: Magnetism and Electricity

  Magnetism and electricity were once thought to be two completely separate phenomena until a
19th-century scientist named Hans Christian Ørsted discovered that a compass needle moved away
from magnetic north when current supplied by a nearby battery was switched on and off.
    Ørsted's keen observation led to lots of research and experimentation, ultimately confirming the
fact that electricity and magnetism are closely related. After several years (and many more accidental
discoveries), Michael Faraday and other scientists figured out how to capitalise on the phenomenon
known as electromagnetism. Today's power transformers, electromagnetic generators and many
industrial motors are based upon the principles of electromagnetism.
  In this section, we look at how electricity and magnetism interact.


Drawing the (flux) lines with magnets
  Just as electricity involves a force (voltage) between two electrical charges, so magnetism involves
a force between two magnetic poles. If you've ever performed the classic school science experiment
where you place a magnet on a surface and toss a bunch of iron filings near the magnet, you've seen the
effects of magnetic force. Remember what happened to the filings? They settled into curved linearpaths from the north pole of the magnet to its south pole.
  Those filings showed you the magnetic lines of force - also known as flux lines - within the
magnetic field created by the magnet. You may have seen more filings closer to the magnet because
that's where the magnetic field is strongest. Figure 5-1 shows the pattern produced by invisible lines of
flux around a magnet.

Figure 5-1: Magnetic lines of force exist in parallel flux lines from a magnet's north pole to its south
pole.






Producing a magnetic field with electricity
  As Ørsted discovered, electrical current running through a wire produces a weak magnetic field
surrounding the wire, which is why the compass needle moved when the compass was close to Ørsted's
circuit. Stop the current from flowing, and the magnetic field disappears. You control this temporary
magnet, known as an electromagnet, electronically: you can turn the magnet on and off by switching
the current on and off.
  With the current on, the lines of force encircle the wire and are spaced evenly along the length of
the wire, as shown in Figure 5-2. Picture a paper towel roll with a wire running through its exact centre.
If you pass current through the wire, invisible flux lines wrap around the wire along the surface of the
paper towel roll and along similar rings around the wire at various distances from the wire. The strength
of the magnetic force decreases as the flux lines get farther away from the wire. If you wind the
current-carrying wire into a uniform coil of wire, the flux lines align and reinforce each other,
strengthening the magnetic field.

Figure 5-2: Current flowing through a wire produces a weak magnetic field around the wire.








Inducing current with a magnet
  Perhaps you're wondering, if electricity running through a wire produces a magnetic field, what
happens if you place a closed loop of wire near a permanent magnet? Actually, nothing happens -
unless you move the magnet. A moving magnetic field induces a voltage across the ends of the wire,
causing current to flow through the wire. Electromagnetic induction seems to make current magically
appear - without any direct contact with the wire.
  The strength of the current depends on a lot of things, such as the strength of the magnet, the
number of flux lines intercepted by the wire, the angle at which the wire cuts across flux lines and the
speed of the magnet motion. You can increase your chances of inducing a strong current by wrapping
the wire in a coil and placing the magnet through the centre (core) of the coil: the more turns of wire
you wrap, the stronger the current.
  Suppose you place a strong permanent magnet in the centre of a coil of wire that's connected as in
Figure 5-3. If you move the magnet up, current is induced in the wire and flows in one direction. If youmove the magnet down, current is induced, but flows in the other direction. By moving the magnet up
and down repeatedly, you can produce an alternating current (AC) in the wire. Alternatively, you can
move the wire up and down around the magnet, and the same thing happens. As long as relative motion
exists between the wire and the magnet, current is induced in the wire.

Figure 5-3: Moving a magnet inside a coil of wire induces a current in the wire.








          Many power plants generate AC by rotating a conductor inside a very powerful magnet.
  Moving a conductor is easier than moving a magnet, and power plants use different methods to
move the conductor. Most methods involve attaching the conductor to a rotating turbine, which turns as
water or steam applies pressure to its fins. As the conductor makes one full rotation inside the magnet,
the magnet pulls electrons first in one direction and then in the other direction, producing alternating
current.


Introducing the Inductor: A Coil with a Magnetic Personality

  An inductor is a passive electronic component made from a coil of wire wrapped around a core,
which can be air, iron or ferrite (a brittle material made from iron). Wrapping wire around iron or
ferrite increases the strength of the magnetic field induced by current several hundred times. Inductors
are sometimes known as coils, chokes, electromagnets and solenoids, depending on how they're used in
circuits. You can see the circuit symbol for an inductor below:




          If you pass current through an inductor, you create a magnetic field around the wire. If you
change the current, increasing it or decreasing it, the magnetic flux around the coil changes, inducing a
voltage across the inductor. That voltage, sometimes called back voltage, causes a current flow that
opposes the main current. This property of inductors is known as self-inductance or simply inductance.


Measuring inductance
    Inductance, symbolised by L, is measured in units called henrys (named after Joseph Henry, a
New Yorker who liked to play with magnets and discovered the property of self-inductance).
  An inductance of one henry (symbol H) induces one volt when the current changes its rate of flow
by one ampere per second. Naturally, one henry is much too large for everyday electronics, so you're
more likely to hear about millihenrys (mH), so-named because thousandths of a henry is more
commonplace (not because Joseph's wife's name was Milly), or microhenrys (μH), which are millionths
of a henry (not named after Joseph's baby).


Opposing current changes
  Figure 5-4 shows the application of a DC voltage to a resistor in series with an inductor. When the
DC voltage is first switched on, current starts to flow, inducing a magnetic field around the coils of theinductor. As the current increases, the strength of the magnetic field increases proportionally. The
changing magnetic field induces a back voltage. The inductor seems to be trying to prevent the current
from changing, and the effect is that the current doesn't increase as quickly.

Figure 5-4: Inductors oppose changes in current, so it takes time for a direct current (DC) to flow
through an inductor. When it does flow, the inductor acts like a short in a DC circuit.








  The induced current reduces the strength of the expanding magnetic field a little. As the source
current keeps rising, the magnetic field continues to expand (but more and more slowly), and current
opposing the source current continues to be induced (but it gets smaller and smaller). The cycle
continues, until finally, the current settles down to a steady DC. When current reaches a steady level,
the magnetic field no longer changes and the inductor stops opposing the current.
  The overall effect is that the current flowing through the inductor takes some time to reach a
steady DC value. When this happens, the current flows freely through the inductor, which acts like a
simple wire (or short circuit, with VL = 0 volts), and the current is determined by the source voltage
and the resistor according to Ohm's Law (I = Vsupply/R). (We discuss Ohm's Law in Chapter 3.)
  If you then remove the DC voltage source and connect the resistor across the inductor, current
flows for a short period of time, with the inductor again opposing the sudden drop in current, until
finally, the current settles down to zero and the magnetic field disappears.


 From an energy perspective, when you apply a DC source to an inductor, it stores
electrical energy in a magnetic field. When you remove the DC source and connect a resistor across the
inductor, the energy transfers to the resistor, where it dissipates as heat. Inductors store electrical
energy in magnetic fields.


          To help understand inductors, think about water flowing through a pipe with a turbine in
it. At first the water is slowed by the inertia of the wheel and the blades. Think of it like trying to push a
car from a standstill. But after a while, the water flows at a constant rate, hardly slowed by the turbine
turning at the same rate as the water is moving. If you suddenly remove the water pressure, the blades
keep turning for a time, pushing water along with them until eventually both the turbine and the water
stop.


          Don't worry about the ins and outs of induced currents, expanding and contracting
magnetic fields, and the like. Just remember a few things about inductors:
  Inductors oppose current changes.

 
  Inductors act like an open circuit when DC is first applied (no current flows right away, and the
entire source voltage drops across the inductor).

 
  Inductors eventually act like a short circuit in DC circuits - when all the magnetic field magic settlesdown. The voltage is zero and it passes the full DC current.

 


Alternating current gets nowhere fast
  When you apply an AC voltage to a circuit containing an inductor, the inductor fights against any
changes in the source current. If you keep varying the supply voltage up and down at a very high
frequency, the inductor keeps opposing the sudden changes in current. At the extreme high end of the
frequency spectrum, no current flows at all because the inductor simply can't react quickly enough to
the change in current.
  Imagine standing between two very tempting chocolate pastries. You're torn between which to try
first. You start out running towards the éclair, but quickly change your mind, turn around and run
towards the brownie. Then you change your mind again, turn and start racing towards the éclair, and so
on. The faster you change your mind, the more you're stuck in the middle - not getting anywhere (or
any chocolate).
  Those tempting pastries make you act like the electrons in an inductor when a high-frequency
signal is applied to the circuit: neither you nor the electrons make any progress.


Understanding Inductive Reactance

  An inductor's opposition to changing current is known as inductive reactance. The faster the
current tries to change, the more the inductor resists the change.
  In the torn-between-two-pastries example in the preceding section, if you don't change your mind
quite so fast, you can run to the éclair, snatch a bite and then run to the brownie, take a bite and so on.
If you change your mind a bit faster, you may find yourself running towards each pastry, getting
halfway there and then turning around and running towards the other, getting halfway there and so on.
How far you get depends on how quickly you change your mind. The same thing applies to current
flow through an inductor: how far a current gets depends on how quickly the current is changing.
    Inductive reactance, symbolised by XL, is measured in - did you guess? - ohms. You use this
formula for XL:

  In this formula, f represents the frequency in hertz (Hz) of the applied AC voltage, L is the
inductance in henrys and Π is a constant that can be approximated as 3.14. You can approximate 2 × Π
as 6.28 and simplify the formula as follows:

  You calculate the inductive reactance of a 0.1 mH inductor for a source with a frequency of 1 Hz
as follows:


  If you raise the frequency to 2 MHz (that's 2,000,000 Hz), the inductive reactance is:


  Notice that for a low-frequency signal (1 Hz), the inductive reactance is nearly zero, so the
inductor looks almost like a short circuit, presenting no opposition to current. For a high-frequency
signal (2 MHz), the inductor puts up significant opposition to current flow (1.3 kilohms of reactance).


Using Ohm's Law for inductive reactance
  You can use Ohm's Law for inductive reactance, as for capacitive reactance, as long as you're
careful and apply it for a single frequency at a time. Suppose you apply a 2-MHz AC voltage with a
peak value of 5 volts to your 0.1-mH inductor. You can calculate the peak current flowing through the
inductor by applying Ohm's Law:

  The inductive reactance for a 0.1-mH inductor at 2 MHz is 1.3 kΩ (as calculated above), so thepeak current is:



Discovering that behaviour depends on frequency (again!)
  Like capacitors, inductors in an AC circuit act differently depending on the frequency of the
voltage applied to them. Because the current passing through an inductor is affected by frequency, so
are the voltage drops across the inductor and other components in the circuit. This frequency-dependent
behaviour forms the basis for useful functions, such as low-, high- and band-pass filters.


          Inductors are sort of the alter egos of capacitors (which we discuss in Chapter 4).
Capacitors oppose voltage changes; inductors oppose current changes. Capacitors block DC and pass
more and more AC as frequency increases; inductors pass DC and block more and more AC as
frequency increases. Both store electrical energy until you need it.


Using Inductors in Circuits

    Inductors are used primarily in tuned circuits, to select or reject signals of specific frequencies, and
to block (or choke) high frequency signals, such as eliminating radio frequency interference in cable
transmissions. Inductors are also commonly used to remove the 50-Hz hum known as noise from
nearby power lines.
  You probably run into (or over) inductors more often than you think. Some traffic lights use an
inductor to sense when a car is waiting for the lights to change. An inductive loop, consisting of several
turns of a huge coil covering several metres, is embedded in the street just before the junction. This
loop is connected to a circuit that controls the traffic signal. As you pass over the loop, the steel
underbody of your car changes the magnetic flux of the loop. The circuit detects this change - and may
give you a green light.


Insulating and shielding inductors
  The wire that makes up an inductor must be insulated to prevent short circuits between the turns.
Inductors used in most electronic circuits are also shielded, or encased in a metal can, to prevent the
magnetic lines of flux from interfering with other components in a circuit.
  You use a shielded inductor when you don't want to induce voltages or currents in other circuit
elements. You use an unshielded inductor (or coil) when you do want to affect other circuit elements.
We discuss the use of unshielded coils in circuits in the later section ‘Calling on the Coil Next Door:
Transformers'.


Reading inductance values
  The value of an inductor is typically marked on its package using the same colour-coding
technique used for resistors, which you can read about in Chapter 3. You can often find the value of
larger inductors printed directly on the components. Smaller value inductors look a lot like low-wattage
resistors, and these inductors and resistors even have similar colour-coding marks. Larger value
inductors come in a variety of sizes and shapes, depending upon their application.
    Inductors can be fixed or variable. With both types, a slender wire winds around an insulating coil.
The number of turns of the wire, the core material, the wire's diameter and length of the coil determine
the value of the inductor.
  Fixed inductors have a constant value, whereas variable inductors sport a knob that you can turn to
adjust the value. The core of an inductor can be made of air, iron ferrite or any number of othermaterials (including your car). Air and ferrite are the most common core materials.


Combining shielded inductors
    Although you're unlikely to use inductors in the basic electronic circuits you set up, you may run
across circuit diagrams for power supplies and other devices that include multiple inductors. Just in
case you do, you need to know how to calculate the equivalent inductance of combinations of shielded
inductors so that you can understand how the circuit operates.


Adding inductors in series
    Inductors in series add up, just as resistors do:


Reciprocating inductors in parallel
  Like resistors, inductors in parallel combine by adding the reciprocals of each individual
inductance and then taking the reciprocal of that sum:


  If you have just two inductors in parallel, you can simplify this equation as follows:



Filtering signals with inductors
  You can use inductors in filter circuits to do exactly the opposite of what capacitors do in filter
circuits, which you can read about in Chapter 4.
  Figure 5-5 shows an RL circuit, which is simply a circuit that contains both a resistor and an
inductor, with the output voltage, Vout, taken across the inductor. The lower the frequency of the input
voltage, the more the inductor is able to react to changes in current, so the more the inductor looks like
a short circuit.
  As a result, for low input frequencies, the output voltage is nearly zero. The higher the frequency
of the input voltage, the more the inductor fights the change in current and the less successful the input
voltage is in pushing current through the circuit. As a result, for high input frequencies, very little
voltage drops across the resistor (because VR = I × R, and I is very low), so most of the input voltage
drops across the inductor, and the output voltage is nearly the same as the input voltage.

Figure 5-5: An RL circuit can be used as a simple high-pass filter.








  This RL circuit is configured as a high-pass filter, because it allows high-frequency input signals
to pass through to the output, while blocking DC and low frequencies from getting through.
  If you reverse the roles of the resistor and the inductor in Figure 5-5, taking the output voltage
across the resistor instead, you have a low-pass filter. For low frequencies, because the inductor acts
like a short circuit, nearly all the input voltage drops across the resistor; at high frequencies, the
inductor acts more and more like an open circuit, allowing less and less current to flow through the
resistor, so the output voltage attenuates (decreases) dramatically.Calculating the RL time constant
  You can calculate the amount of time (in seconds) taken for an inductor's induced voltage to reach
roughly two-thirds of its value using the RL time constant, T:

  Just as the RC time constant in RC circuits (which we discuss in Chapter 4) gives you an idea of
how long a capacitor takes to charge up to its full capacity, so the RL time constant helps you figure out
how long an inductor takes to fully conduct a DC current: direct current settles down to a steady value
after roughly five RL time constants. You can also use the RL time constant to calculate the filter cutoff
frequency (the frequency at which a filter starts to affect an input signal) as follows:





Now Introducing Impedance!

  An inductor's opposition to current is known as inductive reactance, and in Chapter 4 we state that
a capacitor's opposition to current is known as capacitive reactance. In circuits that have reactance and
resistance, for instance the RL circuit in Figure 5-5, you may need to know the total opposition to
current in the circuit for an input signal at a certain frequency.


 Both resistance and reactance are measured in ohms, so you may think that you can
simply add the inductive reactance, XL, to the resistance, R, to get the total opposition to current (like
adding up series resistances) - but you can't. The reason you can't is due to the time taken for an
inductor (and similarly, a capacitor) to react to changes in the circuit. The good news is that a way does
exist to calculate the total opposition to current in a circuit at a particular frequency.


          Impedance is the total opposition a circuit provides to varying current for a given
frequency. You use the symbol Z to represent impedance, which takes into account the total resistance
and total reactance of a circuit.
  For a series RL circuit, the total impedance can be found using this formula:

  Similarly, for a series RC circuit, the total impedance is:

  So how do you use those scary-looking formulas? Well, if you want to use Ohm's Law to calculate
the current through a series RL or RC circuit when you apply an input signal of a particular frequency,
you can calculate the total impedance of the circuit at that frequency and then apply Ohm's Law, using
the impedance to calculate the peak value of the current passing through the circuit for that one
particular frequency:

  If you have a circuit with a resistor, capacitor and inductor all in series (one type of RLC circuit),
the formula for impedance is more complicated, because the total reactance in the circuit (XT) is the
difference between the inductive reactance, XL, and the capacitive reactance, XC (XT = XL - XC). For
parallel arrangements of resistors and inductors, or resistors and capacitors, the formula for impedance
is even more complicated, and we aren't going to go there in this book.


Tuning in to Radio Broadcasts

    Inductors are natural low-pass filters, and capacitors are natural high-pass filters, so what happens
when you put the two in the same circuit? As you may guess, inductors and capacitors are often usedtogether in tuning circuits, to tune in a specific radio station broadcast frequency.


Resonating with RLC circuits
  Look at the RLC circuit in Figure 5-6. The total impedance of this circuit can be found using the
following really scary formula:



  Don't panic! Just notice one thing: if XL = XC, the total impedance becomes the square root of R2,
which is just R, or just the resistance.
  In other words, when XL = XC, the inductive reactance and the capacitive reactance cancel each
other out, almost as if only a resistor is in the circuit. This effect happens at exactly one frequency,
known as the resonant frequency. The resonant frequency is the value of frequency, f, that makes XL =
XC for a given combination of inductance (L) and capacitance (C).

Figure 5-6: An RLC circuit has a resonant frequency, at which the total reactance is zero.







  So what's the significance of the resonant frequency? Well, something special happens at that
frequency that doesn't happen at any other frequency.
  At frequencies above and below the resonant frequency, some overall reactance exists in the
circuit, adding to the resistor's opposition to current flow. For very low frequencies, the capacitor
exhibits a high reactance, whereas for very high frequencies, the inductor exhibits a high reactance. So
for low frequency signals, the capacitor squashes current flow, and for high frequencies, the inductor
squashes current flow. At the resonant frequency, the overall reactance is zero, and only the resistance
appears to oppose current flow.
  The circuit is said to resonate at that particular frequency, and so is known as a resonant circuit. In
Figure 5-7, which shows a frequency plot of the current passing through the circuit, notice that the
current is highest at the resonant frequency.
  Radio receivers use RLC circuits to allow just one frequency to pass through the circuit. This
technique is known as tuning in to the frequency and used this way, the circuit is known as a tuning
circuit. Use a variable capacitor to adjust the resonant frequency, so that you can tune in different
stations broadcasting at different frequencies. The knob that allows the capacitance to be changed is
attached to the tuning control knob on your radio.
  By shifting components around a bit, placing the inductor in parallel with the capacitor, you create
a circuit that produces the minimum current at the resonant frequency. This sort of resonant circuit tunes
out that frequency, allowing all others to pass, and is used to create band-stop filters. You may find
such a circuit filtering out the 50-Hz hum that electronic equipment sometimes picks up from a nearby
power line.

Figure 5-7: The current in a series RLC circuit is highest at the resonant frequency.Ensuring crystal-clear resonance
  If you slice a quartz crystal in just the right way, mount two leads to it and enclose it in a
hermetically sealed package, you create a single component that acts like an RLC combo in an RLC
circuit, resonating at a particular frequency. Quartz crystals, or simply crystals, are used in circuits to
generate an electrical signal at a very precise frequency. The circuit symbol for a crystal, abbreviated to
XTAL, is shown below:

  Crystals work because of something called the piezoelectric effect. If you apply a voltage in just
the right way across a quartz crystal, it vibrates at a specific frequency, known as the resonant
frequency. If you then remove the applied voltage, the crystal continues to vibrate until it settles back to
its previous shape. As it vibrates, the crystal generates a voltage at the resonant frequency.
  The frequency at which a crystal resonates depends upon its thickness and size, and you can find
crystals with resonant frequencies ranging from a few tens of kilohertz to tens of megahertz. Crystals
are more precise and more reliable than combinations of capacitors and inductors, but there's a catch:
they're usually more expensive. And with a crystal, you're pretty much stuck with a particular resonant
frequency, so you don't find crystals in tuning circuits that allow you to adjust the resonant frequency
during operation.
  You do find crystals used in circuits called oscillators to generate electric signals at a very precise
frequency. Oscillators are responsible for the ticks and tocks that control quartz wristwatches and
digital integrated circuits (which we discuss in Chapter 7), and for controlling the accuracy of radio
equipment.
  A quartz crystal is accurate to within roughly 0.001 per cent of its stated resonant frequency. (That
why they're worth paying extra for!) You may also hear of ceramic resonators, which work the same
way but cost less and aren't as accurate as quartz. Ceramic resonators have a 0.5 per cent frequency
tolerance and are used in many consumer electronics devices, such as TVs, cameras and toys.


Calling on the Coil Next Door: Transformers

    Inductors used in tuning circuits are shielded so that the magnetic field they produce doesn't
interact with other circuit components. Unshielded coils are sometimes placed close to one another so
that their magnetic fields can interact. In this section, we describe how unshielded coils interact and
how you can exploit their interaction to do some useful things with an electronic device known as a
transformer.


Letting unshielded coils interact
  When you place two unshielded coils near each other, the varying magnetic field created as a
result of passing AC through one coil induces a voltage in that coil as well as in the other coil.
  Mutual inductance is the term used to describe the effect of inducing a voltage in another coil, and
self-inductance refers to the effect of inducing a voltage in the same coil that produced the varying
magnetic field in the first place: the closer the coils, the stronger the interaction. Mutual inductance can
add to or oppose the self-inductance of each coil, depending on how you match up the north and southpoles of the inductors.
  If you have an unshielded coil in one circuit and place it close to an unshielded coil in another
circuit, the coils interact. By passing a current through one coil, you cause a voltage to be induced in
the neighbouring coil - even though that coil is in a separate, unconnected circuit. This effect is known
as transformer action.


          A transformer is an electronic device that consists of two coils wound around the same
core material in such a way that the mutual inductance is maximised. Current passing through one coil,
known as the primary, induces a voltage in the other coil, known as the secondary. The job of a
transformer is to transfer electrical energy from one circuit to another.
  The circuit symbols for an air core transformer and solid core transformer respectively are shown
below:





Isolating circuits from a power source
  If the number of turns of wire in the primary winding of a transformer is the same as the number
of turns in the secondary winding, theoretically all the voltage across the primary is induced across the
secondary. This transformer is known as a 1:1 transformer, because a 1:1 (read ‘one-to-one')
relationship exists between the two coils. (In reality, no transformer is perfect, or lossless, and some of
the electrical energy gets lost in the translation.)
  1:1 transformers are also known as isolation transformers and are commonly used to electrically
separate two circuits while allowing power or an AC signal from one to feed into the other. The first
circuit typically contains the power source while the second circuit contains the load. (In Chapter 1, we
define the load as the destination for the electrical energy, or the thing you ultimately want to perform
work on, such as a speaker diaphragm.) You may want to isolate circuits to reduce the risk of electrical
shocks or to prevent one circuit from interfering with the other.


Stepping up, stepping down voltages
  If the number of turns in the primary winding of a transformer isn't the same as the number of
turns in the secondary winding, the voltage induced in the secondary is different from the voltage
across the primary. The two voltages are proportional to each other, with the proportion determined by
the ratio of the number of turns in the secondary to the number of turns in the primary, as follows:

  In this equation, VS is the voltage induced in the secondary, VP is the voltage across the primary,
NS is the number of turns in the secondary and NP is the number of turns in the primary.
  Say, for instance, the secondary consists of 200 turns of wire, twice as many as the primary, which
consists of 100 turns of wire. If you apply an AC voltage with a peak value of 50 volts to the primary,
the peak voltage induced across the secondary is 100 volts, or twice the value of the peak voltage
across the primary. This type of transformer is known as a step-up transformer, because it steps up the
voltage from the primary to the secondary.
  If instead, the secondary consists of 50 turns of wire, while the primary consists of 100 turns, for
the same AC signal applied to the same primary, the peak voltage across the secondary is 25 volts, or
half the primary's voltage. This transformer is known as a step-down transformer, for obvious reasons.
  In each case, the power applied to the primary winding is transferred to the secondary. Because
power is the product of voltage and current (the Joule's Law in Chapter 3: P = V × I), the current
induced in the secondary winding is inversely proportional to the voltage induced in the secondary. Soa step-up transformer steps up the voltage while stepping down the current, and a step-down
transformer steps down the voltage while stepping up the current.
  Step-up and step-down transformers are used in the mains network to transmit power over long
distances and to supply lower voltages in homes and businesses.        Chapter 6: The Wide World of


                          Semiconductors



  In This Chapter
Looking inside a semiconductor
  Combining semiconductors to make diodes and transistors
Letting current flow one way but not the other with diodes
Understanding and using transistors
    Semiconductors are at the heart of almost every electronic system in use today, from your washing
machine to the space shuttle. These tiny components have revolutionised modern medicine, space
exploration, industrial automation, home entertainment, transport, communications and just about every
industry or workplace you can think of.
    Semiconductor diodes and transistors can be made to conduct or block electric current - depending
on how you control them electrically. They can allow current to flow in one direction, but not the other,
and can amplify tiny signals - tasks that your average passive electronic component can't perform.
  In this chapter, we go inside semiconductor materials, discover how to make them conduct current
and explore ways to combine semiconductors to create diodes and transistors. We observe the valve-
like behaviour of diodes and show you how to exploit that behaviour in circuits. In addition, we
investigate how transistors work and why they're so popular, setting the stage for modern-day
electronics.


Are We Conducting, or Aren't We?

    Somewhere between insulators and conductors are a group of materials that can't seem to make up
their minds about whether to hold on to their electrons or let them roam freely. Semiconductors behave
like conductors under some conditions and insulators under other conditions. Silicon and germanium
are two semiconductor elements commonly used to create electronic devices. The electrons encircling
the nucleus in a semiconductor atom aren't quite as free to jump around as they are in a good conductor,
because they're bound to the atom in a special way.
  The atoms of semiconductor materials align themselves in a structured way, forming a very
regular pattern, known as a crystal, as shown in Figure 6-1. Atoms within the crystal are held together
by a special bond, called a covalent bond, with each atom sharing its outermost electrons with its
neighbours. (Bonding - it's a wonderful thing; like next-door neighbours sharing a front drive, and each
behaving as if the drive belongs only to her - except when it needs resurfacing!)

Figure 6-1: Semi-conductor materials such as silicon contain strong covalent bonds that hold the atoms
together in a crystalline structure.  Precisely because of this special touchy-feely bonding and sharing of electrons, the semiconductor
crystal acts like an insulator most of the time. Those electrons aren't as likely to break free and wander
off on their own as the free electrons in conductors. But you can do something to a pure semiconductor
that changes the electrical properties of the material: dope them.


          If you want to find out a little bit about the underlying theory of semiconductor physics,
read the rest of this section. But you don't really need the theory to understand how semiconductor
components work. If you skip ahead to ‘Forming a Junction Diode', you can still read what you need to
use semiconductors in circuits.


Doping semiconductors
  If you add impurities (meaning different types of atoms, not dirt or dander) to a pure
semiconductor material, such as silicon, you upset the bonding apple cart. This process is known as
doping, and the impurities are called dopants. Arsenic and boron are two dopants that are commonly
used to dope pure silicon.
  Dopants are no dopes; these atoms pretend to be the crystal's atoms, attempting to bond with the
other atoms, but they're just different enough to stir things up a bit. For instance, an atom of arsenic has
one more outer electron than an atom of silicon. When you add a small amount of arsenic to a bunch of
silicon atoms, each arsenic atom muscles its way in, bonding with the silicon atoms, but leaving its
extra electron drifting around through the crystal. Even though the doped material is electrically
neutral, it has more free electrons wandering around than undoped silicon - making it much more
conductive. By doping the silicon, you change its electrical properties.
  Another way to dope semiconductors is to use materials such as boron, which has one less outer
electron than silicon. For every boron atom you add to a silicon crystal, you get what's known as a hole
in the crystalline structure. Now the great thing about holes is that electrons love dropping into them.
So an electron falls into the hole, which leaves another hole, and another electron drops into that hole,
and so on.


          Think of this process as the hole moving around inside the crystal, as illustrated in Figure
6-2. (Really, the electrons are moving, but it looks like the hole is moving.) Each hole represents a
missing electron, and so the movement of holes has the same effect as a flow of positive charges.
    Impurities, such as arsenic, that free up electrons (negative charges) to move through a
semiconductor are called donor dopants, and the doped semiconductor is known as an n-type
semiconductor. Impurities, such as boron, that free up holes (positive charges) to move through a
semiconductor are called acceptor dopants, and the doped semiconductor is known as a p-typesemiconductor.


Combining n-types and p-types to create components
  If you apply a voltage source across an n-type or a p-type semiconductor, current flows due to the
movement of electrons through the material from the negative voltage towards the positive voltage.
(For p-type semiconductors, you'll hear this process described as a movement of holes from the positive
voltage towards the negative voltage.)


 

                              Diving into a pn-junction

    To really understand the reasons why current flows  or doesn't flow when you apply voltages
    across a pn-junction, you need to dive a bit deeper into the physics that lies beneath the surface
    of the junction. Although we don't dive too deeply here, we do tell you that the important aspect
    is which way the holes are pushed in the p-type material, which way the electrons are pushed in
    the n-type material and how holes and electrons sometimes re-combine at the junction.

 
    Even with no external voltage applied, a small voltage difference still exists across the junction.
    That voltage is caused by holes and electrons meeting up at the junction, crossing over to the
    other side and re-combining (meaning that an electron fills a hole). This process leaves the area
    on either side of the junction with a net charge: on the p-side of the junction, the net charge is
    negative; on the n-side, the net charge is positive. Therefore, a difference in charge, or a small
    voltage, exists across the junction.

 
    By connecting the positive terminal of a battery to the p-type material and the negative terminal
    of the battery to the n-type material, you push holes through the p-type material towards the
    junction and push electrons through the n-type material towards the junction. If you send enough
    of those two types of charges toward the junction, you overcome the small voltage that exists
    there  already,  and  holes  cross  into  the  n-type  material  and  electrons  cross  into  the  p-type
    material.

 
    The  external  voltage  supply  keeps  pushing  charges  towards  the  junction,  so  charges  keep
    crossing the junction. The net effect of holes moving one way and electrons moving the other
    way is a current. Conventional current (movement of positive charges) moves from the positive
    battery terminal through the p-type material, across the junction and through the n-type material
    towards the negative battery terminal.

 
    If you connect the battery the other way, the negative terminal attracts holes from the p-type
    material, pulling them away from the junction, and the positive terminal attracts electrons from
    the n-type material, pulling them away from the junction. This process in effect strengthens the
    already-existing voltage across the junction, making it even harder for current to flow. If the
    externally applied voltage is strong enough, eventually current can be made to flow - in the
    reverse direction across the junction. The voltage at which this happens is called the breakdown
    voltage, and this breakdown process is what makes a Zener diode work (see the later section
    ‘Regulating voltage with Zener diodes' for more information on these heavily doped diodes that
    break down at low voltages.

 

   So far, this isn't very exciting: the doped semiconductors are simply acting like conductors, and we
can just as easily use copper wire to achieve the same effect!
    Things start to get interesting, however, when you fuse together an n-type and a p-type
semiconductor and apply a voltage across this pn-junction. Whether or not a current flows depends on
which way you apply the voltage. If you connect the positive terminal of a battery to the p-type material
and the negative terminal to the n-type material, current flows (as long as the applied voltage exceeds a
certain minimum). But if you reverse the battery, current doesn't flow (unless you apply a very large
voltage).
  Exactly how these n-type and p-type semiconductors are combined determines what sort of
semiconductor device they become and how they allow current to flow (or not) when voltage is
applied. The pn-junction is the foundation for solid-state electronics, which involves smaller, solid
electronic devices rather than more cumbersome and fragile hollow glass parts. Semiconductors have
largely replaced vacuum tubes in electronics.

Figure 6-2: Every time an electron from a neighbouring atom moves to fill in a hole in a covalent
bond, the hole appears to be moving in the opposite direction.













Forming a Junction Diode

    Junctions in diodes can do some amazing things, from converting alternating current to direct
current and emitting light when a current passes through it (in the case of a light-emitting diode), or
even the other way around - generating a current when exposed to light (as in a solar cell).
  A semiconductor diode is a two-terminal electronic device that consists of a single pn-junction.
Diodes act like one-way valves, allowing current to flow in one direction, but not the other when a
voltage is applied to them. This capability is sometimes referred to as the rectifying property. The
circuit symbol for a diode is shown below:


  You refer to the p-side of the pn-junction in a diode as the anode, and the n-side as the cathode. In
the circuit symbol above, the anode is on the left (broad end of the arrowhead) and the cathode is on the
right (short vertical line segment). Most diodes allow current to flow from the anode to the cathode.
(Zener diodes, which we discuss in the later section ‘Regulating voltage with Zener diodes', are an
exception.) You can think of the junction within a diode as a hill and the current as a ball you're trying
to move from one side of the hill to the other. Pushing the ball down the hill (from anode to cathode) is
easy, but pushing the ball up the hill (from cathode to anode) is very difficult.
  Diodes are cylindrical, like resistors, but aren't quite as colourful. Most diodes sport a stripe or
other mark at one end, signifying the cathode. Figure 6-3 shows some diodes.Figure 6-3: Diodes are similar in size and shape to resistors, but include just one stripe indicating the
cathode.











Biasing the diode
  You forward-bias a diode when you apply a voltage across it with the proper polarity to allow
current to flow from anode to cathode. To do this, you apply a more positive voltage to the anode than
to the cathode. Forward current flows easily across the pn-junction when the bias voltage reaches a
certain level, known as the forward voltage. The forward voltage varies, depending on the type of
diode, and can range from 0.2 to 4.0 volts. Figure 6-4 shows a forward-biased diode allowing current to
flow through a lamp.
  You reverse-bias a diode when you apply a reverse voltage (a more positive voltage is applied to
the cathode than to the anode) across the diode, prohibiting current from flowing, as shown in Figure 6-
5. If the reverse-bias voltage exceeds a certain level, the diode breaks down and reverse current starts
flowing from cathode to anode. The reverse voltage at which the diode breaks down is known as the
peak inverse voltage (PIV).

Figure 6-4: The battery forward-biases the diode in this circuit, allowing current to flow through a
lamp.







Figure 6-5: Because the diode in this circuit is reverse-biased, it acts like a closed valve, prohibiting
the flow of current through the circuit.







Conducting current through a diode
  When current starts flowing through a diode, the forward voltage drop across the diode remains
fairly constant - even if you increase the forward current. For instance, most silicon diodes have a
forward voltage of between 0.6 and 0.7 volts over a wide range of forward currents. If you're analysing
a circuit that contains a silicon diode, such as the circuit in Figure 6-4, you can assume that the voltage
drop across the diode is about 0.7 volts - even if you increase the source voltage from 6 to 9 volts.Increasing the source voltage increases the current through the circuit, but the diode voltage remains the
same, so the increased source voltage is dropped across the lamp.


 Of course, every electronic component has its limits. If you increase the current through a
diode too much, you generate a lot of heat within the diode. At some point, the junction becomes
damaged from all that heat, so you have to be careful not to turn up the source voltage too high.


Rating your diode
  Resistors and capacitors come in a range of sizes, measured in ohms and farads. But a diode isn't
rated as big or small in that way - it just does its own thing! A diode controls the on/off flow of
electrons, without altering the shape or size of the electron flow. But that doesn't mean all diodes are
the same. Standard diodes are rated according to two main criteria: peak inverse voltage (PIV) and
current. These criteria guide you to choosing the right diode for a particular circuit:
The PIV rating tells you the maximum reverse voltage the diode can handle before breaking down.
For example, if the diode is rated at 100 volts, you shouldn't use it in a circuit that applies more than
100 volts to the diode.

 
The current rating tells you the maximum forward current the diode can withstand without
sustaining damage. A diode rated for 3 amps can't safely conduct more than 3 amps without
overheating and failing.

 
Rectifier diodes (flip to the later section ‘Rectifying AC' for more on these diodes) rated to about 3 to 5
amps generally come encased in black or grey epoxy, and they're designed so that you can mount them
directly on printed circuit boards. Higher-current diodes, with ratings of 20, 30 or 40 amps, are
commonly contained in a metal housing that includes a heat sink or a mounting stud designed to allow
you to affix the diode securely to a heat sink. A few diodes use the same packaging as transistors
(which we describe in the next section).

 


Discovering what's in a name
  Most diodes are named with an industry-standard five- or six-digit code that starts with ‘1N' (‘N'
labels it as a semiconductor, and ‘1' is the number of pn-junctions in the diode). The remaining three or
four digits reveal the type of diode.
  A classic example is the series of rectifier diodes identified as 1N40xx, where xx may be 00, 01
and so forth up to 08. They're rated at 1 amp with PIV ratings ranging from 50 to 1000 volts, depending
upon the xx. For instance, the 1N4001 rectifier diode is rated at 1 amp and 50 volts, and the 1N4008 is
rated at 1 amp and 1000 volts.
  Diodes in the 1N54xx series have a 3 amp rating with PIV ratings from 50 to 1000 volts. You can
readily find such information in any electronics component catalogue or diode data cross-reference
book. (A cross-reference book tells you what parts can be substituted for other parts, in case you can't
find a particular part specified in a circuit diagram.)


 Just to make things interesting (not to mention confusing), some diodes use the same
colour-coding scheme on their packaging as resistors, but instead of translating the code into a value
(like resistance), the colour code simply gives you the semiconductor identification number for the
diode. For instance, the colour sequence brown-orange-red indicates the numerical sequence 1-3-2,
meaning that the diode is a 1N132 germanium diode.Orientating yourself: Which way is up?
  When you use a diode in a circuit, orienting it the right way round is extremely important. The
stripe or other mark on the diode package corresponds to the line segment in the circuit symbol for a
diode: both indicate the cathode, or negative terminal, of the diode.


 You can also determine which end is what by measuring the resistance of the diode
(before you insert it in your circuit) with an ohmmeter or multimeter (which we discuss in Chapter 12).
The diode has a low resistance when forward-biased and a high resistance when reverse-biased. By
applying the positive lead of your meter to the anode and the negative lead to the cathode, your meter is
essentially forward-biasing the diode (because when used to measure resistance, a multimeter applies a
small voltage across its leads). You can measure the resistance twice, applying the leads first one way
and then the other way. The lower measurement result indicates the forward-bias condition.


 Diodes are like one-way valves, allowing current to flow in one direction only. If you
insert a diode backwards into a circuit, your circuit doesn't work at all (because no current flows) or
you may damage some components (because you may exceed the PIV and allow current to flow in
reverse, which can damage components such as electrolytic capacitors). Always note the orientation of
the diode when you use it in a circuit, double-checking to make sure that you have it right!


Using Diodes in Circuits

  We now describe several different types of semiconductor diode that are designed for various uses
in electronic circuits.


Rectifying AC
  Figure 6-6 shows a circuit with a silicon diode, a resistor and an AC power source. Notice the
orientation of the diode in the circuit: its anode (positive end) is connected to the power source. The
diode conducts current when forward-biased, but not when the diode is reverse-biased. When the AC
source is positive (and at least 0.7 volts), the diode conducts current; when the AC source is negative,
the diode doesn't conduct current. The output voltage is a clipped version of the input voltage, passing
only the positive portion of the input signal through to the output.

Figure 6-6: The diode in this circuit clips off the negative half of the AC source voltage.





  If the diode orientation is reversed in the circuit, the opposite happens. When the input voltage is
positive, the diode is reverse-biased and no current flows. When the input is sufficiently negative (at
least -0.7 volts), the diode is forward-biased and current flows. Only the negative part of the input
voltage is passed through to the output.


 Diodes are often used in this way to convert AC current into varying DC current (the
current is DC because it's flowing in one direction only, but it's not a constant current). This process is
known as rectification. Using a single diode to clip an AC signal is known as half-wave rectificationbecause it converts half of the AC signal into DC.
  Diodes used for rectification are sometimes called rectifier diodes or just rectifiers. They usually
handle currents ranging from several hundred milliamps to a few amps, whereas general-purpose signal
diodes are designed to handle smaller currents (up to about 100 milliamps).
  By arranging four diodes in a circuit known as a bridge rectifier, you can convert both the ups and
the downs of an AC voltage into just ups, as shown in Figure 6-7. This process is known as full-wave
rectification, and it's the first stage in converting AC power to a steady DC power supply. Bridge
rectifiers are so popular that you can purchase them as a single four-terminal part, with two leads for
the AC input and two leads for the DC output.

Figure 6-7: A bridge rectifier uses four diodes to transform AC current into a varying DC current.









Regulating voltage with Zener diodes
  Zener diodes are special diodes that are meant to break down. They're really just heavily doped
diodes that break down at much lower voltages than standard diodes. When you reverse-bias a Zener
diode, and the voltage across it reaches or exceeds its breakdown voltage, the Zener diode suddenly
starts conducting current backwards through the diode (from cathode to anode). As you continue to
increase the reverse-bias voltage beyond the breakdown point, the Zener continues to conduct more and
more current - while maintaining a steady voltage drop.
  The two important ratings for Zener diodes are:
The breakdown voltage, commonly called the Zener voltage, is the reverse-bias voltage that causes
the diode to break down and conduct current. Breakdown voltages, which are controlled by the
semiconductor doping process, range from 2.4 volts up to hundreds of volts.

 
The power rating tells you the maximum power (voltage × current) that the Zener diode can handle.
(Even diodes designed to break down can really break down if you exceed their power ratings.)

 
  The circuit symbol for a Zener diode is shown below:


  Zener diodes are so good at maintaining a constant reverse-bias voltage, even as current varies,
that they're used to regulate voltage in a circuit. In the circuit in Figure 6-8, a 9-volt DC supply is being
used to power a load, and a Zener diode is placed so that the DC supply exceeds the breakdown voltage
of 6.8 volts. (Note that this voltage is reverse-biasing the diode.) Because the load is in parallel with the
Zener diode, the voltage drop across the load is the same as the Zener voltage, which is 6.8 volts. The
remaining supply voltage is dropped across the resistor (which is there to limit the current through the
diode so that the power rating isn't exceeded).
  Here's the important thing: if the supply voltage varies up or down around its nominal 9-volt
value, the current in the circuit fluctuates, but the voltage across the load remains the same: a constant
6.8 volts. The Zener diode allows current fluctuations while stabilising the voltage, whereas the resistor
voltage varies as the current fluctuates.

Figure 6-8: The Zener diode stabilises the voltage drop across the load in this circuit.Seeing the light with LEDs
  All diodes release energy in the form of light when forward-biased. The light that the standard
silicon diodes release is in the infrared range, which isn't visible to the human eye. Infrared light-
emitting diodes (IR LEDs) are commonly used in remote control devices to send invisible messages to
other electronic devices, such as your TV or DVD player.
  Diodes known as visible LEDs (or just LEDs) are specially made to emit copious amounts of
visible light. By varying the semiconductor materials used, diodes can be engineered to emit red,
yellow or green light, and you can find special-purpose LEDs that emit blue or even white light. Tri-
colour LEDs contain two or three different diodes within one package.
  The diode in an LED is housed in a plastic bulb designed to focus the light in a particular
direction. The lead connected to the cathode is shorter than the lead connected to the anode. LEDs last
longer and use power more efficiently than standard light bulbs, which generate heat in addition to
light, eventually burning out the filament. Indicator lights in cars, computers and audio electronics are
often made from LEDs.
  You may have noticed household light bulbs, each containing an array of diodes, starting to appear
in the shops. That's because they last longer and are cheaper to run (although they still cost more to buy
in the first place) than conventional tungsten or halogen light bulbs. Figure 6-9 shows the circuit
symbol for an LED along with some single-colour LEDs.
  LEDs carry the same specifications as standard diodes, but they usually have fairly low current
and PIV ratings. A typical LED has a PIV rating of about 5 volts with a maximum current rating of
under 50 milliamps. If more current passes through an LED than its maximum rating specifies, the LED
burns up like a marshmallow in a campfire. Forward voltages vary depending on the type of LED,
ranging from 1.5 volts for IR LEDs up to 4.6 volts for blue LEDs. Red, yellow and green LEDs
typically have a forward voltage of about 2 volts.


 Make sure that you check the specifications of any LEDs you use in circuits.

Figure 6-9: The shorter lead of a typical single-colour LED is attached to the cathode. The symbol for
an LED is also shown here.











 The maximum current rating for an LED is usually referred to as the maximum forward
current, which is different from another LED rating, known as the peak current or pulse current. Thepeak/pulse current, which is higher than the maximum forward current, is the absolute maximum
current that you can pass through the LED for a very short period of time. Here, short means short - in
the order of milliseconds. If you confuse forward current with peak current, you may wreck your LED.


 Never connect an LED directly to a power source because it's going to go bang! Instead,
use a resistor in series with the LED to limit the forward current.
  For instance, in the circuit in Figure 6-10, a 6-volt battery is used to power a red LED. The LED
has a forward voltage drop of 2 volts and a maximum current rating of 30 milliamps. The voltage drop
across the resistor is the difference between the source voltage and the LED forward voltage, or 6 volts
- 2 volts = 4 volts. The question is, how big should the resistor be to limit the current to 30 milliamps
(that's 0.030 amps) or less when the voltage dropped across the resistor is 4 volts? You apply Ohm's
Law (which we discuss in Chapter 3) to calculate the minimum value of resistance required to keep the
current below the maximum current rating as follows:



  You're unlikely to find a resistor with the exact value you calculated, so choose a standard resistor
with a higher value, such as 150 Ω, to limit the current a bit more. If you choose a lower value, such as
120 Ω, the current exceeds the maximum current rating.

Figure 6-10: A resistor inserted in series with an LED is necessary to limit current to the LED.






Using diodes in other ways
  Diodes have lots of other uses in circuits including:
Overvoltage protection: Diodes placed in parallel with a piece of sensitive electronic equipment
protect the equipment from large voltage spikes. The diode is placed backwards so that it's normally
reverse-biased, acting like an open circuit and not playing any part in the normal operation of the
circuit. However, an abnormal voltage spike forward-biases the diode, limiting the voltage across the
sensitive component and drawing excess current away from it.

 
Making logic gates: Diodes are the building blocks of specialised circuits known as logic, which
produce a binary (0 or 1) output when given a set of two or more binary inputs. We discuss logic a bit
more in Chapter 7.

 
Current steering: Diodes are sometimes used in uninterruptible power supplies (UPSs) to prevent
current from being drawn out of a backup battery under normal circumstances, while allowing current
to be drawn from the battery during a power outage.

 


Trillions of Transistors

  Imagine the world without the amazing electronics building block known as the transistor. Your
phone wouldn't be mobile, and your computer wouldn't fit in your palm, or in your desk - or even in the
room.    Transistors are at the heart of nearly every electronic device in the world, quietly working away
without taking up much space, generating a lot of heat, or breaking down. Generally regarded as the
most important technological innovation of the 20th century, transistors were developed as an
alternative to the vacuum tube, which drove the development of electronic systems ranging from radio
broadcasting to computers, but were big, heavy and fragile. The solid-state transistor enabled the
miniaturisation of electronics, leading to the development of mobile phones, iPods, satnavs and pretty
much every gadget or computer that we take for granted.


Shrinking circuits
    Transistors are microscopically small, have no moving parts, are very reliable and dissipate a heck
of a lot less power than their vacuum tube predecessors. They basically do just two things in electronic
circuits: switch and amplify. But with those two things, they can do a lot. If you can switch electron
flow on and off, you have control over the flow, and you can build very involved circuits by
incorporating lots of switches in the right places. If you can amplify an electrical signal, you can store
and transmit tiny signals and boost them up when you need them to make something happen (like move
the diaphragm of a speaker).


Examining the anatomy of a transistor
    Although many different types of transistors exist, the two most common types are bipolar
junction transistors and field effect transistors.


Bipolar junction transistors
  The first transistors to be invented were bipolar junction transistors (BJTs), and they're what most
hobbyists use in home-made circuits. BJTs consist of two pn-junctions in a three-layer sandwich-like
structure. Leads are attached to each section of the transistor and labelled the base, collector and
emitter. The two types of bipolar transistors are:
NPN transistors: A thin piece of p-type semiconductor is sandwiched between two thicker pieces of
n-type semiconductor, and leads are attached to each of the three sections. The symbol for an NPN
transistor is shown below:

 


 
PNP transistors: A thin piece of n-type semiconductor is sandwiched between two thicker pieces of
p-type semiconductor, and leads are attached to each section. The symbol for a PNP transistor is shown
below:

 


 


          Bipolar transistors essentially contain two pn-junctions: the base-emitter junction and the
base-collector junction. By controlling the voltage applied to the base-emitter junction, you control how
that junction is biased (forward or reverse), ultimately controlling the flow of electrical current through
the transistor. We explore exactly how an NPN transistor works in the later section ‘How Transistors
Really Work'.


Field effect transistors  A field effect transistor (FET) consists of a channel of n- or p-type semiconductor material through
which current can flow, and a different material, laid across a section of the channel, that controls the
conductivity of the channel.
  One end of the channel is known as the source, the other end of the channel is called the drain,
and the control mechanism is called the gate. By applying a voltage to the gate, you control the flow of
current from the source to the drain. Leads are attached to the source, drain and gate. Some FETs have
a fourth lead, grounding part of the FET to the chassis of the circuit.
  FETs come in two flavours - N-channel (similar to NPN) and P-channel (similar to PNP) -
depending on the type of semiconductor material through which current flows. The two major types of
FETs are MOSFETs (metal-oxide-semiconductor FETs) and JFETs (junction FETs). Which is which
depends on exactly how the gate is constructed, and that in turn results in different electrical properties
and, consequently, different uses of each type.


          Although you don't need to concern yourself with the details of gate construction, you
should be aware of the names of the two major types of FETs: MOSFETs and JFETs.
  FETs (particularly MOSFETs) have become much more popular than bipolar transistors for use in
integrated circuits, which we discuss in Chapter 7, where thousands of transistors work together to
perform a task. That's because they're low-power devices with a structure that allows for thousands of
N- and P-channel MOSFETs to be crammed together like sardines on a single piece of silicon.


          Electrostatic discharge (ESD) can damage FETs. If you purchase FETs, be sure to keep
them in an antistatic bag or tube and leave them there until you're ready to use them. You can read
more about the harmful effects of ESD in Chapter 9.


Operating a transistor
  BJTs and FETs work in basically the same way. The voltage you apply to the input (base for a
BJT or gate for an FET) determines whether or not current flows through the transistor (from collector
to emitter, for a BJT, and from source to drain for an FET). Below a certain voltage level, no current
flows. Above a certain voltage level, the maximum current possible flows. Between those two voltage
levels, an in-between amount of current flows.
  In this in-between operating mode, small fluctuations in input current produce large fluctuations in
output current. By allowing only the first two possibilities of input voltage (all or nothin'), you use the
transistor as an on/off switch for current flow. By allowing the third possibility, you use the transistor
as an amplifier.


          To understand how a transistor works (specifically, a FET), think of a pipe connecting a
source of water to a drain with a controllable valve across a section of the pipe, as shown in Figure 6-
11. By controlling whether the valve is fully closed, fully open or partially open, you control the flow
of water from the source to the drain. You can set up the control mechanism for your valve in two
different ways: it can act like an on/off switch, fully opening or fully closing with nothing in between;
or it can open partially, depending on how much force you exert on it. That's how a transistor can act as
a switch or as an amplifier.

Figure 6-11: In an FET, voltage applied to the gate controls the flow of current from the source to the
drain.How Transistors Really Work


          If you're curious about how applying a voltage to one pn-junction in a bipolar transistor
can control the current flowing through the rest of the transistor, this section is for you. If you're not all
that interested in the goings-on of free electrons and holes in doped semiconductors, you can skip this
section all together and head off to the later section, ‘Using a Model to Understand Transistors'.
  To get an insider's view of how transistors really work, we take a look at an NPN transistor. Figure
6-12 shows a representation of the structure of an NPN transistor, which includes a narrow p-type
section sandwiched between two thicker n-type sections. The p-type section forms the base of the
transistor and has a lead sticking out of it.
  One of the n-type sections is the emitter and the other is the collector. The emitter and collector
aren't interchangeable: they're doped differently and so have different concentrations of free electrons.
The base is so narrow that it contains many fewer holes than free electrons are available in the emitter
and collector. This fact is important.

Figure 6-12: An NPN transistor has a narrow base made up of p-type semiconductor material
sandwiched between two thicker pieces of n-type semiconductor material, known as the emitter and
collector.









Emitting and collecting electrons
  An NPN transistor has two pn-junctions: the base-to-emitter pn-junction and the base-collector pn-
junction. This arrangement is like sticking two diodes together, anode to anode. The way we bias the
two p-n junctions controls the operation of a transistor. Say you connect two different voltage sources
across the two junctions, as shown in Figure 6-13. If VCE > VBE, the voltage at the base is more
negative than the voltage at the collector, so the base-collector pn-junction is reverse-biased, and no
current flows across that junction. If you raise VBE to about 0.7 volts or more (for silicon transistors),
you forward-bias the base-emitter junction, and current flows across the junction.

Figure 6-13: Forward-biasing the base-emitter junction in a transistor is like turning on a valve that
allows current to flow through the transistor.          The current that flows across the base-emitter junction consists of the set of free electrons
in the emitter. The emitter is said to emit electrons towards the base (hence the name). (Of course, in
fact an external force - coming from the power supply voltage connected to the collector - is nudging
the free electrons in the emitter.)
  Some of the electrons that get into the base recombine with the holes floating around in the base
(remember, the base is made of a p-type semiconductor). But because the base is so narrow, too few
holes exist to absorb all the electrons crossing the junction, so the base becomes negatively charged and
tries to force the extra electrons out.
  All those surplus electrons can travel out of the base via two paths: through the base connection
that leads to the positive voltage source or through the base-collector junction and into the collector. So
which way do they go? Remember that the base-collector junction is reverse-biased, with a strong
positive voltage connected to the collector lead. That positive voltage tends to attract the free electrons
that normally exist in the n-type collector towards one end of the collector. This makes the region at the
other end of the collector (right near the base-collector junction) look as though it's positively-charged.
  Hmmm . . . so the region of the collector right near the base-collector junction looks positively
charged, while loads of electrons that were emitted by the emitter are now crowding into the base
looking for a way out. So what happens? Most of those electrons (about 99 per cent) get pulled across
the base-collector junction. The electrons that were emitted by the emitter are now collected by the
collector. A small percentage (less than 1 per cent) of the electrons move out of the base through the
lead that's connected to the base voltage source, but the pull across the base and out isn't as strong as
the other pull across the junction and into the collector. The collector wins the tug-of-war, attracting
most of the emitter's electrons.


          What you see as an outside observer, looking at the leads connected to the transistor, is
that when the base-emitter junction is forward-biased, electrons flow from the emitter and then get splitbetween the collector and the base, with most of the electrons (about 99 per cent) going to the collector.
By controlling the voltage at the base-emitter junction, you cause a large amount of electrons to flow
through the transistor from emitter to collector. This fact is the crux of transistor operation. Biasing the
transistor is like opening a valve that controls the flow of current through the transistor.


          Because electronic circuits always refer to conventional current, which is just the opposite
of the real electron flow we've been talking about in this section, in circuit-speak, you say that forward-
biasing the base-emitter junction of an NPN transistor causes a small (conventional) current to flow
from the base to the emitter, and a large (conventional) current to flow from the collector to the emitter.
That's why the circuit symbol for an NPN transistor shows an arrow pointing out of the emitter; the
arrow's pointing in the direction of conventional current flow.
  You forward-bias a silicon NPN transistor by applying a voltage of at least 0.7 volts to the base-
emitter junction. Transistors made of germanium (much less common than silicon) have smaller
forward-bias voltages (about 0.3 volts), but the same cause-and-effect transistor action occurs.
  PNP transistors work the same way, except that all the polarities are reversed because the
junctions are reversed. To forward-bias the base-emitter junction of a PNP transistor, for example, you
apply a voltage of -0.7 volts from base to emitter. The circuit symbol for a PNP transistor shows an
arrow pointing into the emitter, which indicates the direction of conventional current flow when the
transistor is conducting.


Gaining current
  If you increase the current flowing into the base, IB, when a transistor is conducting current, an
interesting thing happens: the current flowing into the collector, IC, increases too. If you decrease the
base current, the collector current decreases too. In fact, the 1-99 per cent relationship between the base
current and the collector current holds true as you vary the base current (within limits, which we
discuss in the next section, ‘Saturating the transistor').


          The pattern of current changes at the collector exactly tracks the pattern of current changes
at the base - just much bigger, which is why transistors are known as current amplifiers. The amount of
collector current that flows is directly proportional to the amount of base current. The current gain
(symbolised by hFE) of the transistor depends on several factors, including the specific transistor in
use.


          Even for a single, specific transistor, the current gain varies according to several factors.
You should never design a circuit that hinges on a specific value of current gain, because your circuit is
likely to act strangely.
  When you're using the transistor as an on/off switch (which we discuss in the later section
‘Switching Signals with a Transistor'), the exact current gain doesn't matter. If you're using the
transistor as an amplifier, you can avoid a crazy circuit by configuring your transistor, along with other
components such as resistors, in a way that removes any dependency on the exact value of current gain.
  This clever little work-around, which we discuss in ‘Amplifying Signals with a Transistor' later in
this chapter, is very easy to design.


                      Understanding the word ‘transistor'

    The word ‘transistor' is a combination of two word  parts: trans and resistor. The trans part of the    name conveys the fact that by placing a forward-bias voltage on the base-emitter junction, you
    cause electrons to flow in another part of the component, from emitter to collector. You transfer
    the action from one part of the transistor to another, known as transistor action.

 
    Fluctuations in base current result in proportional fluctuations in collector/emitter current, so you
    can think of the transistor as a sort of variable resistor: when you turn the dial (by varying the
    base  current),  the  resistance  changes,  producing  a  proportionally  varying  collector/emitter
    current. That's where the sistor part of the name comes from.

 

 


Saturating the transistor
  In transistors, the current gain from base to collector is proportional up to a point.


          The insides of a transistor consist of doped semiconductors with a limited number of free
electrons or holes that can move around. As you increase the voltage supply feeding into the base, you
allow more electrons to flow out of the base, which means more electrons coming from the emitter. But
only so many free electrons are available in the emitter, so an upper limit exists as to how much current
can flow. When the transistor maxes out, you say it's saturated.


          You can think of saturating a transistor as opening a valve wider and wider, so that more
and more water flows through a pipe, until the pipe is handling as much water as it can; you can open
the valve more, but you can't get any more water to flow.
  When a transistor is saturated, both of its junctions (base-emitter and base-collector) are forward-
biased. The voltage drop across the output of the transistor - from collector to emitter - is nearly zero, as
if a wire is connected across the output of the transistor. And because IC is so much larger than IB, and
IE = IB + IC, you can say that IC ≈ IE.
  This approximation comes in handy when analysing and designing transistor circuits.


 If you operate the transistor so that current maxes out or doesn't flow at all, you're using
the transistor as an on/off switch. You do this by designing your circuit so that the base-emitter junction
is nonconducting (the voltage across it is less than 0.7 volts) or fully conducting - with nothing in
between.


Using a Model to Understand Transistors

  Free electrons, moving holes, pn-junctions and biasing as described in the preceding sections are
all very nice, but you really don't need to know all that technical stuff in order to use transistors in
circuits. Instead, you can familiarise yourself with a functional model of a transistor and find out
enough to get going.
  Figure 6-14 shows a simple model of an NPN transistor. The model shows a diode between the
base and the emitter controlling a variable resistance, RCE, between the collector and the emitter.


 A transistor can operate in three different ways: Transistor off: If VBE < 0.7 volts, the diode is off, so IB = 0. This result makes the resistance RCE
infinite, which means IC = 0. The output of the transistor (collector-to-emitter) is like an open switch.
You call this mode of operation cutoff.

 
 Transistor partially on: If VBE ≥ 0.7 volts, the diode is on, so base current flows. If IB is small,
the resistance RCE is reduced and some collector current, IC, flows. IC is directly proportional to IB,
with a current gain, hFE, equal to IC/IB, and the transistor functions as a current amplifier. You say
that the transistor is operating in active mode.

 
 Transistor fully on: If VBE ≥ 0.7 volts, and IB is increased a lot, the resistance RCE is zero and the
maximum possible collector current, IC, flows. The voltage from collector to emitter, VCE, is nearly
zero, so the output of the transistor (collector-to-emitter) is like a closed switch. You say that the
transistor is saturated.

 


                              Choosing the right switch

    You may wonder why you'd use a transistor as  a switch when so many other types of switches
    and relays are available (as we describe in Chapter 8). Well, transistors have several advantages
    over other types of switches, and so they're used under certain circumstances.

 
    Transistors use very little power, can switch on and off several times per second and can be
    made  microscopically  small,  so  integrated  circuits  (which  we  discuss  in  Chapter  7)  use
    thousands of transistors to switch signals around on a single tiny chip. Mechanical switches and
    relays have their uses, too, in situations where transistors just can't handle the load, such as
    switching currents over about 5 amps, switching higher voltages (such as in electrical power
    systems) and switching several contacts simultaneously.

 

 


Figure 6-14: You can use a model of a transistor to understand how it works as a switch or an
amplifier, depending upon how you control what's input to the base.








  When you design a transistor circuit, you choose components that put the transistor into the right
operating mode (cutoff, active or saturation), depending on what you want the transistor to do. For
instance, if you want to use the transistor as an amplifier, you select supply voltages and resistors that
forward-bias the base-emitter junction and allow just enough base current to flow, but not so much that
the transistor becomes saturated. This setting is known as biasing the transistor.
  If you want the transistor to act like a switch, you choose values that allow no base current to flow
or enough base current to saturate the transistor, and you control that two-state operation with a switch
or the output of a previous stage of electronic circuitry.Amplifying Signals with a Transistor

    Transistors are commonly used to amplify small signals. Say, for instance, you produce an audio
signal as the output of one stage of an electronic circuit, and you want to amplify it before shipping it
off to another stage of electronics, such as a speaker. You use a transistor, as shown in Figure 6-15, to
amplify the small up-and-down fluctuations in the audio signal (vin), which you input to the base of the
transistor, into large signal fluctuations (vout), which appear at the output (collector) of the transistor.
Then you take the transistor output and apply it to the input of your speakers.


Turning it on
  A transistor must be partially on in order to work as an amplifier. To do this, you apply a small
voltage to the base to bias the transistor. In the example in Figure 6-15, resistors R1 and R2 are
connected to the base of the transistor and configured as a voltage divider (we discuss how a voltage
divider works in Chapter 3). The output of this voltage divider (R1/(R1 + R2) × V) supplies enough
voltage to the base to turn the transistor on and allow current to flow through it, biasing the transistor so
that it's in the active mode (partially on).

Figure 6-15: By strategically positioning a few resistors in a transistor circuit, you can properly bias a
transistor and control the gain of the circuit.











  The capacitor at the input allows only AC to pass through to the transistor, blocking any DC
component (known as a DC offset) of the input signal, as shown in Figure 6-16. Without that capacitor,
any DC offset in the input signal can upset the bias of the transistor, potentially shutting the transistor
off (cutoff) or saturating it so that it no longer acts like an amplifier.


Turning it up
  With the transistor in Figure 6-15 partially on, the current fluctuations caused by the AC input
signal get amplified by the transistor. Because the current gain of any transistor you happen to choose
can be highly unpredictable, you design your amplifier circuit in such a way so as to eliminate any
dependency on that flaky current gain. You give up some of the strength of the amplification, but you
get stability and predictability in return.


          By placing resistors R3 and R4 in the circuit, you can control the voltage gain, or how
much the input signal is amplified - without worrying about the exact current gain of the specific
transistor at the heart of your circuit - amazing but true!
  The AC voltage gain of a transistor circuit with resistors as shown in Figure 6-15 is -R4/R3. The
negative sign just means that the input signal is inverted: as the input voltage varies up and then down,
the output voltage varies down and then up, as shown by the input and output signal waveforms inFigure 6-15.

Figure 6-16: Using a blocking capacitor to filter out DC offsets in the input signal helps maintain the
bias of the transistor.





Turning it to your needs
  The type of transistor setup we discuss in the preceding section, known as a common-emitter
circuit, is just one of many different ways to configure transistor circuits for use as amplifiers. You use
different configurations to achieve different goals, such as high power gain versus high voltage gain.
  How the circuit behaves depends on how you connect up the transistor to power supplies, where
the load is and what other circuit components, such as resistors, capacitors and other transistors, you
add and where you add them. For instance, you can piggy-back two bipolar transistors in a setup known
as a Darlington pair to produce multiple stages of amplification (or you can just purchase a three-lead
component called a Darlington transistor, which includes a Darlington pair already wired up for you).


          Transistor amplifier circuit design is a field of study on its own, and many excellent books
have been written on the subject. If you're interested in discovering more about transistors and how to
design amplifier circuits using transistors, try getting your hands on a good electronics design book,
such as The Art of Electronics, by Paul Horowitz and Winfield Hill (Cambridge University Press). The
book's not cheap, but it's a classic.


Switching Signals with a Transistor

  You can also use a transistor as an electrically operated switch. The base lead of the transistor
works like the toggle on a mechanical switch. The transistor is off when no current flows into the base
(in cutoff), and the transistor acts like an open circuit - even if a voltage difference exists from collector
to emitter. The transistor is on when current flows into the base (in saturation), and the transistor acts
like a closed switch, allowing current to flow from collector to emitter - and out to whatever load you
want to turn on.
  How do you get this on/off thing to work? Say that you use an electronic gadget to feed your cat at
sunrise. You can use a photodiode, which conducts current when exposed to light, to control the input
to a transistor switch that delivers current to your cat feeder (the load). At night, the photodiode doesn't
generate any current, so the transistor is off. When the sun rises, the photodiode generates current,
turning the transistor on. This reaction allows current to drive a motor that raises a dish cover or opens
a door so moggie can get her breakfast and you can get a lie-in.
  Why don't you just supply the current from the photodiode to the gadget? Because your gadget
may need a larger current than can be supplied by the photodiode. The small photodiode current
controls the on/off action of the transistor, which acts like a switch to allow a larger current from a
battery to power your gadget.


 One of the reasons transistors are so popular for switching is that they don't dissipate a lot
of power. Remember that power is the product of current and voltage. When a transistor is off, no
current flows, so the power dissipated is zero. When a transistor is fully on, Vce is nearly zero, so the
power dissipated is nearly zero.Choosing Transistors

  So, you may be wondering, how do you make sense of the thousands upon thousands of different
transistors available, and how do you select the right one for your circuit? Good questions.
  If you're designing a transistor circuit, you need to understand how your circuit operates under
various conditions. What's the maximum amount of collector current that your transistor has to handle?
What's the minimum current gain you need in order to amplify an input signal? How much power can
possibly be dissipated in your transistor under extreme operating conditions (for instance, when the
transistor is off and the entire power supply voltage may be dropped across the collector-emitter)?
  When you understand the ins and outs of how your circuit operates, you can start looking up
transistor specifications to find one that meets your needs.


Tackling transistor ratings
    Transistor makers use lots of different parameters to describe their endless variety of products, but
you really need to be familiar with only a few in order to choose the right transistor for your circuit. For
bipolar (NPN or PNP) transistors, here's what you need to know:
Ic max: The maximum collector current the transistor can handle. When designing a circuit, you
need to make sure that you use a resistor to limit the collector current so that it doesn't exceed this
value.

 
hFE: The DC current gain from base to collector. Because the current gain can vary, even among
transistors of the same type, you need to know the guaranteed minimum value of hFE, and that's what
this parameter tells you. hFE also varies for different values of Ic, so sometimes hFE is given for a
specific value of Ic, such as 20 milliamps.

 
Vce: The maximum collector-to-emitter voltage. Usually at least 30 volts, so for low power
applications like hobby electronics circuits, you don't really need to worry about it.

 
Ptotal max: The maximum power dissipation, which is roughly Vce × Ic max. If you're using the
transistor as a switch, you don't need to worry about this rating, because power dissipation is nearly
zero anyway. If you're using the transistor as an amplifier, you need to be aware of this rating. If you
think that your circuit may approach this value, you need to attach a heat sink to the transistor.

 
  Of course, none of these ratings appears anywhere on the transistor itself - that would be too easy.
Look at the retailer's production description, a specifications book or the technical documentation at the
manufacturer's website. If you're building a circuit someone else designed, you can simply use the
transistor specified by the designer or consult a cross-reference book to find a similar model to
substitute.


Identifying transistors
  Most bipolar transistors are named using an industry-standard five- or six-digit code (see the
‘Discovering what's in a name' section earlier in this chapter). Transistors start ‘2N': the ‘N' tells you
that it's a semiconductor and the ‘2' gives the number of pn-junctions. The remaining three or four
digits indicate the specific features of the transistor. However, different manufacturers may use
different coding schemes, so your best bet is to consult the appropriate website, catalogue or
specification sheet to make sure that you're getting what you need for your circuit.
  Many suppliers categorise transistors according to the type of application in which they're used,
such as low power, medium power, high power, audio (low noise) or general purpose. This system
helps guide you to make the right selection of a transistor for your particular circuit.Recognising transistors
  The semiconductor material in a transistor is the size of a grain of sand or even smaller, so
manufacturers put these microscopic little components in a metal or plastic case with leads sticking out
so that you can see them in the first place and then connect them up in your circuits.
  You can find literally dozens upon dozens of different shapes and sizes of transistors, some of
which are shown in Figure 6-17. The smaller packages generally house signal transistors, which are
rated to handle smaller currents, whereas larger packages contain power transistors designed to handle
larger currents. Most signal transistors come in plastic cases, but some precision applications require
signal transistors housed in metal cases to reduce the likelihood of stray radio frequency (RF)
interference.

Figure 6-17: Signal and power transistors come in a variety of sizes and packages.











  Bipolar transistors typically have three wire leads so that you can access the base, collector and
emitter of the transistor. One exception is a phototransistor (which we discuss in Chapter 8), which is
packaged in a clear case and has just two leads (collector and emitter), because light is used to bias the
transistor so you don't have to apply a voltage to the base. All FETs have leads for the source, drain and
gate, and some include a fourth lead so that you can ground its case to the chassis of your circuit.


          To figure out which package lead is which, you need to consult the documentation for the
specific transistor. Be careful how you interpret the documentation: transistor connections are often
(though not always) shown from the underside of the case, as if you've turned the transistor over and
are gazing at it from the bottom.


          You absolutely must install transistors the proper way in your circuits. Switching the
connections around can damage a transistor and may even damage other circuit components.


Integrating Components

    Transistors can be combined in all sorts of different ways to make lots of incredible things happen.
The small size of the semiconductor material making up a transistor allows the creation of a single
circuit containing hundreds or thousands of transistors (along with resistors and other components) in a
single component that fits easily into the palm of your hand.
  These amazing creations, known as integrated circuits (ICs), enable you to build really complex
circuits with just a couple of parts. To find out more, take a look at Chapter 7, where we discuss some
of the ICs that are available today as a result of the semiconductor revolution.  Chapter 7: Cramming Components


                                into Chips



  In This Chapter
Packing parts onto an integrated circuit (IC)
Thinking logically about digital circuits
Pondering packages and pinouts
Boosting signals with op amps
Timing, counting and controlling everything in sight
  This chapter is about chips - apologies if that makes you feel hungry, but you can't eat these ones.
We're going to tell you all about silicon chips, also known as integrated circuits (ICs). Space
exploration, desktop computers, consumer electronics and much more would be impossible without this
incredible innovation - really, a series of incredible innovations - that drives the modern information
age. The silicon chip has completely revolutionised the world in the past half century - and it's still
changing our lives faster than ever before. Just don't smother one in tomato sauce!
  An IC incorporates anywhere from a few dozen to many millions of circuit components into a
single device that can sit on the tip of your finger. Like the web of neurons that makes up your central
nervous system, each IC contains an intricate mesh of tiny transistor-based taskmasters, with access to
the outside world provided via a finite number of inputs and outputs akin to the nerve endings of your
five sense organs.
  In this chapter, we explore how integrated circuits came into being, identify the three major IC
flavours and dissect the inner workings of one variety - digital ICs. We look at how computers and
other digital devices manipulate low and high voltages to process information using special rules
known as logic. In addition, we explain how to read an IC to understand what the heck it does (because
its cover doesn't tell you) and how to connect it up for use in real circuits. Finally, we introduce you to
three best-selling ICs, show you what they do and how you can use them to create your own innovative
circuits.


                                  The birth of the IC

    With the invention of the transistor in 1947, the  focus of electronic design shifted away from
    bulky  vacuum  tubes  to  this  new,  smaller,  more  reliable  device.  This  innovation  stirred  up
    tremendous excitement, as engineers worked to build more and more advanced circuits, because
    size was no longer an obstacle. The success in creating advanced designs led to some practical
    problems:  interconnecting  hundreds  of  components  inevitably  resulted  in  errors  that  were
    extremely  difficult  to  isolate.  Additionally,  complex  circuits  often  failed  to  meet  speed
    requirements  (because  electrons  take  some  time  to  travel  through  a  bunch  of  wires  and
    components). Throughout the 1950s, a major focus within the electronics industry was figuring
    out how to make circuits smaller and more reliable.

 
    Then in the summer of 1958, an engineer named Jack Kirby working alone in a lab at Texas
    Instruments (while his colleagues were on vacation) came up with a brilliant idea: why not build
    multiple circuit components out of a single monolithic piece of semiconductor material and lay
    metal connectors in patterns on top of it? He reasoned that this arrangement would eliminate
    faulty wiring and the cumbersome manual assembly of discrete components. Luckily, he got the    go-ahead from management to try his idea out, and the first IC was born. (Kirby was awarded
    the Nobel Prize in Physics for his invention - but not until 42 years later.)

 
    A lot has happened since 1958. All those really smart, creative people continued to plug away at
    their work, and many more innovations took place. As a result, the electronics industry exploded
    as chip densities (a measure of how closely packed the transistors are) increased exponentially.
    Semiconductor  manufacturers  routinely  carve  millions  of  transistors  into  a  piece  of  silicon
    smaller than a postage stamp, and still ICs continue to shrink.

 

 


Discovering Integrated Circuits

  The IC was invented in 1958 (see the following sidebar ‘The birth of the IC') to solve the problems
inherent in manually assembling mass quantities of tiny transistors. These amazing creations are
miniature circuit boards etched onto a single piece of semiconductor, which is usually silicon (made
from sand).
  A typical IC contains hundreds of transistors, resistors, diodes and capacitors, and the most
advanced contain several hundred million components. Because of this circuit efficiency, you can build
really complex circuits with just a couple of parts. ICs are the building blocks of larger circuits. You
string them together to form just about any electronic device you can think up.


Linear, Digital or Both?

  Over the years, chip makers have produced lots of different integrated circuits, each of which
performs a specific function depending on how the components inside are wired up.
  Many of the ICs you encounter are so popular that chip makers have standardised them.
Manufacturers and hobbyists the world over buy and use these standardised ICs in various projects, and
you can find a wealth of information about them online and in books. In contrast to standardised ICs,
some companies also design so-called special-purpose ICs to accomplish unique tasks.
  Whether standardised or special-purpose, you can separate ICs into three main categories: linear
(analogue), digital and mixed signal. These terms relate to the kinds of electrical signals (we discuss
electrical signals in Chapter 2) that work within the circuit:
Linear (analogue) ICs: These ICs contain circuits that process analogue signals, which consist of
continuously varying voltages and currents. Such circuits are known as analogue circuits, and you can
see simple examples of those in Chapters 3, 4 and 5. Examples of analogue ICs are power management
circuits, sensors, amplifiers and filters.

 
Digital ICs: These ICs contain circuits that process digital signals, which are patterns consisting of
just two voltage (or current) levels representing binary digital data, for instance, on/off, high/low or 1/0.
(We discuss digital data a bit more in the next section, ‘Making Decisions with Logic'.) Such circuits
are known as digital circuits. Some digital ICs, such as microprocessors, contain millions of tiny
circuits within just a few square millimetres.

 
Mixed signal ICs: These ICs contain a combination of analogue and digital circuits.

 
  The majority of standardised ICs fall into the linear or digital category, and most mail-order
businesses that sell ICs separate them into linear and digital lists. We present projects that use both
linear and digital ICs in Chapter 14. In this chapter, however, we focus more on how digital ICs workthan on linear ICs because the special way in which they process digital, or binary, data has made them
the building blocks of computers. When you understand how they think, you too can use them in some
ingenious ways.


Making Decisions with Logic

  When you first find out how to add numbers, you memorise facts such as ‘2 + 2 = 4', ‘3 + 6 = 9'
and so forth. Then, when you discover how to add multi-digit numbers, you use those simple facts as
well as a new rule - carrying to us older folks, regrouping to the younger generation. By applying a few
simple addition facts and one simple rule, you can add two large numbers together fairly easily.
  The digital microprocessor in your computer works in much the same way. It uses lots of
microscopically small digital circuits, known as logic, to process simple functions similar to ‘2 + 2 = 4',
and then combines the outputs of those functions by applying rules similar to carrying/regrouping to get
an answer. By piggybacking lots of these answers together in a complex web of circuitry, the
microprocessor is able to perform some pretty complicated mathematical tasks. Deep down inside,
though, is just a bunch of logic applying simple little rules.
  In this section, we take a look at how digital logic circuits work.


Beginning with bits
  When you add two digits together, you have ten choices for each digit (0 to 9) because that's how
the generally used numbering system (known as a base 10 or decimal system) works. When a computer
adds two digits together, it uses only two possible digits: 0 and 1 (which is known as a base 2 or binary
system). Because only two digits are used, they're known as binary digits, or bits. Bits can be strung
together to represent letters or numbers. The sidebar ‘Adding up bits of numbers' tells you more about
how the binary system works, if you want to know. You don't need this information, however, to work
with digit circuits
  In addition to representing numbers and letters, bits can also be used to carry information. As
information carriers, data bits can represent many two-state (binary) things: pixel on or off; CTRL key
up or down; DVD laser pit or absence; ATM transaction authorised or not - and much more. By
assigning logical values of 1 and 0 to a particular on/off choice, you can use bits to carry information
about real physical events and allow that information to control other things by processing the bits in a
digital circuit.
  Logical 1 and logical 0 are also referred to as true and false, or high and low. But what exactly are
these ones and zeros in a digital circuit? They're simply high or low currents or voltages that are
controlled and processed by transistors. (In Chapter 6, we discuss how transistors work and how they
can be used as on/off switches.) Common voltage levels used to represent digital data are 0 volts for
logical 0 (low) and (often) 5 volts for logical 1 (high).


 

                            Adding up bits of numbers

    In the decimal (base 10) system, if you want to express  a number greater than 9, you need to use
    more than one digit. Each position, or place, in a decimal number represents a power of ten (100,
    101, 102, 103 and so forth) and the value of the digit (0-9) sitting in that position is a multiplier
    for that power of ten. With powers of ten, the exponent (that tiny number raised up next to the
    10) tells you how many times to multiply 10 times itself, so 101 equals 10, 102 equals 10 × 10,
    which is 100, 103 equals 10 × 10 × 10, which is 1000 and so on. As for 100, it just equals 1
    because any number raised to the power of zero equals 1. So the positions in a decimal number,
    starting from the rightmost position, represent 1, 10, 100, 1000 and so forth. These positions are    also known as place values (ones or units, tens, hundreds, thousands and so forth). The digit (0-
    9) sitting in that position (or place) tells you how many ones, tens, hundreds, thousands and so
    forth are contained in that decimal number.

 
    For example, the number 9452 can be written in expanded notation as:

 
          (9 × 1000) + (4 × 100) + (5 × 10) + (2 × 1)
    The entire mathematics system is based on the number 10 (if humans had only eight fingers, we
    may be using a base 8 system), and so your brain has been trained to automatically think in
    decimal format (it's like a maths language). When you add two digits together, such as 6 and 7,
    you automatically interpret the result, 13, as ‘1 group of 10 plus 3 groups of 1'. The system is as
    ingrained in your brain as your native language.

 
    The binary system is like another language: it uses the exact same methodology, but it's based on
    the number 2. If you want to represent a number greater than 1, you need more than one digit
    and each position in your number represents a power of two: 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and so forth,
    which is the same as 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 and so on. The bit (a bit is a binary digit, just 0 or 1) that sits
    in that position in your number is a multiplier for that power of two. For example, the binary
    number 1101 can be written in expanded notation as:

 
          (1 × 23) + (1 × 22) + (0 × 21) + (1 × 20)
    By translating this into decimal format, you can see what numerical quantity the bit string 1101
    represents:

 
          (1 × 8) + (1 × 4) + (0 × 2) + (1 × 1)
          = 8 + 4 + 0 + 1
          = 13 (in decimal format)
    So the binary number 1101 is the same as the decimal number 13. They're just two different
    ways of representing the same physical quantity, just as you may say ‘bonjour' or ‘buenos días'
    rather than ‘hello'. They're just different words for the same greeting.

 
    When you add two binary numbers together, you use the same methodology that's used in the
    decimal system, but using 2 as a base. In the decimal system, 1 + 1 = 2, but in the binary system,
    1 + 1 = 10 (remember, the binary number 10 represents the same quantity as the decimal number
    2). Computers use the binary system for arithmetic operations because the electronic circuits
    inside computers can work easily with bits, which are just high or low voltages (or currents) to
    them. The circuit that performs addition inside a computer contains several transistors arranged
    in just the right way so that when high or low signals representing the bits of two numbers are
    applied to the transistor inputs, the circuit produces the right combination of high or low outputs
    to represent the bits of the numerical sum. Exactly how this is done is beyond the scope of this
    book, but hopefully, you now have an idea of how this sort of thing works.

 

 



 A byte, which you've probably heard about quite a bit, is a grouping of eight bits used as a
basic unit of information for storage in computer systems. Computer memory, such as Random Access
Memory (RAM), and storage devices such as CDs and memory sticks, use bytes to organise chunks ofdata. Just as banks pack coins into bags of £10, £20 or other nice round values to simplify the job of
counting out cash, so computer systems pack data bits together in bytes to simplify the storage of
information.


Processing data with gates
  Logic gates, or simply gates, are tiny digital circuits that accept one or more data bits as inputs and
produce a single output bit whose value (1 or 0) is based on a specific rule. Just as different arithmetic
operators produce different outputs for the same two inputs (for instance, three plus two produces five,
whereas three minus two produces one), so different types of logic gates produce different outputs for
the same inputs:
AND gate: The output is high (1) only if both inputs (one input AND the other input) are high. If
either input is low (0), the output is low. A standard AND gate has two inputs, but you can also find
three-, four- and eight-input AND gates. For those gates, the output is high only if all inputs are high.

 
NOT gate (inverter): This single-input gate produces an output that inverts the input: a high input
generates a low output, and a low input generates a high output. A more common name for a NOT gate
is an inverter.

 
NAND gate: This function behaves like an AND gate followed by an inverter (hence the NAND,
which means NOT AND). It produces a low output only if all its inputs are high. If any input is low, the
output is high.

 
OR gate: The output is high when one, OR the other, OR both of its inputs are high. It produces a
low output only if both inputs are low. A standard OR gate has two inputs, but three- and four-input OR
gates are also available. For these gates, a low output is generated only when all inputs are low; if one
or more inputs is high, the output is high.

 
NOR gate: This behaves like an OR gate followed by a NOT gate. It produces a low output if one or
more of its inputs are high, and generates a high output only if all inputs are low.

 
XOR gate: The exclusive OR gate produces a high output if one input OR the other is high, but not
both; otherwise, it produces a low output. All XOR gates have two inputs, but multiple XOR gates can
be cascaded together to create the effect of XORing multiple inputs.

 
XNOR gate: The exclusive NOR gate produces a low output if either of its inputs - but not both - is
high. All XNOR gates have two inputs.

 
  Figure 7-1 shows the circuit symbols for these common logic gates.

Figure 7-1: Circuit symbols for logic gates (the labels aren't part of the symbols).          Most logic gates are built using diodes and transistors, which we discuss in Chapter 6.
Inside each logic gate is a circuit that arranges these components in just the right way, so that when you
apply input voltages (or currents) representing a specific combination of input bits, you get an output
voltage (or current) that represents the appropriate output bit. The circuitry is built into a single chip
with leads, known as pins, providing access to the inputs, outputs and power connections in the circuit.
  You usually find multiple logic gates sold in integrated circuits, such as an IC containing four two-
input AND gates (called a quad 2-input AND gate), as shown in Figure 7-2. The package sports pins
leading to each gate's inputs and output and pins you use to connect a power supply to the circuitry.
  IC manufacturers produce datasheets for their products (see the later section ‘Relying on IC
datasheets' for more about these useful products). A datasheet is like a user's manual, providing
technical specifications and performance information about the chip. Look on the website of the IC's
manufacturer for a datasheet that tells you which pins are inputs, outputs, V+ (voltage) and ground.


 Make sure that the part you buy has the number of inputs that you need for your project.
You can buy logic gates with more than two inputs. For example, you can get a 3-input AND gate from
most electronics suppliers.

Figure 7-2: Functional diagram of the industry-standard 4081 integrated circuit.          You can create any of the other logical functions by combining just NAND gates or just
NOR gates with inverters in the right way. Chip makers typically build digital circuits using these so-
called universal gates almost exclusively, so that they can focus their research and development efforts
on making process and design improvements to just two basic logic gates.


Telling the truth
    Tracking all the high and low inputs to logic gates and the outputs they produce can get a bit
confusing - especially for gates with more than two inputs - so designers use a tool called a truth table
to keep things organised. A truth table lists all the possible combinations of inputs and corresponding
outputs for a given logical function. Truth tables for the AND and NAND logic gates are shown below
to show you how they work. In these tables, A and B represent input bits and the rightmost column
shows the output of the gate.










Understanding How to Use ICs

    Integrated circuits are nothing like discrete components, such as individual resistors, capacitors
and transistors, which have two or more leads connected directly to the component inside the package.
The miniature pre-built components inside an IC are already interconnected into one big happy circuit,
ready to perform a specific task. You just have to add a few ingredients, like power and one or more
input signals, and the IC does its thing.
    Sounds simple, right? Well, it is. You just have to know how to read IC packages - they all look
like squashed black bugs with lots of legs - so that you know how to make the right connections.


Identifying ICs with part numbers
  Every IC has a unique code, such as 7400 or 4017, to identify the type of device - really, the
circuit that's inside. You can use this code, also known as a part number, to look up specifications and
parameters about an IC in a reference book or online resource. The code is printed on the top of the
chip.


          Many ICs also contain other information, including manufacturing catalogue number and
maybe even a code that represents when the chip was made. Don't confuse the date code or catalogue
number with the part number used to identify the device. Manufacturers don't have any standards for
how they stamp the date code on their integrated circuits, so you may have to do some detective work
to pick out the actual part number of the IC.


Packaging is everything  Great things really do come in small packages. Many ICs that can balance on your fingertip
contain incredibly complex circuitry, such as an entire AM/FM radio circuit (minus the battery and
antenna) in an IC package the size of a stamp. The actual circuit is so small that manufacturers have to
mount it onto a reasonably sized plastic or ceramic package so that humans can use it. They also attach
little wires leading out of the package so that the chip inside can connect to your circuit outside.
  ICs used in hobby electronics projects are assembled into dual in-line packages (DIPs), such as the
ones in Figure 7-3. DIPs (sometimes called DILs) are rectangular-shaped plastic or ceramic packages
with two parallel rows of leads, called pins, down either side. DIPs contain between 8 and 52 pins, but
the most common sizes are 8-, 14- and 16-pin. You can solder DIP pins directly or insert them into
sockets designed to hold the chip without bending the pins, and then solder the socket connections into
your circuit.

Figure 7-3: The dual in-line pin (DIP) package is one of the most popular styles for ICs.













 Some ICs are very sensitive to static electricity (which we discuss in Chapter 1), so when
storing ICs, be sure to enclose them in special conductive foam (sold by most electronics suppliers).
And before handling an IC, make sure that you discharge yourself by touching a conductive material,
such as a metal pipe, so you don't zap your IC and wonder why it's not working.


 ICs used in mass-produced products are generally more complex and require a higher
number of pins than DIPs can provide, so manufacturers have developed (and continue to develop)
clever ways of packaging ICs and connecting them to printed circuit boards (PCBs). To save space on
the board, most ICs today are mounted directly to metal connections built onto the PCBs. This
technique is known as surface mount technology (SMT), and many IC packages are specially designed
to be used this way.


Understanding IC pinouts
  The pins on a DIP or other IC package provide connections to the tiny integrated circuits inside,
but alas, the pins aren't labelled on the package so you have to rely on the datasheet for the particular IC
in order to make the proper connections. Among other things, the datasheet provides you with the IC's
pinout, which describes the function of each pin.


          You can find datasheets for most common (and many uncommon) ICs on the Internet. Try
using a search engine, such as Google or Yahoo!, to help you locate them.
  To determine which pin is which, you look down onto the top of the IC (not up at the little bug'sbelly) and look for the clocking mark on the package. The clocking mark is usually a small notch in the
packaging, but it can also be a little dimple, or a white or coloured stripe.
    Conventionally, the pins on an IC are numbered counter-clockwise, starting with the upper-left pin
closest to the clocking mark. So, for example, the pins of a 14-pin IC are numbered 1 through 7 down
the left side and 8 through 14 up the right side, as shown in Figure 7-4.

Figure 7-4: IC pin numbering follows a counter-clockwise sequence, starting from the upper left. The
clocking notch orients the chip at the 12 o'clock position.















 Don't assume that all ICs with the same number of pins have the same pinouts, or even
that they use the same pins for power connections. And never - never! - make random connections to
IC pins, under the misguided notion that you can explore different connections until you get the IC to
work. That's a sure-fire way to destroy a poor defenceless circuit.
  Many circuit diagrams (schematics) indicate the connections to integrated circuits by showing an
outline of the IC with numbers beside each pin. The numbers correspond to the clocked pinout of the
device. (Remember, you start with 1 in the upper left and count up as you go counter-clockwise around
the chip.) You can easily wire up an IC with these kinds of diagrams because you don't need to look up
the device in a book or datasheet. Just make sure that you follow the schematic and that you count the
pins properly.
  If a schematic lacks pin numbers, you need to find a copy of the pinout diagram. For standard ICs,
you can find these diagrams in reference books and online; for non-standard ICs, you have to visit the
manufacturer's website to get the datasheet.


Relying on IC datasheets
  IC datasheets are like owner's manuals, providing detailed information about the insides, outsides
and recommended use of an integrated circuit. They're created by the IC manufacturer and are usually
several pages long. Typical information contained in a datasheet includes:
Available packaging formats (for instance, 14-pin DIP) and photos of each format

 
Brief functional description

 
  Dimensions and pinout diagrams

 
IC name and part number 
Input/output waveforms (showing how the chip changes an input signal)

 
  Manufacturer's name

 
  Minimum/maximum ratings (such as power supply voltages, currents, power and temperature)

 
Recommended operating conditions

 
  Many datasheets include sample circuit diagrams, illustrating how to use the IC in a complete
circuit. You can get lots of guidance and good ideas from IC datasheets. Sometimes it really does pay
to read the owner's manual!


                          Sourcing and sinking current

    The insides of integrated circuits are hidden from  view, which means that knowing exactly how
    current flows when you connect a load or other circuitry to the IC's output pin or pins is difficult.
    Typically, datasheets specify how much current an IC output can source or sink. An output is
    said to source current when current flows out of the output pin and sink current when current
    flows into the output pin. If you connect a device, say a resistor, between an output pin and the
    positive terminal of a power supply and the output goes low (0 volts), current flows through the
    resistor into the IC (the IC sinks the current). If you connect a resistor between the output pin
    and the negative supply (ground) and the output goes high, current flows out of the IC and
    through the resistor (the IC sources the current). Refer to the datasheet for the maximum source
    or sink current (which are usually the same) of an IC output.

 

 



          Manufacturers often publish application notes for their ICs. An application note (often
called an app note) is a multi-page document that explains in greater detail than the datasheet how to
use the IC in an application. An app note may showcase one or more unusual uses of a particular IC.


Meeting Some Top Chips

  You can find a seemingly endless supply of integrated circuits on the market today, but two are
famous for their versatility and ease of use: the operational amplifier (really, a class of ICs) and the 555
timer. If you intend to get even remotely serious about developing your electronics habit, you need to
get to know these two circuits fairly well.
  In this section, we describe these two popular ICs as well as one additional IC, the 4017 CMOS
decade counter. We use all three of these ICs in the projects in Chapter 14.


Sounding out operational amplifiers
  The most popular type of linear (analogue) IC is undoubtedly the operational amplifier,
nicknamed the op amp, which is designed to add muscle to (amplify) a weak signal. An op amp
contains several transistors, resistors and capacitors, and offers more robust performance than a single
transistor. For example, an op amp can provide uniform amplification over a much wider range of
frequencies (bandwidth) than a single-transistor amplifier.  Most op amps come in 8-pin DIPs, as shown in Figure 7-5, and include two input pins (Pin 2,
known as the inverting input, and Pin 3, known as the non-inverting input) and one output pin (Pin 6).
  An op amp is one type of differential amplifier: the circuitry inside the op amp produces an output
signal that's a multiple of the difference between the signals applied to the two inputs. Used a certain
way, this setup can help eliminate noise (unwanted voltages) in the input signal by subtracting it out of
what's amplified.

Figure 7-5: Pinout of a standard 8-pin op amp, such as the LM741 or LM386.







  You can configure an op amp to multiply an input signal by a known gain factor that's determined
by external resistors. One such configuration, known as an inverting amplifier, is shown in Figure 7-6.
The values of the resistors connected to the op amp determine the gain of the inverting amplifier circuit:

  For instance, if the value of R2 is 10 kΩ and that of R1 is 1 kΩ, the gain is 10. With a gain of 10, a
1-volt input signal (peak value) produces a 10-volt (peak) output signal.
  To use the inverting amplifier, you just apply a signal (for instance, the output of a microphone)
between the input pins; the signal, amplified several times, then appears at the output, where it can
drive a component, such as a speaker. Because of the way the op amp in Figure 7-6 is configured, the
input signal is flipped, or inverted, to produce the output signal.


          An op amp requires both positive and negative supply voltages. A positive supply voltage
in the range of 8 to 12 volts (connected to Pin 7) and a negative supply voltage in the range of -8 to -12
volts (connected to Pin 4) works.

Figure 7-6: An inverting op amp circuit provides uniform gain over a wide range of frequencies.







  Plenty of different op amps are available at prices ranging from under a pound for standard op
amp ICs, such as the LM386 power amplifier and the LM741 general-purpose op amp, to over £100 for
high-performance op amps. The 'Lil but Loud Amp project in Chapter 14 uses an LM386 op amp.


Playing with the IC time machine: the 555 timer
    Although it can't take you back to the 1970s so that you can rescue all those flares from the back
of the wardrobe, the versatile 555 timer is one of the most popular and easy-to-use integrated circuits.
First introduced in 1971 and still in wide use today, more than one billion units are produced every
year. This little workhorse can be used for a variety of functions in both analogue and digital circuits,
most commonly for precision timing ranging from microseconds to hours. The 555 timer is the
cornerstone of many projects you can build (including several in Chapter 14).  Figure 7-7 illustrates the pin assignments for the 555 timer. Among the pin functions are:
Trigger input: When you apply a low voltage to Pin 2, you trigger the internal timing circuit to start
working. This trigger is known as an active low trigger.

 
Output pin: The output waveform appears on Pin 3.

 
Reset: If you apply a low voltage to Pin 4, you reset the timing function, and the output pin (Pin 3)
goes low. (Some circuits don't use the reset function, and this pin is tied to the positive supply.)

 
Control voltage input: If you want to override the internal trigger circuit (which you normally
don't), you apply a voltage to Pin 5. Otherwise, you connect Pin 5 to ground, preferably through a 0.01
µF capacitor.

 
Threshold input: When the voltage applied to Pin 6 reaches a certain level (usually two-thirds the
positive power supply voltage), the timing cycle ends. You connect a resistor between Pin 6 and the
positive supply. The value of this timing resistor influences the length of the timing cycle.

 
Discharge pin: You connect a capacitor to Pin 7. The discharge time of this timing capacitor
influences the length of the timing intervals.

 


          You can find various models of the 555 timer IC, including the 556 timer, a dual version
of the 555 timer, packaged in a 14-pin DIP. The two timers inside share the same power supply pins.
  By connecting a few resistors, capacitors and switches to the various pins of the 555 timer, you
can get this little gem to perform loads of different functions - and doing so is remarkably easy. You
can find detailed, easy-to-read information about its various applications on the manufacturers'
datasheets. We discuss three popular ways to configure a timing circuit using a 555 here.

Figure 7-7: 555 timer pinout.








Astable multivibrator (oscillator)
  The 555 can behave as an astable multivibrator, which is just a fancy term to describe a sort of
electronic metronome. By connecting components to the chip as shown in Figure 7-8, you configure the
555 to produce a continuous series of voltage pulses that automatically alternate between low (0 volts)
and high (the positive supply voltage, Vs), as shown in Figure 7-9. (The term astable refers to the fact
that this circuit doesn't settle down into a stable state, but keeps changing on its own.) This self-
triggering circuit is also known as an oscillator.
  You can use the 555 astable multivibrator for lots of fun things:
Flashing lights: A low-frequency (< 10 Hz) pulse train can control the on/off operation of an LED or
lamp (see the Building Brilliant, Blinking, Bright Lights project in Chapter 14).

 Electronic metronome: Use a low-frequency (< 20 Hz) pulse train as the input to a speaker or
piezoelectric transducer to generate a periodic clicking sound.

 
  Sounding an alarm: By setting the frequency to the audio range (20 Hz - 20 kHz) and feeding the
output into a speaker or piezoelectric transducer, you can produce a loud, annoying tone (see the Siren
and Light Alarm projects in Chapter 14).

 
  Clocking a logic chip: You can adjust the pulse widths to match the specifications for the signal that
clocks the logic inside a chip (see the Generating Cool Lighting Effects project in Chapter 14).

 
  The frequency (F, in Hertz), which is the number of complete up-and-down cycles per second, of
the square wave produced is determined by your choice of three external components, according to this
equation:


  If you flip the numerator and dominator in this equation, you get the time period (T), which is the
length of time (in seconds) of one complete up-and-down pulse:


Figure 7-8: 555 astable multivibrator circuit configuration.











Figure 7-9: The 555 astable multivibrator circuit produces a series of voltage pulses. The pulse width is
controlled by external circuit components.




  You can set up your circuit so that the width of the high part of the pulse is different from the
width of the low part of the pulse. The width of the high part of the pulse, Thigh, is:

  The width of the low part of the pulse, Tlow, is:

  If R2 is much, much bigger than R1, the high and low pulse widths are fairly equal. If R2 = R1,
the high portion of the pulse is twice as wide as the low portion. You get the idea.


          You can also use a potentiometer (variable resistor) in series with a small resistor as R1 or
R2 and adjust its resistance to vary the pulses.
  To choose values for R1, R2 and C1, we suggest you follow these steps:
        1. Choose C1. Decide what frequency range you want to generate and choose an    appropriate capacitor. The lower the frequency range, the higher the capacitor you should
    choose. (Assume that R1 and R2 are somewhere in the 10 kΩ to 1 MΩ range.) For many low
    frequency applications, capacitor values of between 0.1 µF and 10 µF work well. For higher
    frequency applications, choose a capacitor in the range 0.01-0.001 µF.

 2. Choose R2. Decide how wide the low part of the pulse should be and choose the value of
    R2 that produces that width, given the value of C1 you've already determined.

 3. Choose R1. Decide how wide the high part of the pulse should be. Using the values of
    C1 and R2 already selected, calculate the value of R1 that produces the desired high pulse width.

 

Monostable multivibrator (one-shot)
  By configuring the 555 timer as shown in Figure 7-10, you can use it as a monostable
multivibrator that generates a single pulse when triggered (sometimes called a one-shot). Without a
trigger, this circuit produces a low (zero) voltage, which is its stable state. When triggered by closing
the switch between Pin 2 and ground, an output pulse is generated at the supply voltage, Vs. The width
of the pulse, T, is determined by the values of R1 and C1, as follows:



          Capacitor values can often vary by as much as 20 per cent, so you may need to choose a
resistor with a somewhat different value than the formula suggests in order to produce the pulse width
you desire.


          You can use a one-shot to safely trigger a digital logic device, such as that in the later
section ‘Counting on the 4017 decade counter'. Mechanical switches tend to bounce when closed,
producing multiple voltage spikes that a digital IC can misinterpret as multiple trigger signals. Instead,
if you trigger a one-shot with a mechanical switch and use the output of the one-shot to trigger the
digital IC, you can effectively debounce the switch.

Figure 7-10: When triggered by closing the switch at Pin 2, the 555 monostable circuit produces a
single pulse whose width is determined by the values of R1 and C1.












Bistable multivibrator (flip-flop)
  If an astable circuit has no stable state, and a monostable circuit has one stable state, what's a
bistable circuit? Yup, it's a circuit with two stable states. The 555 bistable multivibrator shown in
Figure 7-11 produces alternating high and low voltages, switching from one state to the other only
when triggered. Such a circuit is commonly known as a flip-flop. You don't need to calculate resistor
values, because the timing of the pulses generated is controlled by activating the trigger switch.          Because it stays low or high until triggered, a flip-flop can be used to store a data bit.
(Remember, a bit is a 0 or a 1, which is a low or a high voltage.) The registers used to store temporary
outputs between stages of logic consist of multiple flip-flops. Flip-flops are also used in certain digital
counter circuits, holding bits in a series of interconnected registers that form an array, the outputs of
which make up a bit string representing the count.


          You can use various types of 555 timer circuits to trigger other 555 timer circuits. For
instance, you can use an oscillator to trigger a flip-flop (useful for clocking registers).
  Try using a one-shot to produce a temporary low-volume tone, and then when it ends, change the
state of a flip-flop, whose output triggers an oscillator that pulses the speaker on and off. This circuit
can be used in a home alarm system: upon entering the home, the homeowner (or intruder) has 10
seconds or so to deactivate the system (when hearing a low-volume warning tone) - or the siren wakes
up the neighbours.

Figure 7-11: The 555 bistable circuit (or flip-flop) produces a high output when triggered by the switch
at Pin 2 and a low output when reset by the switch at Pin 4.












                                Meet the logic families

      Manufacturers use many different techniques to  build digital integrated circuits. A single gate
    can be constructed using a resistor and a transistor, or just bipolar transistors, or just MOSFETs
    (another kind of transistor), or other combinations of components. Certain design approaches
    make cramming lots of tiny gates together in a chip easier, and other design approaches result in
    faster circuits or lower power consumption.

 
    Digital  ICs  are  classified  according  to  the  design  approach,  and  therefore  the  processing
    technology, used to build the tiny circuits. These classifications are called logic families. Dozens
    of logic families exist, but the two most famous families are TTL and CMOS.

 
    TTL, or transistor-transistor logic, uses bipolar transistors to construct both gates and amplifiers.
      Manufacturing TTL ICs is relatively inexpensive, but they generally draw a lot of power and
    require a specific (5-volt) power supply. The TTL family has several branches, but the most
    notable  is  the Low  Power  Schottky  series,  which  draws  roughly  one-fifth  the  power  of
    conventional TTL technology. Most TTL ICs use the 74xx and 74xxx part number format, where
    xx or xxx specifies the particular type of logic device. For instance, the 7400 is a quad 2-input
    NAND gate. The Low Power Schottky version of this part is coded 74LS00. 
    CMOS, which stands for complementary metal oxide semiconductor, is one type of technology
    used to make MOSFETs (metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors). (You can see why
    this family shortened its name to CMOS!) CMOS chips are a little more expensive than their
    TTL equivalents, but they draw a lot less power and operate over a wider range of supply
    voltages  (3  to  15  volts).  They're  very  sensitive  to  static  electricity,  and  so  require  special
    handling. Some CMOS chips are pin-for-pin equivalents for TTL chips and are identified by a
    ‘C' in the middle of the part number. For instance, the 74C00 is a CMOS quad 2-input NAND
    gate with the same pinout as its cousin, the TTL 7400 IC. Chips in the 40xx series, for instance
    the 4017 decade counter and 4511 7-segment display driver, are also members of the CMOS
    family.

 

 


Counting on the 4017 decade counter
  The 4017 CMOS decade counter shown in Figure 7-12 is a 16-pin IC that counts from 0 to 9 when
triggered. Pins 1-7 and 9-11 go from low to high one at a time when a trigger signal is applied to Pin
14. (They don't go high in order; you have to check the pinout to determine the order.) You can use the
count outputs to light up LEDs (as in the ‘Building Brilliant, Blinking, Bright Lights' section and
project in Chapter 14) or trigger a one-shot that controls another circuit.
    Counting can take place only when the disable pin (Pin 13) is low; you can disable counting by
applying a high signal to Pin 13. You can also force the counter to reset to zero (meaning that the ‘zero'
count output, which is Pin 3, goes high) by applying a high signal (+V) to Pin 14.

Figure 7-12: Pinout of the 4017 CMOS decade counter.














          By piggybacking multiple 4017 ICs together, you can count up tens, hundreds, thousands
and so forth. Pin 12 is high when the count is 0-4 and low when the count is 5-9, so it looks like a
trigger signal that changes at one-tenth the rate of the count. If you feed the output of Pin 12 into the
trigger input (Pin 14) of another decade counter, that second counter counts up tens. By feeding the
second counter's Pin 12 output into Pin 14 of a third counter, you can count up hundreds. With enough
4017 ICs, you may even be able to tally the national debt!


          You can also connect two or more of the counter's outputs using diodes to produce avariable timing sequence. To do this, connect each anode (positive side of a diode) to an output pin and
connect all the cathodes (negative sides of the diodes) together and then through a resistor. With this
arrangement, when any one of the outputs is high, current flows through the resistor. For instance, you
can simulate the sequence of a traffic light by tying outputs 0-4 together and feeding the result (through
a resistor) into a red LED, connecting output 5 to a yellow LED and tying outputs 6-9 together to
control a green LED.


Expanding Your IC Horizons

  In addition to the uses described in the earlier sections, ICs can also provide the following
common functions:
  Mathematical operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication and division).

 
Multiplexing (selecting a single output from among several inputs).

 
  Analogue-to-digital (A/D) converters (to convert a real-world analogue signal into a digital signal so
that you can process it with a computer or other digital electronics system).

 
  Digital-to-analogue (D/A) converters (to convert a processed digital signal back into an analogue
signal).

 
  Of course, the microprocessor that runs your personal computer (and maybe even your personal
life) is also quite popular as ICs go!
  Among the most versatile integrated circuits you can find is the small, complete computer on a
chip, known as a microcontroller. To program a microcontroller, you place it on a development board
that allows the IC to interface with your personal computer.
  When it's programmed, you mount the microcontroller into a socket on your electronic device.
You add a few other components in circuits that interface the microcontroller to your computer, motors
or switches, and voilà! Your little programmed IC makes things happen (for instance, it can control the
motion of a robot).
  The great thing about a microcontroller is that you can simply alter a few lines or code or
reprogram it completely to change what it does; you don't need to swap out wires, resistors and other
components in order to get this flexible IC to take on a new personality.
    Integrated circuits have much more to them than we can possibly cover in this book. Really smart
circuit designers are always coming up with new ideas and improvements on some of the old ideas, so
you're spoilt for choice in the world of integrated circuits.
  If you're interested in finding out more, refer to the Appendix for some interesting websites that
provide useful how-to information for using various ICs in working projects.Chapter 8: Rounding Out Your Parts


                                        List



  In This Chapter
Picking the perfect type of wire
Powering up with batteries and solar cells
Controlling connections with switches
Triggering circuits with sensors
Turning electricity into light, sound and motion
  Many individual components and integrated circuits (such as those we discuss in Chapters 3-7) are
the foundations of shaping the flow of electrons in electronic circuits. But these indispensable parts rely
on a bunch of other contributing parts to help get the job done.
  Some of these contributing parts, such as wires, connectors and batteries, are themselves essential
ingredients in any electronic circuit. After all, you'd be hard pressed to build an electronic circuit
without wires to connect things together or a source of power to make things run. You may use the
other parts we discuss in this chapter only occasionally and for certain circuits - for example, when you
need to make some noise, a buzzer certainly comes in handy.
  In this chapter, we discuss a mixed bag of components, some of which you need to keep in stock
(just like toilet paper and toothpaste - we hope) and others that you can pick up whenever you feel like
it.


Making Connections

  Making a circuit requires that you connect components so that electric current can flow between
them. The following sections describe wires, cables and connectors that allow you to do just that.


Choosing wires wisely
  Wire that you use in electronics projects is just a long strand of metal, usually made of copper. The
wire has only one job: to allow electrons to travel through it. However, various types of wire are
available, and in this section we help you choose the right one for the situation.


Selecting stranded or solid
  Unplug and cut open the cord of an old lamp you're about to dump and you can see two or three
small bundles of very fine wires, each bundle wrapped in insulation; this sort of wire is called stranded
wire. Another type of wire, known as solid wire, consists of a single wire on its own. You can see
examples of each in Figure 8-1.

Figure 8-1: If you think that wire is just wire, think again. Electronics commonly uses solid and
stranded wire.  Stranded wire is much more flexible than solid wire, and you use it in situations in which the wire
is going to be moved or bent a lot (such as in cords for lamps or the cables you hook up to your home
entertainment system).
  You use solid wire in places where you don't plan to move the wire around, and to connect
components on breadboards (check out Chapter 11 for more on breadboards). Inserting solid wire into
holes in the breadboard is easy, but if you try to use a stranded wire, you have to twist the strands to get
them all in the hole, and you may break a strand or two in the process (trust us, it happens!), which can
short out the circuit.


Sizing up your wire gauge
  You refer to the diameter of wire as the wire gauge. This gauge is sometimes given in millimetres
for diameter or cross-sectional surface area. But you can also see it expressed as a two-digit number,
such as in the American Wire Gauge (AWG) system, in which the smaller the number, the thicker the
wire. Table 8-1 shows the common wire gauges.














  For most electronics projects, including the ones in Chapters 13 and 14 in this book, you use 20-
or 22-gauge wire. If you're hooking up a motor to a power supply, you need to use 16- or 18-gauge
wire. As you progress in your electronics dabbling, you may find yourself connecting components on
special circuit boards using a technique known as wire wrapping, which calls for smaller 30-gauge
wire.          The AWG system is most popular in America, but you see it in the UK and elsewhere too,
abbreviated in many different ways or just given as a two-digit figure on its own. You may also come
across a little-used British Standard Wire Gauge (SWG) and a metric gauge. So you may see the same
wire described as 22 AWG, 23 SWG or the metric 7/0.25. Confused? Things are clearer when you see
what's on the shelf, we promise!


          If you start working on projects involving higher voltage or current than the ones we
describe in this book, consult the instructions for your project or an authoritative reference to determine
the appropriate wire gauge. For example, the IEE Wiring Regulations lists the recommended wire
gauges for each type of wiring that you use in a house - to meddle with that you need planning
permission, a suitable approved electrician or both. Mains wiring is outside the scope of this book but,
needless to say, messing with it isn't a good idea.


Viewing the colourful world of wires
  Like the colourful bands that unlock the secrets of resistor values (check out Chapter 3 for all
about resistors), the colourful insulation around wire can help you keep track of connections in a
circuit.
  A common practice when wiring up a DC circuit (for example, when you work with a breadboard)
is to use red wire for all connections to positive voltage (+V) and black wire for all connections to
ground. For AC circuits, you may want to use green wire instead of black wire for ground connections.
Yellow or orange wire is often used for input signals, such as the signal from a microphone into a
circuit.


          If you keep lots of different colours of wire handy, you can colour-code your component
connections so that you can more easily tell what's going on in a circuit just by glancing at it.


Collecting wires into cables or cords
    Cables are actually groups of two or more wires, each protected by an outer layer of insulation and
usually with another layer of insulation around them all. Line cords that bring AC power from a wall
socket to an electrical device such as a lamp are cables, as are the mishmash of connections in your
home entertainment system.


Plugging in to connectors
  If you look at a cable, say the one that goes from your computer to your printer, you see that it has
metal or plastic bits on each end. These bits are called plugs, and they're one kind of connector. Your
computer and printer also have metal or plastic receptacles into which these cable ends fit. These
receptacles are another kind of connector, called a socket or jack. The various pins and holes in
connectors connect the appropriate wire in the cable to the corresponding wire in the device.
  Many different types of connectors are used for various purposes. Here are some of the connectors
you're likely to hook up with in your electronics adventures:
A terminal and terminal block work together as the simplest type of connector. A terminal block
contains sets of screws in pairs. You attach the block to the case or chassis of your project. Then, for
each wire you want to connect, you solder (or crimp) a wire to a terminal. Next, you connect each
terminal to a screw on the block. When you want to connect two wires to each other, simply select apair of screws and connect the terminal on each wire to one of those screws.

 
Plugs and jacks that carry audio signals between pieces of equipment, such as a guitar and an
amplifier, have cables like the one you see in Figure 8-2. Plugs on each end of the cable connect to
jacks on the equipment being connected. These cables contain one or two signal wires (they carry the
actual audio signal) and a metal shield surrounding the wires. The metal shield protects the signal wires
from electrical interference, known as noise, by minimising the introduction of current into the wires.

 
Pin headers bring signals to and from circuit boards, which are thin boards designed to house a
permanent circuit. Pin headers consist of two parts: the socket, which you mount on the circuit board,
and the plug, which you attach to a ribbon cable. A ribbon cable consists of a series of insulated wires
stuck together side-by-side to form a flat, flexible cable. The rectangular shape of the connector allows
for easy routing of signals from each wire in the cable to the correct part of the circuit board via the
socket.

 
You refer to these connectors by the number of pins; for example, you may talk about a 40-pin header.
Pin headers come in handy for complex electronics projects that involve multiple circuit boards.

 

Figure 8-2: A cable with a plug on each end connects to jacks mounted on two pieces of electronic
equipment.














    Electronics uses many connectors that you don't need to know about until you get into more
complex projects. If you want to find out more about the broad array of connectors, take a look at some
of the catalogues or websites of the electronics suppliers listed in Chapter 16.


Powering Up

  All the wires and connectors in the world are useless when you don't have a power source. In
Chapter 2, we discuss sources of electricity, including AC power from wall sockets and DC power from
batteries and solar cells (also known as photovoltaic cells). Here we discuss how to choose a power
source and how to feed the power into your circuits.


Turning on the juice with batteries
  For most hobby electronics projects, batteries are the way to go. They're relatively lightweight and
portable, and by combining multiple batteries in series, you can create a variety of DC voltage sources.Everyday batteries, such as AAA-, AA-, C- and D-size batteries, all produce about 1.5 volts. A
transistor battery is shaped like a 3-D rectangle; it produces 9 volts and is commonly called a 9-volt
battery. The big, boxy lantern battery produces about 6 volts.
  The symbol used to represent a battery in a circuit diagram is shown below:


Connecting batteries to circuits

 You use a 9-volt battery clip, shown in Figure 8-3, to connect an individual 9-volt battery to a
circuit. Battery clips snap on to the terminals of the battery and contain black and red leads that you
connect to your circuit. You strip the insulation off the ends of the wires and then connect the leads to
your circuit. You can connect them to terminals, insert them into holes in a breadboard or solder the
leads directly to components. We discuss all these techniques in Chapter 11.
  When you connect the positive terminal of one battery to the negative terminal of another battery,
the total voltage across this series connection is the sum of the individual battery voltages. Battery
holders, such as the one shown in Figure 8-4, make series connections between batteries for you while
holding multiple batteries in place. Red and black leads from the battery holder provide access to the
total voltage.

Figure 8-3: A battery clip allows you to connect a 9-volt battery easily to your circuit.













Figure 8-4: Four 1.5-volt batteries tucked into a battery holder produce about 6 volts across the red and
black leads. 

                    Rating the life of the everyday battery

    The amp-hour or milliamp-hour rating for a battery  gives you an idea of how much current a
    battery can conduct for a given length of time. For example, a 9-volt transistor battery usually
    has about a 500 milliamp-hour rating. Such a battery can power a circuit using 25 milliamps for
    approximately 20 hours before its voltage begins to drop. (We checked a 9-volt battery that we'd
    used for a few days and found that it was producing only 7 volts.) An AA battery may have a
    1500  milliamp-hour  rating,  so  a  battery  pack  containing  AA  batteries  can  power  a  circuit
    drawing 25 milliamps of current for approximately 60 hours.

 
    Six AA batteries in series, which produce about 9 volts, last longer than a single 9-volt battery.
    That's because the six series batteries contain more chemicals than the single battery and can
    produce  more  current  over  time  before  becoming  depleted.  (In  Chapter  2,  we  discuss  how
    batteries are made and why they eventually run out of juice.) If you have a project that uses a lot
    of current or you plan to run your circuit all the time, consider using larger C- or D-size batteries,
    which last longer than smaller batteries or rechargeable batteries.

 
    See the section ‘Sorting batteries by what's inside' for more about different types of batteries and
    how long you can expect them to last.

 

 


Sorting batteries by what's inside
  Batteries are classified by the chemicals they contain, and the type of chemical determines if a
battery is rechargeable or not. The following types of batteries are readily available:
  Non-rechargeable batteries:

 
        • Zinc-carbon batteries are at the low end of the battery food chain. They may not cost very
    much, but they also don't last very long.

 
        • Alkaline batteries also come in a variety of sizes and last about three times as long as
    zinc-carbon batteries. We suggest starting with this type of battery for your projects. If you find
    yourself replacing them often, you can step up to rechargeable batteries.

 
        • Lithium batteries are lightweight and generate higher voltages - about 3 volts - than other
    types; they also have a higher current capacity than alkaline batteries. They cost more, and you
    can't recharge most lithium batteries, but when your project calls for a lightweight battery (for
    instance, if you're moving a small robot around the house), you can't beat them.

 
  Rechargeable batteries:

 
        • Nickel-cadmium (Ni-Cad or Nicad) batteries generate about 1.2 volts and are the most
    popular type of rechargeable batteries. Some Ni-Cad batteries still exhibit a flaw known as the
    memory effect, requiring you to discharge the battery fully before recharging it, to ensure that it
    recharges to its full capacity. 
        • Nickel-metal hydride (Ni-MH) batteries also generate about 1.2 volts, but don't suffer
    from the memory effect. We suggest you use Ni-MH batteries for your projects that need
    rechargeable batteries.

 


 Be careful not to mix battery types in the same circuit, and never attempt to recharge non-
rechargeable batteries. These batteries can rupture and leak acid, or even explode.


 Buying a recharger and a supply of rechargeable batteries can save you a considerable
amount of money over time. Just make sure that the battery charger you use is designed for the type of
rechargeable battery you select.


Getting power from the sun
  If you're building a circuit designed to operate outside - or you just want to use a clean, green
source of energy - you may want to purchase one or more solar panels. A solar panel consists of an
array of solar cells, which are large diodes known as photodiodes that generate current when exposed to
a light source, such as the sun. (We discuss diodes in Chapter 6, and photodiodes in the section ‘Using
Your Sensors', later in this chapter.)
  A solar panel measuring about 12.5 x 12.5 centimetres (5 x 5 inches) may be able to generate 100
milliamps at 5 volts in bright sunlight. If you need 10 amps, you can certainly get it, but you may find
the size of the panel problematic on a small or portable project.
  Some solar panels contain output leads that you can connect into your circuit, much like the leads
from a battery clip or battery holder. Other solar panels have no leads, so you have to solder your own
leads to the two terminals.
  Here are some criteria to consider to help you determine whether or not a solar panel is right for
your project:
Do you plan to have the solar panel in sunlight when you want your circuit to be on? If not, look for
another power source.

 
Does the solar panel fit on the gadget you're building? To answer this question, you need to know
how much power your gadget needs and the size of the solar panel that can deliver enough power. If the
panel is too large for your gadget, you need to redesign the gadget to use less power or look for another
power source.

 


Working off your wall power (not recommended!)
  The AC power supplied by your utility company can cause injury or death if used improperly, so
we don't recommend you run circuits directly off mains electricity. And because the vast majority of
hobby electronics projects run on batteries, you may never be tempted to work with AC. However,
some projects need more current or higher voltages than batteries can easily provide. In those cases,
you can use a wall transformer, such as the one shown in Figure 8-5, to convert AC to DC. All the
working parts are self-contained in the wall transformer, so you aren't exposed to high AC currents.
  Wall transformers supply currents ranging from hundreds of milliamps to a few amps at voltages
ranging from 5 to 20 volts DC. Some provide both a positive DC voltage and a negative DC voltage.
Different models use different types of connectors to deliver power. If you purchase a wall transformer,be sure to read the specification sheet (specs) carefully to determine how to connect it to your circuit.

Figure 8-5: A plug-in wall transformer shields you from AC house current.
















                                  Acquiring wall warts

    Wall transformers are sometimes called wall warts  because they stick out of the wall like an ugly
    wart. You can purchase wall warts new or surplus. Check out Chapter 16 for some good leads on
    suppliers. And, of course, you may already have some old wall warts saved from a discarded
    cordless phone or other electronic device. If so, be sure to check the voltage and current rating,
    usually printed on the transformer, to see whether it's suitable for your next project.

 

 


Switching Electricity On and Off

  If you think that a switch is just a simple on/off mechanism, think again. You can use lots of
different kinds of switches in your electronics projects, and they're categorised by how they're
controlled, the type and number of connections they make and, as with all components, how much
current they can handle.


          A switch is a device that makes or breaks one or more electrical connections. When a
switch is in the open position, the electrical connection is broken and you have an open circuit with no
current flowing. When a switch is in the closed position, an electrical connection is made and current
flows.


Controlling the action of a switch
    Switches are referred to by names that indicate how the switching action is controlled. We list
some of the many different types of switches below and show several in Figure 8-6:
Slide switch: You slide a knob back and forth to open and close this switch, which you can find on
many torches.

 
Toggle switch: You flip a lever one way to close the switch and the other way to open the switch. 
Rocker switch: You press one side of the switch down to open the switch, and the other side of the
switch down to close the switch. You find rocker switches on many power strips.

 
Pushbutton switch: You push a button to change the state of the switch, but how it changes depends
on the type of pushbutton switch you have:

 
        • Push on/push off buttons: Each press of the button reverses the position of the switch.

 
        • Push-to-make (for example, a leaf switch): This momentary switch is normally open
    (off), but if you hold the button down, the switch is closed (on). When you release the button, the
    switch becomes open again.

 
        • Push-to-break: This momentary switch is normally closed (on), but if you hold the button
    down, the switch is open (off). When you release the button, the switch becomes closed again.

 
Relay: A relay is an electrically controlled switch. If you apply a certain voltage to a relay, an
electromagnet within pulls the switch lever (known as the armature) closed. You may hear talk of
closing or opening the contacts of a relay. That's just the term used to describe a relay's switch.

 

Figure 8-6: From top to bottom: two toggle switches, a rocker switch and a leaf switch.















Making the right contacts
    Switches are categorised by how many connections they make when you flip the switch and
exactly how those connections are made. A switch can have one or more poles, or sets of input
contacts, which can be connected to an output: a single-pole switch can connect one input wire to an
output, whereas a double-pole switch can connect two input wires to an output.
  A switch can have one or more conducting positions, or throws. A single-throw switch connects or
disconnects one input to one output, whereas a double-throw switch has twice as many output contacts
as input contacts and connects or disconnects each input to either of two outputs.
  Here's the low-down on some common switch varieties:
Single-pole single-throw (SPST): This type is your basic on/off switch, with one input and one
output. The symbol for an SPST switch is shown below: 

Single-pole double-throw (SPDT): This on/on switch contains one input contact and two output
contacts. An SPDT switch is always on; it just switches the input between two options of output. You
use an SPDT switch, or changeover switch, when you want to have a circuit turn one device or another
on (for example, a green light to let people know that they can enter a room, or a red light to tell them
to stay out). The symbol for an SPDT switch is shown below:

 

  Double-pole single-throw (DPST): This dual on/off switch contains two input contacts and two
output contacts and behaves like two separate SPST switches operating in sync. In the off position, both
switches are open and no connections are made. In the on position, both switches are closed and
connections are made between each input contact and its corresponding output contact. The symbol for
a DPST switch is shown below:

 


  Double-pole double-throw (DPDT): This dual on/on switch contains two input contacts and four
output contacts, and behaves like two SPDT switches operating in sync. In one position, the two inputs
are connected to one set of outputs, and in the other position, the two inputs are connected to the other
set of outputs. Some DPDT switches have a third position, which disconnects all contacts.

 
You can use a DPDT switch as a reversing switch for a motor, connecting the motor to positive voltage
to turn one way or negative voltage to turn the other way, and, if a third switch position is available,
zero voltage to stop turning. The symbol for a DPDT switch is shown below:

 




Using Your Sensors

  When you want to trigger the operation of a circuit based on something physical happening, such
as a change in temperature, you use electronic components known as sensors. Sensors take advantage
of the fact that various forms of energy, including light, heat and motion, can be converted into
electrical energy.
  Sensors are a type of transducer, which is an electronic device that converts energy from one form
to another. In this section, we describe some of the more common input transducers, or sensors, used in
electronic circuits.


Seeing the light
  Many electronic components behave differently depending on the light to which they're exposed.
Manufacturers make certain versions of components to exploit this light dependency, enclosing them in
clear cases so that you can use them as sensors in equipment such as burglar alarms, smoke detectors,
automatic dusk-to-dawn lighting and safety devices that stop your electric garage door from closing
when a cat runs under it.
  You can also use these light-sensitive devices for communications between your TV remote
control, which sends coded instructions via infrared light using a light-emitting diode (or LED, which
we discuss in Chapter 6), and your TV, which contains a light-sensitive diode or transistor to receive
the coded instructions.
  Examples of light-sensitive devices used as sensors include the following:  Photoresistors (or photocells) are light-dependent resistors (LDRs) made from semiconductor
material. They typically exhibit a high resistance (about 1 MΩ) in darkness and a fairly low resistance
(about 100 Ω) in bright light, but you can use a multimeter (as we describe in Chapter 12) to determine
the actual resistances that a specific photoresistor exhibits. The typical photoresistor is most sensitive to
visible light, especially in the green-yellow spectrum. The symbol for a photoresistor, which can be
installed either way in your circuits, is shown below:

 


Photodiodes are sort of the opposite of the LEDs that we discuss in Chapter 6. They conduct current
or drop voltage only when exposed to sufficient light, usually in the invisible infrared range. Like
standard diodes, photodiodes contain two leads: the shorter lead is the cathode (negative end) and the
longer lead is the anode (positive end). The circuit symbol for a photo diode is shown below:

 


  Phototransistors are simply bipolar junction transistors (as we discuss in Chapter 6) encased in a
clear package so that light biases the base-emitter junction. These devices have only two leads (whereas
standard transistors contain three leads), because you don't need access to the base of the transistor in
order to bias it - light does the job for you. Phototransistors amplify differences in the light that strikes
them, but from the outside, they look just like photodiodes, so you really have to keep track of which is
which. The circuit symbol for a phototransistor is shown below:

 


  Take a look at Chapter 14 for some projects that involve light-sensitive components.


Capturing sound with microphones
    Microphones are input transducers that convert acoustic energy, otherwise known as sound, into
electrical energy. Most use a thin membrane, or diaphragm, that vibrates in response to air pressure
changes from sound. The vibrations of the membrane are translated into an AC electrical signal via any
number of ways, depending on the type of microphone:
In a condenser microphone, the vibrating membrane plays the role of a movable capacitor plate in a
variable capacitor, so that variations in sound produce corresponding variations in capacitance. The
variable capacitor is one component in the electronic circuit that carries the sound signal within the
audio system. We describe variable capacitors in Chapter 4.

 
In a dynamic microphone, the diaphragm is attached to a movable induction coil located inside a
permanent magnet. As sound moves the diaphragm, the coil moves inside the magnet field, changing
the current in the coil. We describe this phenomenon, known as electromagnetic induction, in Chapter
5.

 
In a crystal microphone, a special piezoelectric crystal is used to convert sound into electrical
energy, taking advantage of the piezoelectric effect in which certain substances produce a voltage when
pressure is applied to them.

 
In a fibre-optic microphone, a laser source directs a light beam towards the surface of a tiny
reflective diaphragm. As the diaphragm moves, a detector picks up changes in light reflected off the
diaphragm, which transforms the differences in light into an electrical signal.

   The circuit symbol for a microphone is shown below:



Feeling the heat
  A thermistor is a resistor whose resistance value changes with changes in temperature.
Thermistors have two leads and no polarity, so you don't need to worry about which way you insert a
thermistor into your circuit. The circuit symbol for a thermistor is shown below:



                      Using light sensors to detect motion

    If you've ever walked up to a dark doorway and  seen the outdoor light going on automatically,
    you've seen a motion detector at work. These devices commonly use light sensors to detect the
    presence  of  infrared  light  emitted  from  a  warm  object  (such  as  a  person  or  animal)  or  the
    absence of infrared light when an object interrupts a beam emitted by another part of the device.

 
    Many  homes,  schools  and  shops  use passive  infrared  detectors  to  turn  on  lights  or  detect
    intruders. These motion detectors contain a pyroelectric infrared (PIR) sensor with at least one
    crystal in it, a lens and a small electronic circuit. When infrared light hits the crystal, it generates
    an electric charge. Because warm bodies, such as (most) humans, emit infrared light at different
    wavelengths than cooler objects, such as a wall, differences in the output of the PIR sensor can
    be used to detect the presence of a warm body. The electronic circuit interprets differences in the
    PIR sensor output to determine whether or not a moving warm object is nearby.

 
    Industrial passive infrared motion detectors use or control mains-voltage circuits. For hobby
    projects using a battery pack, you need a compact motion detector that works with about 5 volts.
    A typical compact motion detector has three leads: ground, positive voltage supply and the
    detector output. If you supply +5 volts to the detector, the voltage on the output lead reads about
    0 (zero) volts when no motion is detected or about 5 volts when motion is detected. You can find
    compact motion detectors through online security system vendors, but be sure to buy a motion
    detector, rather than just a PIR sensor. The lens included in a motion detector helps the device
    detect the motion of an object rather than just the presence of an object.

 
    An active infrared motion detector uses its own infrared LEDs to switch a phototransistor (or
    other detector) on and off. The detector is an active infrared device, meaning it generates infrared
    light, as opposed to the passive infrared sensor that doesn't generate, but only receives, light.
    Such electric eye devices are used in automatic garage-door opener systems to detect moving
    objects.

 

 

  Two types of thermistor are available:
Negative temperature coefficient (NTC) thermistor: The resistance of an NTC thermistor (the
most common type of thermistor) decreases with a rise in temperature.

 
Positive temperature coefficient (PTC) thermistor: The resistance of a PTC thermistor increases
with a rise in temperature.

   Suppliers' catalogues usually list the resistance of thermistors as measured at 25 degrees Celsius
(77 degrees Fahrenheit). You can measure the resistance of the thermistor yourself with a multimeter
(see Chapter 12 for more about using multimeters) at a few temperatures. These measurements enable
you to calibrate the thermistor, or get the exact relationship between temperature and resistance.


                    Other ways to take your temperature

      Thermistors  aren't  the  only  type  of  temperature   sensors.  Here,  we  briefly  summarise  the
    characteristics of several other types for the curious among you:

 
              Bimetallic strip: The thermostat in your house uses a coiled metal strip, which shrinks
          as the temperature cools, to trip a switch and turn your boiler on.
              Semiconductor temperature sensor: The most common type of this sensor, whose
          output voltage depends on the temperature, contains two transistors (which we discuss in
          Chapter 6).
              Thermocouple:  A  thermocouple  contains  two  wires  made  of  different  metals  (for
          example, a copper wire and a wire made of a nickel/copper alloy) that are welded or
          soldered  together  at  one  point.  These  sensors  generate  a  voltage  that  changes  with
            temperature. The metals used determine how the voltage changes with temperature. You
          use a thermocouple to measure high temperatures, such as several hundred degrees, or
          even over a thousand degrees, Celsius.
              Infrared temperature sensor: This sensor measures the infrared light given off by an
          object. You use it when your sensor must be located at a distance from the object you plan
          to measure; for example, when a corrosive gas surrounds the object. Industrial plants and
          scientific labs typically use thermocouples and infrared temperature sensors.

 



 If you're planning to use the thermistor to trigger an action at a particular temperature,
make sure that you measure the resistance of the thermistor at that temperature.


Trying other energising input transducers
  Many, many other types of input transducers are used in electronic circuits. Some examples are:
Antennas: An antenna senses electromagnetic waves and transforms the energy into an electrical
signal. (It also functions as an output transducer, converting electrical signals into electromagnetic
waves.)

 
Pressure or position sensors: These sensors take advantage of the variable resistance properties of
certain materials when they undergo a deformation. Piezoelectric crystals are one such set of materials.

 
Magnetic tape heads: These devices read magnetic field fluctuations on audio and video cassette
tapes (as well as the computer floppy disks used by the ancients) and convert them into electrical
signals.

 
    Transducers are often categorised by the type of energy conversion they perform, for instance,
electroacoustic, electromagnetic, photoelectric and electromechanical transducers. These amazing
devices open up tremendous opportunities for electronic circuits to perform countless useful tasks.Sensing Something's Going On


 Sensors, or input transducers, take one form of energy and convert it into electrical
energy, which is fed into the input of an electronic circuit. Output transducers do the opposite: they
take the electronic signal at the output of a circuit and convert it into another form of energy, for
instance sound, light or motion (which is mechanical energy).
  You may not realise, but you're probably very familiar with many devices that really are output
transducers. Light bulbs, LEDs, motors, speakers and cathode ray tubes (CRTs) and other displays all
convert electrical energy into another form of energy. You can create, shape and send electrical signals
around wires and through components all day long, but when you transform the electrical energy into a
form of energy that you can experience personally, you really begin to enjoy the fruits of your labour.


Speaking of speakers
    Speakers convert electrical signals into sound energy. Most speakers consist simply of a
permanent magnet, an electromagnet (which is a temporary, electrically controlled magnet) and a cone.
Figure 8-7 shows how the components of a speaker are arranged.

Figure 8-7: The parts of your typical, cheap-as-chips speaker: two magnets and a cone.










  The electromagnet, which consists of a coil wrapped around an iron core, is attached to the cone.
As electrical current alternates back and forth through the coil, the electromagnet gets pulled towards
and then pushed away from the permanent magnet. (We describe the ups and downs of electromagnets
in Chapter 5.) The motion of the electromagnet causes the cone to vibrate, which creates sound waves.
  Most speakers come with two leads that can be used interchangeably. For more serious projects,
such as speakers in stereo systems, you must pay attention to the polarity markings on the speakers
because of the way they're used in electronic circuits inside the stereo system.
  The circuit symbol for a speaker is shown below:


    Speakers are rated according to the following criteria:
  Frequency range: Speakers can generate sound over different ranges of frequencies, depending on
the size and design of the speakers, within the audible frequency range, about 20 Hz (hertz) to 20 kHz
(kilohertz). For example, one speaker in a stereo system may generate sound in the bass (low audible
frequency) range while another generates sound in a higher range. You need to pay close attention to
speaker frequency range only if you're building a high-end audio system, when you get to know your
woofers from your tweeters.

 
  Impedance: Impedance is a measure of the speaker's resistance to AC current (as we discuss in
Chapter 5). You can easily find 4 Ω, 8 Ω, 16 Ω and 32 Ω speakers. You need to select a speaker thatmatches the minimum impedance rating of the amplifier you're using to drive the speaker. (You can
find that rating in the datasheet for the amplifier on your supplier's website.) If the speaker impedance
is too high, you don't get as much volume out of the speaker as possible, and if the speaker impedance
is too low, you may overheat your amplifier.

 
Power rating: The power rating tells you how much power (power = current × voltage) the speaker
can handle without getting damaged. Typical power ratings are 0.25 watts, 0.5 watts, 1 watts and 2
watts. Be sure that you look up the maximum power output of the amplifier driving your speaker
(check the datasheet) and choose a speaker with a power rating of at least that value.

 


          For hobby electronics projects, miniature speakers - roughly 5-7.5 centimetres (2-3 inches)
in diameter - with an input impedance of 8 Ω are often just what you need. Be careful, however, not to
overpower these little noisemakers, which typically handle only 0.25 or 0.5 watts.


Sounding off with buzzers
  Like speakers, buzzers generate sound, but unlike speakers, buzzers indiscriminately produce the
same obnoxious sound no matter what voltage you apply (within reason). With speakers, ‘Mozart in'
creates ‘Mozart out'; with buzzers, ‘Mozart in' creates nothing but noise.
  One type of buzzer, a piezoelectric buzzer, contains a diaphragm attached to a piezoelectric
crystal. When a voltage is applied to the crystal, the crystal expands or contracts (known as the
piezoelectric effect); this effect, in turn, makes the diaphragm vibrate, generating sound waves. (Note
that this process is pretty much exactly the opposite of the way a crystal microphone works, as we
described earlier section ‘Capturing sound with microphones'.)
  Buzzers have two leads and come in a variety of packages. Figure 8-8 shows a couple of typical
buzzers. To connect the leads the correct way, remember that the red lead connects to a positive DC
voltage. The circuit symbol for a piezoelectric buzzer is shown below:


Figure 8-8: These noisy little buzzers are very simple to operate.











  When shopping for a buzzer, you need to consider three specifications:
The frequency of sound it emits: Most buzzers give off sound at one frequency somewhere in the
range of 2-4 kHz.

 
The operating voltage and voltage range: Make sure that you get a buzzer that works with the DC
voltage that your project supplies. 
The level of sound it produces in decibels (db): The higher the decibel rating, the louder (and more
obnoxious) the sound emitted. Higher DC voltage provides a higher sound level.

 


          Be careful that the sound doesn't get so loud that it damages your hearing. You can start to
get an annoying ringing in your ears at levels of around 85 db and above.


Creating good vibrations with DC motors
  Have you ever wondered what causes a mobile phone to vibrate? No, it's not Mexican jumping
beans: these devices usually use a DC motor. DC motors change electrical energy, such as the energy
stored in a battery, into motion. That motion may involve turning the wheels of a robot that you build
or vibrating your mobile. In fact, you can use a DC motor in any project where you need motion.
    Electromagnets make up an important part of DC motors because these motors consist of,
essentially, an electromagnet on an axle rotating between two permanent magnets, as you can see in
Figure 8-9.
  The positive and negative terminals of the battery connect so that each end of the electromagnet
has the same polarity as the permanent magnet next to it. Alike poles of magnets repel each other. This
repelling action moves the electromagnet and causes the axle to spin. As the axle spins, the positive and
negative connections to the electromagnet swap places, so the magnets continue to push the axle
around.
  A simple mechanism consisting of a commutator (a segmented wheel with each segment
connected to a different end of the electromagnet) and brushes that touch the commutator cause the
connections to change. The commutator turns with the axle and the brushes are stationary, with one
brush connected to the positive battery terminal and the other brush to the negative battery terminal. As
the axle, and therefore the commutator, rotates, the segment in contact with each brush changes. This
effect in turn changes which end of the electromagnet is connected to negative or positive voltage.


          If you want to get a feel for the mechanism inside a DC motor, buy a cheap one for a few
pounds and take it apart.

Figure 8-9: How the parts of a simple DC motor fit together.










  The axle in a DC motor rotates a few thousand times per minute - a bit fast for most applications.
Therefore, suppliers sell DC motors with something called a gear head pre-mounted; this device
reduces the speed of the output shaft to under a hundred revolutions per minute (rpm). The result is
similar to the way that changing gears in your car changes the speed of the car.
  Suppliers' catalogues typically list several specifications for the motors they carry. You need toconsider two key things:
Speed: The speed (in rpm) that you need depends on your project. For example, when turning the
wheels of a model car, you may aim for 60 rpm, with the motor rotating the wheels once per second.

 
Operating voltage: The operating voltage is given as a range. Hobby electronics projects typically
use a motor that works in the 4.5-12-volt range. Also notice the manufacturer's nominal voltage and
stated rpm for the motor. The motor runs at this rpm when you supply the nominal voltage. If you
supply less than the nominal voltage, the motor runs slower than the stated rpm.

 
  DC motors have two wires (or terminals to which you solder wires), one each for the positive and
negative supply voltage. You run the motor by simply supplying a DC voltage that generates the speed
that you want and switching off the voltage when you want the motor to stop.
  You can use a more efficient method of controlling the speed of the motor called pulse width
modulation. This method turns voltage on and off in quick pulses. The longer the ‘on' intervals, the
faster the motor goes. If you're building a kit for something motor-controlled, such as a robot, the
electronics for the kit supplies this speed control.


 If you're attaching things such as wheels, fan blades and so on to the motor shaft, be sure
that you attach the component securely before you apply power to the motor. If not, the item may spin
off and hit you, or someone near and dear to you, in the face.                                    Part II

Getting Your Hands Dirty




















    In this part . . .

  Ready to get down to business and build an electronic circuit or two (or

more)?  This  part  gives  you  the  low-down  on  how  to  set  up  your  own

electronics workbench, stock up on tools and supplies, and stay safe. We also

run through the essential ‘how-tos' you need to know so that you can build -

and troubleshoot - your circuits.

  You find out where (and where not) to locate your electronics workbench,

what  shiny  new  tools  you  absolutely  must  have  and  what  electronic

components to buy to get you started. We reveal the language of schematics -

circuit diagrams - and how to transfer a circuit design from paper to real live

current-carrying components.

  We also show you how to use a solderless breadboard to build prototype

(test) circuits, and how to solder components together to create permanent

circuits. You also meet the amazing multimeter, which enables you to ‘see'

inside your circuits and sniff out problems. And we introduce the basics of

two useful but optional test tools: the logic probe and the oscilloscope.        Chapter 9: Setting Up Shop and


                              Staying Safe



  In This Chapter
Designing a workspace that works for you
Getting hold of tools and other supplies
Starting a stock of electronics components
Realising that Ohm's Law also applies to the human body
Keeping yourself safe
  Finding out all about amazing resistors, transistors and other electronic components is great, but if
all you ever do is sketch out circuit diagrams and dream about how your cool circuit is going to
manipulate electron flow, you never make anything buzz, beep or move. You need to start tinkering
with real components, add a little power and watch your circuits perform. But before you go running
out to your local electronics shop, take time to prepare for this circuit-building stage of your life.
  In this chapter, we give you guidelines for setting up a little electronics laboratory in your own
home. We outline the tools and supplies you need to get the circuit-building job done, and we give you
a shopping list of electronic components to purchase so that you can build a bunch of different projects.
  Building electronics circuits isn't for the faint-hearted (because even small currents can affect your
heart), and therefore we run you through the safety information that you must know to remain a living
and healthy electronics engineer.


          A word to the wise right here in the chapter intro: very little electrical current is needed to
seriously hurt or even kill you. Even the most seasoned professionals take appropriate precautions to
stay safe. We strongly suggest (insist, even) that you thoroughly read the safety facts in this chapter
and, before you start each project, review the ‘Staying Safe: Safety Checklist' section at the end of this
chapter.
    Promise?


Picking a Place to Practise Electronics

  Where you put your workshop is just as important as the projects you make and the tools you use.
As with property, the motto is location, location, location. Stake out just the right spot in your house or
flat and you're better organised and able to enjoy your experiments much more. Nothing is worse than
working with a messy workbench in dim lighting while breathing stale air.


Creating a great lab
  The prime ingredients for the well set-up electronics laboratory are:
A comfortable, dry climate.

 
A comfortable place to work, with a workbench and chair.

 
Ample electrical sockets.

 
A solid, flat work surface. 
Good lighting.

 
Peace and quiet.

 
Tools and toolboxes on nearby shelves or racks.

 


          The workbench and work area must be inaccessible to your children. Keep your projects,
tools and supplies out of reach or behind lockable doors and integrated circuits and other sharp parts off
the floor - they're more painful to step on than Lego bricks!
  If your work area is accessible to other family members, find ways to make the area off-limits to
those with less knowledge about electronics safety, especially young children. Curious youngsters and
electronics simply don't mix! (We cover safety later in this chapter in the section ‘Protecting You and
Your Electronics'.)
  The ideal workspace is one that doesn't get disturbed when you have to leave it for hours or days.
The garage is an ideal setting because it gives you the freedom to work with solder and other messy
materials without worrying about soiling the carpet or nearby furniture.
  You don't need much space: about 1-x-1.5 metres square ought to do it. If you can't clear that
much space in your garage (or you don't have a garage), you can use a room in the house, but try to
keep a corner of the room for your electronics work. When working in a carpeted room, you can
prevent static electricity by spreading a protective cover, such as an anti-static mat, over the floor. We
discuss this aspect in detail in the ‘Minimising static electricity' section, later in this chapter.
  No matter where you set up shop, consider the climate. Extremes in heat, cold or humidity can
have a profound effect on your electronics circuits. If you find your work area chilly, warm or damp,
take steps to control the climate in that area, or don't use that area for electronics work.
  You may need to add insulation and/or use an air conditioner or dehumidifier to control the
temperature and humidity. Locate your workbench away from open doors and windows that can allow
moisture and extreme temperatures in. And for safety reasons, never - repeat, never - work in an area
where the floor is wet or even slightly damp.


Choosing a workbench
  The kinds of projects you do determine the size of the workbench you need, but for most
applications, a table or other flat surface spanning about a metre is fine. You may even have a spare
desk or table that you can use for your electronics bench.


 As you work on projects, you crouch over your workbench for hours at a time. You can
skimp and buy or build an inexpensive worktable, but if you don't already own a good chair, put one on
the top of your shopping list. Be sure to adjust the seat for the height of the worktable. A poor-fitting
chair can cause backaches and fatigue.


Tooling Up

  Every hobby has its special assortment of tools and supplies, and electronics is no exception. From
the lowly screwdriver to the high-speed drill, you enjoy messing with electronics much more if you
have the right tools and an assortment of supplies organised and stored so that you can put your hands
on them when you need them without cluttering your work area.  This section tells you exactly what tools and supplies you need to have in order to complete basic-
to-intermediate electronics projects.


 If you have a permanent place in your house to work on electronics, you can hang some
of the hand tools mentioned in this section on the wall or a pegboard. Reserve this special treatment for
the tools that you use the most. You can stash other small tools and supplies in a small toolbox and
store it on your workbench. A plastic fishing tackle box with lots of small compartments and one large
section can help you keep your things organised.


Shopping for soldering stuff
    Soldering is the method you use to make semi-permanent connections between components as you
build a circuit. Instead of using glue to hold things together, you use small globs of molten metal called
solder, which are applied with a soldering iron. The metal provides a conductive physical joint, known
as a solder joint, between the wires and component leads of your circuit.
  You'll be glad to know that you need only some pretty simple tools for soldering. You can
purchase a basic, no-frills soldering setup for around £10, although better soldering tools cost a bit
more.
  At a minimum, you need the following basic items for soldering:
  Soldering iron: A pencil-like tool with an insulating handle, a heating element and a polished metal
tip (see Figure 9-1). Choose a soldering iron that's rated at 25-30 watts, sports a replaceable tip and has
a three-pin plug so that it's grounded. Certain models allow you to use different size tips for different
types of projects, and some include variable controls that allow you to change the wattage (both
features are nice, but not absolutely necessary).

 
  Soldering stand: The stand holds the soldering iron and keeps the (very hot) tip from coming into
contact with anything on your workbench. Some soldering irons come with a stand (a set often called a
soldering station). The stand should have a weighted base or clamp to your workbench, so that the
stand doesn't tip over. A stand isn't a fancy accessory but a must-have if you're aiming not to melt your
project, singe your desk and/or burn yourself!

 
Solder: Solder is a soft metal that's heated by a soldering iron, and then allowed to cool, forming a
conductive joint. Solder used to contain a lot of lead and still does in North America, but solder sold in
Europe is now lead-free, which means it's now mostly tin with a tiny bit of copper and sometimes a
little bit of silver. Solder is sold in little spools or tubes.

 
  We recommend that you also get your hands on these additional soldering tools and accessories:
Extra soldering tips: For most electronics work, a small (a few millimetres across) pointed or
chiselled tip works fine, but you can also find larger or smaller tips used for different types of projects.
Be sure to purchase the correct tip for your make and model of soldering iron. Replace your tip when it
shows signs of corrosion or pitting, or when the plating is peeling off; a worn tip doesn't pass as much
heat.

 
Solder removal tools: A solder sucker or desoldering pump is a spring-loaded vacuum that you can
use to remove a solder joint or excess solder in your circuit. To use it, melt the solder that you want to
remove, quickly position the pump over the molten blob and activate it to suck up the solder. Or you
can use a desoldering wick or braid, which is a flat, woven copper wire that you place over unwanted
solder and apply heat to. When the solder reaches its melting point, it adheres to the copper wire, which
you then remove and dispose of. 
Tip cleaner: This tool gives your soldering tip a good cleaning.

 
Wetted sponge: You use this item to wipe off excess solder and flux from the hot tip of the
soldering iron. Some soldering stands include a small sponge and a built-in space to hold it, but a clean
household sponge also works fine.

 
  In Chapter 11, we explain in detail how to use a soldering iron.

Figure 9-1: Some soldering iron models are temperature-adjustable and come with their own stand.















Measuring with a multimeter
  Another essential tool is a multimeter, which you use to measure AC and DC voltages, resistance
and current when you want to explore what's going on in a circuit. Most multimeters you find today are
of the digital variety (see Figure 9-2), which just means that they use a numeric display, like a digital
clock or watch (you can use them to explore analogue, as well as digital, circuits). Older-style analogue
multimeters use a needle to point to a set of graduated scales.

Figure 9-2: Multimeters measure voltages, resistance and current.














  All multimeters come with a pair of test leads: one black (for the ground connection) and one red
(for the positive connection). On small pocket units, the test leads are permanently attached to themeter, whereas on larger models, you can unplug the leads. All test leads have a cone-shaped metal tip
used for probing circuits. You can also purchase test clips that slip over the tips, making testing much
easier because you can attach these clips onto wires or component leads.
  Prices for new multimeters range from a tenner to hundreds of pounds. Higher-priced meters
include additional features, such as built-in testing capabilities for capacitors, diodes and transistors.
Think of a multimeter as a window into your circuits and consider purchasing the best model you can
afford. That way, as your projects grow more complex, you still get a magnificent view of what's going
on inside.
  We give you the low-down on how to use a multimeter and other test equipment in Chapter 12.


Getting hands-on with hand tools
  Hand tools are the mainstay of any toolbox. These tools tighten screws, snip off wires, bend little
pieces of metal and do all those other mundane tasks. Make sure that you have the following tools
available at your workbench:
Wire cutter: You can find general-purpose wire cutters at hardware and home improvement stores,
but it pays to invest a fiver or so in cutters that can snip wires right up close to the work - called nippy
or flush cutters and shown in Figure 9-3. You'll find them easier to use in tight places, such as above a
solder joint.

 
Wire stripper: You often need to expose 10 millimetres or so of bare wire so that you can solder a
connection or insert the wire into the holes of a solderless breadboard (which we discuss in the later
section, ‘Practising with solderless breadboards'). A good wire stripper contains notches allowing you
to neatly and easily strip just the plastic insulation from wires of various sizes (known as gauges, as we
describe in Chapter 8), without nicking the copper wire inside. You can also find a combination wire
cutter and stripper, but you have to perform your own gauge control.

 
  Needlenose pliers (two sets): These pliers help you bend wires, insert leads into breadboard holes
and hold parts in place. Get two pairs: a mini (12.5-centimetre long - 5-inch) set for intricate work and a
standard size set to use when you need to apply a bit more pressure.

 
  Precision screwdrivers: Make sure that you have both straight and Phillips head (cross-shaped tip)
screwdrivers that are small enough for your electronics needs. Use the right size for the job to avoid
damaging the head of the screw. A magnetised screwdriver can make working with small screws easier,
or place a small amount of Blu-Tack into the head of the screw before inserting the screwdriver tip.
Works wonders.

 
Magnifying glass: A 3X (or more) magnifying glass can help you check solder joints and read tiny
part numbers. You can buy versions on stands with built-in lights, too.

 
Third hand: No, not the result of a mad scientist's gory experiment. A third hand is a tool that
clamps onto your workbench and has adjustable clips that hold small parts (or a magnifying glass)
while you're working. This makes tasks such as soldering a heck of a lot easier. See Figure 9-4 for an
example of how to use it.

 

Figure 9-3: Nippy cutters trim wire ends flush to the surface.Figure 9-4: These helping hands combine crocodile clips with a magnifying glass.















Collecting cloths and cleaners
  If the circuitry, components and other parts of your electronics projects aren't kept as clean as a
whistle, they may not work properly. Starting with a clean slate is especially important when you're
soldering parts together or onto a circuit board. Dirt makes for bad solder joints, and bad solder joints
make for faulty circuits.
  Here's a list of items that can help you keep your projects spick and span:
Artist brushes: Get both a small brush and a wide brush to dust away dirt, but avoid cheap brushes
that shed bristles. A dry, clean toothbrush works well, too.

 
Blower brush: Available at any photographic shop, these brushes combine the whisking action of a
soft brush with the cleaning action of a strong puff of air.

 
Compressed air: A shot of compressed air, available in cans, can remove dust from delicate
electronic innards. But keep it locked away when you're not using it; if misused as an inhalant,
compressed air can kill.

 
Contact cleaner: Spray the cleaner onto a brush and then whisk the brush over electrical contacts. 
Cotton swabs: Soak up excess oil, lubricant and cleaner with these swabs.

 
Cuticle sticks and nail files: Scrape junk off circuit boards and electrical contacts, and then give
yourself a manicure!

 
  Electronics cleaner/degreaser: Use only a cleaner/degreaser specifically made for use on electronic
components.

 
Pink pencil rubber: Great for rubbing electrical contacts clean, especially those that have been
contaminated by the acid from a leaky battery. Must be pink; other erasers can leave a hard-to-remove
residue. Avoid rubbing against a circuit board, because it may create static electricity.

 
Soft cloth or bandage: Keep your stuff dust-free by using a soft cloth or sterilised lint-free bandage.
Don't use household dusting sprays because some generate a static charge that can damage electronics.

 
  Water-based household cleaner: Lightly spray to remove stubborn dirt and excess grease from
tools, work surfaces and the exterior surfaces of your projects. Don't use them around powered circuits
or you may short something out.

 


Oiling the wheels
  Motors and other mechanical parts used in electronics projects require a certain amount of grease
or oil to operate and need to be re-lubricated periodically. Two types of lubricants are commonly used
in electronics projects:
Light machine oil: Use this type of oil for parts that spin. Avoid using oil with anti-rust ingredients,
which may react with plastic parts, causing them to melt. A syringe oiler with a long, thin spout is ideal
for hard-to-reach places.

 
Synthetic grease: Use lithium grease or another synthetic grease for parts that mesh or slide.

 


          You should avoid using one type of lubricant with electronics projects: spray-on synthetic
lubricants such as WD-40 and LPS. Because you can't control the width of the spray, you're bound to
get some on parts that shouldn't be oiled. Also, some synthetic lubricants are non-conductive, and their
fine mist can get in the way, interrupting electrical contacts.
  You can find light machine oil and synthetic grease at electronics parts shops as well as many
music, sewing machine, hobby and hardware stores.


          Don't apply a lubricant unless you know for sure that a mechanical part needs it. Certain
self-lubricating plastics used for mechanical components can break down when exposed to a petroleum-
based lubricant. If you're fixing a CD player or other piece of electronic equipment, check with the
manufacturer for instructions regarding the use of lubrication.


Sticking with it
  Many electronics projects require that you use an adhesive of some type. For example, you mayneed to secure a small printed circuit board to the inside of a pocket-sized project box. Depending on
the application, you can use one or more of the following adhesives:
White household glue is best used for projects that involve wood or other porous materials. Allow
20-30 minutes for the glue to dry and about 12 hours to cure.

 
Epoxy cement creates strong, moisture-resistant bonds and can be used for any material. Allow 5-30
minutes for the epoxy to set and 12 hours for it to cure.

 
Super glue, or Cyanoacrylate (CA) glue, bonds almost anything (including fingers, so be careful),
almost instantly. Use ordinary CA glue when bonding smooth and perfectly matching parts; use the
heavier-bodied gap-filling CA glue if the parts don't match 100 per cent.

 
  Double-sided foam tape is a quick way to secure circuit boards to enclosures or to make sure that
loosely fitting components remain in place.

 
A hot-melt glue gun allows you to glue things with a drying time of only about 30 seconds. The
waterproof, gap-sealing glue comes in a stick that you slide into a slot in the gun, which heats the glue
to about 120-170° C - hot enough to hurt you, but not hot enough to melt solder.

 


Selecting other tools and supplies
  We highly recommend that you acquire the following three other items before you begin any
electronics work:
Anti-static wrist strap: This inexpensive strap prevents electrostatic discharge from damaging
sensitive electronic components. We discuss this aspect in the later section ‘Minimising static
electricity'.

 
First-aid kit and guide: Burns (or worse) can happen when working with electronic circuits.
Keeping a first-aid kit at your workbench is a good idea. Make sure that you include guidelines for
applying first aid.

 
Safety glasses: Stylish plastic safety glasses never go out of fashion. They're a must-have to protect
your eyes from flying bits of wire, sputtering solder, exploding electronics parts and many other small
objects. If you wear prescription glasses, place safety glasses over them to ensure complete protection
all around your eyes.

 
  A time will come when you want to enclose an electronics project in some sort of container with
wires or knobs sticking out. For instance, say you build Christmas lights with a controllable blink rate.
You may want to place the main circuit in a box, cut a hole through the front of the box and insert a
potentiometer (variable resistor) through the hole so that you (or someone else) can control how fast the
lights blink. Or you may want to build a circuit that detects intruders opening your fridge: you can
disguise the circuit as a bread box and place it next to the fridge.
    Whatever the project, you need some additional tools and supplies to enclose your project.
  Here's a list of supplies and associated tools you may need in order to box-up your project:
Cable ties: Use cable ties to attach wires to non-flat surfaces, such as a wooden dowel.

 
Electric drill: A drill comes in handy for making holes in your box for knobs and switches. You can
also use it to attach wheels or other external parts to your box. 
Hand saws: You can use a hack saw to cut wood or plastic to make your box and a coping saw to
cut broad openings in the box.

 
  Ready-made box: You can find simple, unfinished wooden boxes at craft shops and ABS plastic
boxes at most electronics suppliers. Or you can make your own box out of plywood or PVC plastic,
using contact cement or another adhesive to keep it together.

 
Wire clips: Adhesive-backed plastic clips hold wires in place along the insides of your box.

 


Picking up Parts

  Okay, so you've got your workbench set up, complete with screwdrivers, pliers and hand saws,
you've donned your anti-static wrist strap and safety glasses (along with your everyday clothes,
please!), and you've got your soldering iron plugged in and ready to go. So what's missing? Oh yeah,
circuit components!
  When you shop for circuit components, you usually don't go out and purchase just the exact parts
listed for a particular circuit diagram or schematic. You purchase an assortment of parts so that you can
build several different projects without having to run out for parts each time you try something new.
Think of this process as being like gathering ingredients for cooking and baking. You maintain a store
of many basic ingredients, such as flour, sugar, oil, rice and spices, and you purchase enough other
ingredients to enable you to cook the sorts of things you like for a week or two. The same thing applies
with stocking up on electronics parts and components.
  In this section, we tell you what parts and how many you should keep on hand in order to build
some basic electronics projects.


Practising with solderless breadboards
  A solderless breadboard is similar in a way to a Lego table: it's a surface that enables you to build
temporary circuits simply by plugging components into holes arranged in rows and columns across the
surface of the board. Breadboards allow you to take one circuit apart very easily and build another
completely different circuit on the same surface.
  The holes in a solderless breadboard aren't just ordinary holes; they're contact holes with copper
lines running underneath so that anything plugged into two or more holes within a particular row is
connected underneath the surface of the breadboard. You plug in your discrete components (resistors,
capacitors, diodes and transistors) and integrated circuits (ICs) in just the right way, and - voilà -
you've got a connected circuit without any soldering necessary. When you're tired of the circuit, you
can simply remove the parts and build something else using the same breadboard.
  Figure 9-5 shows a small solderless breadboard with a battery-powered circuit connected up. The
breadboard in the figure has sections of rows and columns connected in a certain way underneath the
board. We discuss just how the various contact holes are connected in Chapter 11, where we also
discuss how to build circuits using breadboards. For now, just know that different sizes of breadboards
are available with different numbers of contact holes.
  A typical small breadboard has 400 contact holes and is useful for building smaller circuits with
no more than two ICs (plus other discrete components). A typical larger breadboard contains 830
contacts and can be used to build somewhat more complex circuits. You can join some designs of
boards together to make larger boards. Or you can simply link any number of breadboards together by
connecting one or more wires between contact holes on one board and contact holes on the other board.          We recommend that you purchase at least two solderless breadboards and that at least one
of them is a larger (830 contacts) breadboard. Also, get some stick-on Velcro strips to help hold the
breadboards in place on your workbench.

Figure 9-5: You can build a circuit on a small solderless breadboard in a few minutes.














  Solderless breadboards are commonly used to test your circuit design ideas or allow you to
explore circuits as you discover how things work (as you can with the simple circuits in Chapter 13).
  If you've created and tested a circuit using a breadboard and you want to use it on a long-term
basis, you can re-create the circuit on a soldered or printed circuit board (PCB).
  A PCB is a kind of breadboard, but rather than contact holes, it has ordinary holes with copper
pads surrounding each hole and lines of metal connecting the holes within each row. You make
connections by soldering component leads to the copper pads and ensuring that the components to be
connected are located in the same row. In this book, we focus exclusively on circuit construction using
solderless breadboards.


Building a circuit-building starter kit
  You need an assortment of discrete electronic components (those with two or three individual
leads), a few ICs, several batteries and lots of wire to connect things up. Some components, such as
resistors and capacitors, come in packages of ten or more individual pieces. You'll be happy to know
that all these components are really inexpensive (cheap, even), but when you add everything up the
amount may reach as much as £50, depending on what you can find and where.
  Discrete components come in assortment packs of different ratings for each type of component.
See what's available when you start shopping, but below we list the kind of parts to start with:
Capacitors: 10 each (1 package) of 0.01 μF and 0.1 μF non-polarised (polyester or ceramic disc); 10
each (1 package) of 1 μF, 10 μF, 100 μF electrolytic; 3-5 each of 220 μF and 470 μF electrolytic.

 
Diodes: One each: 1N4001 (or any 1N400x) rectifier diode, 1N4148 small signal diode, 1 4.3-volt
Zener diode (or other Zener breakdown voltage between 3 and 7 volts).

 
Fixed resistors (1/4-watt or 1/2-watt carbon film): 10-20 (1 or 2 packages) of each of these
resistances: 1 kΩ, 10 kΩ, 100 kΩ, 1 MΩ, 2.2 kΩ, 22 kΩ, 220 kΩ, 33 kΩ, 470 kΩ, 4.7 kΩ, 47 kΩ, 470
kΩ. 
LEDs (light emitting diodes): 10 each (1 package): red, yellow and green 5-millimetre diffused
LEDs.

 
  Potentiometers: Two each: 10 KΩ, 100 KΩ, 1 MΩ.

 
Transistors: 3-5 general-purpose, low-power bipolar transistors (such as the 2N3904 NPN or the
2N3906 PNP) and 3-5 medium-power bipolar transistors (such as the NTE123A NPN or NTE159M
PNP). (We use the 2N3906 in a project in Chapter 14.)

 
  We suggest you obtain a few popular ICs:
Op amp ICs: Get one or two op amps, such as the LM386 power amplifier (which we use in a
project in Chapter 14) or the LM741 general-purpose amplifier.

 
555 timer IC: Get 3-5 of these; you'll use them!

 
4017 CMOS decade counter IC: One is sufficient. (We use one in a project in Chapter 14.) Get two
if you want to make a decade counter, too, as we discuss in Chapter 7, or if you think that you may
accidentally zap the first one with electrostatic discharge.

 
  Don't forget these essential power and wire components:
Batteries: Pick up an assortment of 9-volt batteries as well as some 1.5-volt batteries (size depends
on how long you think that you're going to run your circuit).

 
Battery clips and holders: These devices connect to batteries and provide wire leads to make it easy
for you to connect battery power to your circuit. Get 3-5 clips for the size batteries you plan to use.

 
Wire: Plenty of solid core wire is necessary for connecting components together on the breadboard.
You can buy reels in a variety of colours for a few pounds each. Cut bits to various lengths and strip the
insulation off each end so that you can solder them to component leads or poke them into contact holes
on your solderless breadboard.

 
Some electronics suppliers sell kits containing dozens of pre-cut, pre-stripped jumper wires of various
lengths and colours, which are ideal for use in solderless breadboards. A kit with 350 jumper wires may
cost you £10, but saves you the time (and trouble) of cutting and stripping your own wire (plus you get
rainbow colours!). We also recommend the little packs of jumper wires with hardened ends for poking
into breadboards.

 


 You can use a jumper wire as a makeshift on/off switch in your circuit, connecting or
disconnecting power or components. Just place one end of the jumper wire in your solderless
breadboard and place and remove the other end to operate the switch.


Adding up the extras
  Lots of other parts and components are available that can enrich your circuits. We recommend you
get a few of the ones listed here:
Crocodile or alligator clips: So-named because they look like the jaws of a fierce reptile, theseinsulated clips can help you connect test equipment to component leads, and they can double as a heat
sink to take heat away from the circuit too! Get a bunch (ten or so).

 
Speaker: You're sure to want to build a circuit that makes noise, so purchase one or two miniature 8-
ohm speakers.

 
Switches: If you think that you may enclose one or more projects in a box and you'd like a front-
panel on/off control, pick up a couple of SPST (single-pole single-throw) switches, such as an SPST
mini rocker switch, for about a pound each. For a few pence more, you can get one with a built-in LED
that lights up when the switch is in the ‘on' position.

 


Organising all your parts
  Keeping all these parts and components organised is essential - unless you're the type who enjoys
sorting through junk drawers looking for some tiny, yet important, item. An easy way to get things
together is to buy a few cheap sets of clear plastic drawers. Label each drawer for a particular
component (or group of components, such as LEDs, 10-99-Ω resistors and so forth). You then know at
a glance where everything is, and you can see when your stock is getting low.


Protecting You and Your Electronics

  You probably know the story about Benjamin Franklin flying his kite during a thunder storm in
1752 to show that lightning is actually an electric current. But he already knew it was dangerous and
must have taken care to insulate himself from the conductive materials attached to the kite (the key and
a metal wire), and to stay dry by taking cover in a barn. Had he not, someone else's face may be on the
US $100 bill!
  You must respect the power of electricity when working with electronics. In this section, we take a
look at keeping yourself - and your electronic projects - safe. This section is the one that you really
must read from start to finish, even if you already have some experience in electronics.
  As you read this section, remember that you can describe electrical current as being one of the
following:
Direct current (DC): The electrons flow one way through a wire or circuit.

 
Alternating current (AC): The electrons flow one way, and then another, in a continuing cycle.

 
  Refer to Chapter 2 for more about these two types of electrical current.


Accepting that electricity can really hurt
  The greatest danger by far in working with electronics is the risk of electrocution. Electrical shock
- the body's reaction to an electrical current - can include an intense contraction of the muscles (namely,
the heart) and extremely high heat where the current enters your skin. The burns can (and do) disfigure
and kill, but even small currents can disrupt your heartbeat.
  How much harm an electrical shock does to you depends on a lot of factors, including your age
and your general health. But no matter how young and healthy you may be, voltage and current can
pack a wallop, so understanding how much they can harm you is vitally important.


          The two most dangerous electrical paths through the human body are hand-to-hand and
left hand to either foot. If electrical current passes from one hand to the other, on its way, it passesthrough the heart. If current passes from the left hand to either foot, it passes through the heart as well
as several major organs.


Seeing yourself as a giant resistor
  Your body exhibits some resistance to electrical current, mostly due to the poor conductive
qualities of dry skin. The amount of resistance can vary tremendously, depending on body chemistry,
level of moisture in the skin, the total path across which resistance is measured and other factors. You
see figures ranging anywhere from 50,000-1,000,000 ohms of resistance for an average human being.
(In Chapter 3, we discuss what resistance is and how you measure it.)
  If your skin is moist (say you have sweaty hands), you're wearing a metal ring or you're standing
in a puddle, you can bet you've lowered your resistance. Industry figures indicate that such activity can
result in resistances as low as 100-300 ohms from one hand to the other, or from one hand to one foot.
That's not a whole lot of resistance.
  To make matters worse, if you're handling high AC voltages (which you shouldn't be), your skin's
resistance - wet or dry - doesn't help you at all. When you're in contact with a metal, your body and the
metal form a capacitor: the tissue underneath your skin is one plate, the metal is the other plate and
your skin is the dielectric. (See Chapter 4 for the low-down on capacitors.) If that metal wire you're
holding is carrying an AC current, the capacitor that's your body acts like a short circuit, allowing
current to bypass your skin's resistance. Voltage shocks of more than 240 volts burn right through your
skin, leaving deep third-degree burns at the entry points.


Understanding how voltage and current can harm you
  You've seen the signs: WARNING! HIGH VOLTAGE. So you may think that voltage is what
causes harm to the human body, but actually current is what inflicts the damage. So why the warning
signs? That's because the higher the voltage, the more current can flow for an equal amount of
resistance. And because your body is like a giant resistor, you should avoid high voltages.
  So how much current is necessary to hurt the average human being? Not much. Table 9-1
summarises some estimates of just how much - or how little - DC and AC current it takes to affect the
human body. Remember that a milliamp (mA) is one one-thousandth of an amp (or 0.001 A). Please
note that these amounts are estimates (no one has performed experiments on real humans to derive
these figures), and that each person is affected differently depending on age, body chemistry, health
status and other factors.













  So what does all this mean to you as you pursue your electronics hobby? You probably know
enough to stay away from high voltages, but what about getting up close and personal with low
voltages? Well, even low voltages can be dangerous - depending on your resistance.
    Remember that Ohm's Law (which we cover in Chapter 3) states that voltage is equal to currenttimes resistance:

  Imagine that your hands are dry and you aren't wearing a metal ring or standing in a puddle; your
hand-to-hand resistance is about 50,000 ohms (keep in mind that your resistance under these conditions
may be lower). You can calculate an estimate (repeat: estimate) of the voltage levels that may hurt you
by multiplying your resistance by the different current levels in Table 9-1.
  For instance, if you don't want to feel even the slightest tingling sensation in your fingers, you
need to avoid coming into contact with wires carrying DC voltages of 30 volts (that's 0.6 milliamps ×
50,000 ohms).
  Now, if you're not as careful and you wear a ring on your finger while tinkering around with
electronics, or you step in a little puddle of water created by a dog or small child, you may accidentally
lower your resistance to a dangerous level. If your resistance is 5000 ohms - and it may be even lower -
you notice a sensation if you handle just 17.5 volts DC (because 5000 ohms × 0.0035 amps = 17.5
volts).


          Household electrical systems in the UK operate at about 230 VAC. This very high voltage
can and does kill. Don't even think about working on circuits that operate off mains electricity until
you're properly trained in its use and dangers.


 Circuits that run directly off mains electricity aren't for hobbyists and they're beyond the
scope of this book. Besides, you can achieve so much with circuits that run off standard-size batteries.
Unless you do something silly, like licking the terminal of a 9-volt battery (and, yes, that does deliver a
shock!), you're fairly safe with these voltages and currents, but you must still be careful.
  The main danger of household current is the effect it can have on your heart muscle. Just 65-100
milliamps can send your heart into fibrillation, which means that the muscles are contracting in an
uncontrolled, uncoordinated fashion - and the heart isn't pumping blood.
  At much lower levels (10-16 milliamps), AC current can cause severe muscle contractions, so
what may start out as a loose grip on a high voltage wire (just to move it a little bit, or something like
that) ends up as a powerful, unyielding grip. Trust us: you won't be able to let go. A stronger grip
means a lower resistance (you're just making it easier for electrons to travel through your hand and into
your body), and a lower resistance means a higher (often fatal) current. (Situations like this one really
do happen. The body acts like a variable resistor, with its resistance decreasing sharply as the hands
tighten around the wire.)
  The potential dangers of DC currents aren't to be ignored either. Burns are the most common form
of injury caused by high DC current. Remember that voltage doesn't have to come from a power plant
to be dangerous. You need to respect even a 9-volt transistor battery: if you short its terminals, the
battery may overheat and can even explode. Battery explosions often send tiny battery pieces flying out
at high velocities, burning skin or injuring eyes.


Maximising your resistance - and your safety
  When working with electronics, ensure that you maximise your resistance just in case you come
into contact with an exposed wire. Make sure that any tools you pick up are insulated, and if possible,
stand on a rubber mat. This way, you add more resistance between you and any voltages you may
encounter.


          Take simple precautions to ensure that your work area starts out dry and stays dry. For
example, don't place a glass of water or cup of coffee too close to your work area; if you accidentallyknock it over, you may lower your own resistance or short-out circuit components.


Keeping a first-aid chart handy
  Even if you're the safest person on earth, get one of those emergency first-aid charts that include
information about what to do in case of electrical shock. You can find these charts on the Internet; try a
search for ‘first-aid wall chart'. You can also find them in school and industrial supply catalogues.


 Helping someone who's been electrocuted may require using cardio-pulmonary
resuscitation (CPR). Be sure that you're properly trained before you administer CPR on anyone. Check
out www.redcross.org to get more information about CPR training.


Soldering safely
  The soldering iron you use to join components in an electronics project operates at temperatures
higher than 400° C. (You can read up on soldering in Chapter 11.) That's about the same temperature as
an electric stove burner set at high heat. You can imagine how much that hurts if you touch it.
  When using a soldering iron, keep the following safety tips in mind:
Always place your soldering iron in a stand designed for the job. Never place the hot soldering
iron directly on a table or workbench. You can easily start a fire or burn your hands.

 
Be sure that the electrical cord doesn't snag on the workbench or any other object. Otherwise,
the hot soldering iron can get yanked out of its stand and fall to the ground. Or worse, right into your
lap!

 
Never solder a live circuit (a circuit to which you've applied voltage). You may damage the
circuit or the soldering iron - and you may receive a nasty shock.

 
Never grab a tumbling soldering iron. Just let it fall and buy a new one if the iron is damaged.

 
Solder only in a well-ventilated area. Soldering produces mildly caustic and toxic fumes that can
irritate your eyes and throat.

 
Unplug your soldering iron when you're done.

 
Use the appropriate soldering setting. If your soldering iron has an adjustable temperature control,
set the dial to the recommended setting for the kind of solder that you're using. Too much heat can spoil
a good circuit.

 
Wear safety glasses when soldering. Solder has been known to splutter.

 


Avoiding static like the plague
  One type of everyday electricity that can be dangerous to both people and electronic components
is static electricity. It's called static because it's a form of current that remains trapped in some
insulating body, even after you remove the power source. Static electricity hangs around until it
dissipates in some way. Most static dissipates slowly over time, but in some cases, it gets released all at
once. Lightning is one of the most common forms of static electricity.  If you drag your feet across a carpeted floor, your body takes on a static charge. If you then touch
a metal object, such as a doorknob or a metal sink, the static quickly discharges from your body, and
you feel a slight shock. This is known as electrostatic discharge (ESD). The resulting current is small,
because of the high resistance of the air that the charges arc through as they leave your fingertips, and
doesn't last very long, so static shocks of the doorknob variety generally don't inflict bodily injury.
  On the other hand, static shocks from certain electronic components can be harmful. The
capacitor, an electronic component that stores energy in an electric field, is designed to hold a static
charge. Most capacitors in electronic circuits store a very minute amount of charge, but some
capacitors, such as those used in bulky power supplies, can store near-lethal doses.


          Use caution when working around capacitors that can store a lot of charge, so that you
don't get an unwanted shock.


Being sensitive to static discharge
  The ESD that results from dragging your feet across the carpet or combing your hair on a dry day
may be as high as a few thousand volts. Although you probably just experience an annoying tickle (and
maybe a bad hair day), your electronic components may not be so lucky. Transistors and integrated
circuits (ICs) that are made using metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) technology are particularly
sensitive to ESD, regardless of the amount of current.
  MOS devices contain a thin layer of insulating glass that can easily be zapped away by 50 volts of
discharge or less. If you, your clothes and your tools aren't free of static discharge, that MOS field
effect transistor (MOSFET) or complementary MOS (CMOS) IC you planned to use will be nothing
more than a useless lump. Because bipolar transistors are constructed differently, they're less
susceptible to ESD damage. Other components - resistors, capacitors, inductors, transformers and
diodes - don't seem to be bothered by ESD.


          We recommend that you develop static-safe work habits for all the components you
handle, whether they're overly sensitive or not.


Minimising static electricity
  You can bet that most of the electronic projects you want to build contain at least some
components that are susceptible to damage from electrostatic discharge. You can take steps to prevent
exposing your projects to the dangers of ESD:
Use an anti-static mat. Available in both table-top and floor varieties, an anti-static mat looks like a
sponge, but is really conductive foam. It can reduce or eliminate the build-up of static electricity on
your table and your body.

 
Use an anti-static wrist strap. Pictured in Figure 9-6, an anti-static wrist strap grounds you and
prevents static build-up. The strap is one of the most effective means of eliminating ESD and costs only
a fiver. To use one, roll up your shirt sleeves, remove all rings, watches, bracelets and other metals and
wrap the strap around your wrist tightly. Then securely attach the clip from the wrist strap to a proper
earth ground connection (which you can read about in the next sidebar ‘Getting a good grounding').

 
Wear low-static clothing. Whenever possible, wear natural fabrics, such as cotton or wool. Avoid
polyester and acetate clothing because these fabrics have a tendency to develop a whole lot of static.

                               Getting a good grounding

    If you have metal pipes, you can use the cold water  pipe under a sink or connected to your water
    heater to connect your anti-static wrist strap to earth ground. This pipe comes into your house
    from under the ground and therefore is connected to the earth outside your house (that's what an
    earth ground is!). (Note that hot water pipes aren't grounded; they originate from your hot water
    heater.)

 
    Attach a metal clamp to a cold water pipe and run a wire from the clamp to your work area.
    Make sure that you have a conductive connection all the way through (nothing interrupting the
    metal). Then secure the end of the wire on your workbench and connect the clip at the end of
    your anti-static wrist strap to the wire.

 
    If you have plastic pipes or can't easily access a cold water pipe, jam a metal rod at least three
    feet into the ground outside your house. Attach a metal clamp to the rod and run a wire from the
    clamp to your workbench, as for the cold water pipe connection.

 

 



          Usually, wearing cotton clothing and using an anti-static wrist strap is sufficient for
preventing ESD damage.

Figure 9-6: An anti-static wrist strap reduces or eliminates the risk of electrostatic discharge.
















          As long as you ground yourself by using an anti-static wrist strap, you generally don't need
to ground your other metal tools, such as screwdrivers and wire cutters. Any static that these tools
generate dissipates through your body and into the anti-static wrist strap.


Staying Safe: Safety Checklist

  Before you get started on any electronics project, review the following simple checklist of minimalsafety requirements. Better still, make a copy of this checklist, laminate it and post it at your workbench
as a reminder of the simple steps that can ensure your safety - and the well-being of your electronics
projects.
  At your workspace, check that you have:
Ample ventilation

 
  Dangerous tools and materials locked up

 
Dry working surface, dry floor

 
First-aid chart within view

 
Grounded soldering iron with weighted stand

 
No liquids, pets or small children within a 3-metre range

 
Phone (and caring friend) nearby

 
  Also make a point of checking these points about yourself:
Are you alert and well-rested?

 
Are you wearing an anti-static wrist band (attached to you and to earth ground)?

 
Are you wearing cotton or wool clothing?

 
Do you have dry hands (or gloves to use)?

 
Have you removed rings, wristwatches and loose jewellery?

 
Have you got your safety glasses handy?

   Chapter 10: Sussing out Schematics



  In This Chapter
Understanding the role of schematics
Getting to know the most common symbols
Using (not abusing!) component polarity
Diving into some specialised components
  Imagine trying to drive around the country without a road map. The chances are that you get lost
along the way and end up driving in circles. Road maps exist to help you find your way.
  Electronic circuits have their own road maps. They're called schematic diagrams (or just
schematics), and they show you how all the parts of the circuits are connected. Schematics display
these connections with symbols that represent electronic parts and lines that show you how to attach the
parts.
    Although not all electronics circuits that you encounter are described in the form of a schematic,
many are. If you're serious about electronics, sooner or later, you need to understand how to read a
schematic. The good news is that the language of schematics isn't all that hard. Most schematic
diagrams use only a small handful of symbols for components, such as resistors, capacitors and
transistors.
  In this chapter, we tell you everything that you really need to know so that you can read almost
any schematic diagram you come across.


Approaching Schematics

  A schematic is a circuit diagram that shows all the components of a circuit, including power
supplies, and their connections. The most important things to focus on when reading a schematic are
the connections, because the positioning of components in a schematic diagram doesn't necessarily
correspond to the physical layout of components in a constructed circuit — just like the London
Underground map. In fact, for a complex circuit, the physical circuit layout is highly unlikely to reflect
the positioning shown in the schematic. Complex circuits often require separate layout diagrams,
sometimes known as artwork.


          Schematics use symbols to represent resistors, transistors and other circuit components,
and lines to show connections between components. By reading the symbols and following the
interconnections, you can build the circuit shown in the schematic. Schematics can also help you
understand how a circuit operates, which comes in handy for testing and repairing the circuit.
    Discovering how to read a schematic is a little like discovering a foreign language. On the whole,
you find that most schematics follow fairly standard conventions. However, just as many languages
have different dialects, the language of schematics is far from universal. Schematics can vary
depending on the age of the diagram, its country of origin, the whim of the circuit designer and many
other factors.


          In this book, we use conventions commonly used in the UK and Europe. But electronics is
one of the most global of industries, and so you may find yourself wanting to build circuits designed in
other countries, especially the United States. To help you deal with some of the variations you may
come across, we include some alternative symbols in our descriptions throughout this chapter and someAmerican symbols in the later section ‘Alternative Schematic Drawing Styles'.


Seeing the Big Picture

  Imagine that you have a schematic in front of you. What do you see? Well, an unwritten rule in
electronics tells you how to orient certain parts of a circuit schematic, especially when drawing
diagrams of complex circuits. Batteries and other simple power supplies are almost always oriented
vertically, with the positive terminal on top. In complex schematics, power supplies are split between
two symbols (as we discuss in the later section ‘Recognising Symbols of Power'), but the positive
terminal is usually shown at the top of the schematic (sometimes extending across a horizontal line, or
rail) and the negative terminal appears at the bottom (again, sometimes along a rail). Inputs are
commonly shown on the left and outputs on the right.


 Many electronic systems (for instance, the radio receiver we discuss in Chapter 2) are
represented in schematics by several stages of circuitry (even though the system really consists of one
mighty big circuit). The schematic for such a system shows the sub-circuits for each stage in a left-to-
right progression (for instance, the tuner sub-circuit on the left, the detector in the middle and the
amplifier on the right), with the output of the first stage feeding into the input of the second stage, and
so forth. Organising schematics in this way helps to make complex circuits more understandable.


Following connections
  In all schematics, whether simple or complex, components are arranged as neatly as possible, and
connections within a circuit are always drawn as lines, with any bends shown as 90° angles. (No
squiggles or arcs allowed!) Understanding what all the lines in a schematic mean is absolutely critical -
and that meaning isn't always obvious.
  The more complex the schematic, the more likely that some lines criss-cross each other (due to the
two-dimensional nature of schematic drawings). You need to know when crossed lines represent an
actual wire-it-together connection and when they don't. Ideally, a schematic clearly distinguishes
connecting and non-connecting wires as follows:
A break or a loop (think of it as a bridge) in one of the two lines at the intersection indicates wires
that shouldn't be connected.

 
A dot at the intersection of two lines indicates that the wires should be connected.

 
  You can see some common variations in Figure 10-1.


 This method of showing connections isn't universal, so you have to figure out which wires
connect and which don't by checking the drawing style used in the schematic. If you see an intersection
of two lines without a dot to positively identify a real connection, you simply can't be sure whether the
wires should be connected or not.

Figure 10-1: You may encounter a number of variations in how a schematic shows connections and
non-connections.          To physically implement the connections shown in a schematic, you typically use
insulated wires or thin traces of copper on a circuit board. Most schematics don't make a distinction
about how you connect the components together; that connection is wholly dependent on how you
choose to build the circuit. The schematic's representation of the wiring merely shows which wires go
where.


Looking at a simple battery circuit
  Figure 10-2 shows a simple DC circuit with a 5-volt battery connected to a resistor labelled R1.
The positive side of the battery (+V) is connected to the lead on one side of the resistor, and the
negative side of the battery is connected to the lead on the other side of the resistor. With these
connections made, current flows from the positive terminal of the battery through the resistor and back
to the negative terminal of the battery.

Figure 10-2: A simple schematic shows the connections between a battery and a resistor.







 In schematics, ‘current' is assumed to be conventional current, which is described as the
flow of positive charges, travelling in a direction opposite to that of real electron flow. We discuss
conventional current and electron flow in Chapter 2.


Recognising Symbols of Power

  Power for a circuit can come from an alternating current (AC) source, such as the 230 VAC (volts
AC) socket in your house or office (so-called mains electricity), or a direct current (DC) source, such asa battery or the low-voltage side of a wall transformer. DC supplies can be positive or negative with
respect to the 0 volt reference (known as common ground, or simply common) in a circuit. Table 10-1
shows various symbols used to represent power and ground connections.
  Figuring out the various power connections in a complex schematic is sometimes a task unto itself.
This section aims to clear things up a bit. As you read through this section, refer to Table 10-1 to see
the symbols we discuss.











 
















Showing where the power is
  DC power supplies are shown in various ways around the world including:
Battery or solar cell symbol: The symbols you're most likely to see. Each of these symbols
represents a DC source with two leads. Technically, the battery symbol that includes two parallel lines
represents a single electrochemical cell, whereas the symbol with multiple pairs of lines represents a
battery (which consists of multiple cells); however, many schematics use the symbol for a cell to
represent a battery. Each symbol includes a positive terminal (indicated by the larger horizontal line)
and a negative terminal. The polarity symbols (+ and -) and nominal voltage are usually shown next to
the symbol. The negative terminal is often assumed to be at 0 (zero) volts, unless clearly distinguished
as different from the zero voltage reference (common ground, which we discuss later in the section
‘Marking your ground'). Conventional current flows out of the positive terminal and into the negative
terminal when the battery is connected to a complete circuit.

 
‘Split' DC power and ground symbols: To simplify schematics, a DC power supply is sometimesshown using two separate symbols: a small circle at the end of a line representing one side of the
supply, with or without a specific voltage label, and the symbol for ground (vertical line with three
horizontal lines at the bottom) representing the other side of the supply, with a value of 0 volts. In
complex circuits with multiple connections to power, you may see the positive side of the supply
represented by a rail labelled +V extending across the top of the schematic. These split power-symbol
representations are used to eliminate a lot of wire connections in a schematic.

 
Two terminals labelled with polarities: This symbol resembles the DC version of the AC symbol,
comprising two little terminal circles with a waveform in between.

 
  The circuit shown in Figure 10-2 can also be drawn using separate symbols for power and ground,
as in Figure 10-3. Note that the circuit in Figure 10-3 is, in fact, a complete circuit.

Figure 10-3: This circuit shows a DC power source symbol at the top and ground symbol at the
bottom, which together represent connections to a battery.







 Many DC circuits use multiple DC power supplies, such as +5 VDC, +12 VDC and even
-5 VDC or -12 VDC, and so the voltage source symbols in the schematics are usually labelled with the
nominal voltage. If a schematic doesn't specify a voltage, you're often (but not always!) dealing with 5
VDC. And, unless otherwise specifically noted, the voltage in a schematic is almost always DC, not
AC.


 Some circuits (for instance, op amp circuits, which we discuss in Chapter 7) require both
positive and negative DC power supplies. You often see the positive supply represented by an open
circle labelled +V and the negative supply represented by an open circle labelled -V. If the voltages
aren't specified, they may be +5 VDC and -5 VDC. Figure 10-4 shows how these power supply
connection points are implemented.

Figure 10-4: Some circuits require positive and negative power supplies.








  An AC power supply is usually represented by a circle with two leads, with or without a waveform
shape and polarity indicators:
Circle containing waveform: A squiggly line or other shape inside an open circle represents one
cycle of the alternating voltage produced by the power supply. Usually, the source is a sine wave, but it
can be a square wave, a triangle wave or something else.

 Circle with polarity: Some schematics include one or both polarity indicators inside or outside the
open circle. This symbol is just for reference purposes, so that you can relate the direction of current
flow to the direction of voltage swings.

 
  Power for a circuit can come from an AC source, such as the 230 VAC socket in your house or
office (so-called mains electricity). You typically use an internal power supply to step down (or lower)
the 230 VAC and convert it to DC. This lower-voltage DC power is then delivered to the components
in your circuit. If you're looking at a schematic for a DVD player or some other gadget getting its
power from a wall socket, that schematic probably shows both AC and DC power.


Marking your ground
  Ready for some electronics schematic double-talk? As regards labelling ground connections in
schematics, common practice is to use the symbol for earth ground (which is a real connection to the
earth) to represent the common ground (the reference point for 0 volts) in a circuit. We discuss these
two types of grounds in Chapter 2. More often than not, the ground points in low-voltage circuits aren't
actually connected to earth ground, but are just tied to each other; hence the term common ground (or
simply common). Any voltages labelled at specific points in a circuit are assumed to be relative to this
common ground. (Remember, voltage is really a differential measurement between two points in a
circuit.)
  So what symbol should really be used for ground points that aren't truly connected to the earth?
The answer is the symbol labelled chassis ground or frame. Common ground is sometimes called
chassis ground, because in older equipment the metal chassis of the device (hi-fi, television or
whatever) served as the common ground connection. Using a metal chassis for a ground connection
isn't as common today.
  You may also see the symbol for signal ground used to represent a 0-volt reference point for
signals carried by two wires. One wire is connected to this reference point and the other wire carries a
varying voltage representing the signal. Again, in many schematics, the symbol for earth ground is used
instead.


          In this book, we use only the schematic symbol for earth ground because most schematics
you see these days use that symbol.
  As you can see in Figure 10-5, a schematic may show the ground connections in a number of
ways:
No ground symbol: The schematic can show two power wires connected to the circuit. In a battery-
powered circuit, common ground is assumed to be the negative terminal of the battery.

 
Single ground symbol: The schematic shows all the ground connections connected to a single point.
It doesn't often show the power source or sources (for instance, the battery), but you should assume that
ground connects to the positive and/or negative DC power sources as shown in Figure 10-4.

 
Multiple ground symbols: In more complex schematics, drawing the circuit with several ground
points is usually easier. In the actual working circuit, all these ground points connect together.

 

Figure 10-5: A circuit's common ground connections may be shown using multiple symbols, a single
symbol or no symbol at all (when assumed to be the negative terminal of a battery).Labelling Circuit Components

  You can find literally hundreds of symbols for electronic components in schematics, for the simple
reason that hundreds of them need to be depicted. Fortunately, you probably encounter only a small
number of these symbols in schematics for hobby electronics projects.
  Along with the circuit symbol for a particular electronic component, you may see additional
information to help uniquely identify the part:
Reference ID: An identifier, such as R1 or Q3. The convention is to use one or more letters to
represent the type of component and a numerical suffix to distinguish one particular component from
others of the same type. The most common type designators are R for resistor, C for capacitor, D for
diode, L for inductor, T for transformer, Q for transistor and U or IC for integrated circuit.

 
Part number: Used for standard components, such as a transistor or integrated circuit, or where you
have a manufacturer's customer product part. For example, a part number may be something like
2N222 (that's a commonly used transistor) or 555 (a type of IC used in timing applications).

 
Value: Component values are sometimes shown for passive parts, such as resistors and capacitors,
which aren't designated by conventional part numbers. For example, when indicating a resistor, the
value (in ohms) may be marked beside the resistor symbol and/or the reference ID. Most often, you see
just the value without the units label (ohms, microfarads and so on). Normally, resistor values are
assumed to be in ohms and capacitor values are assumed to be in microfarads.

 
  Additional information: A schematic may include additional specifics about one or more
components, such as the wattage for a resistor when it isn't your typical 1/4 or 1/8 watt value. If you see‘10W' next to a resistor value, you know that you need a power resistor.

 


 Many schematics show only the reference ID and the circuit symbol for each component,
and then include a separate parts list to provide the details of part numbers, values and other
information. The parts list maps the reference ID to the specific information about each component.


                                  Reference ID primer

      Components are often identified in a schematic  using an alphabetic type designator, such as C
    for capacitor, followed by a numerical identifier (1, 2, 3 and so on) to distinguish multiple
      components of the same type. Together, these identifiers form a reference ID that uniquely
    identifies a specific capacitor or other component. The reference ID can be used in a parts list to
    indicate  the  precise  value  of  the  component  to  use,  if  that  value  isn't  printed  beside  the
    component symbol. The following type designators are among those most commonly used:

 
          C - Capacitor
          D - Diode
          IC (or U) - Integrated circuit
          L - Inductor
          LED - Light-emitting diode
          Q - Transistor
          R - Resistor
          RLY - Relay
          T - Transformer
          XTAL - Crystal

 


Analogue electronic components
    Analogue components control the flow of continuous (analogue) electrical signals. Table 10-2
shows the circuit symbols used for basic analogue electronic components. The third column of the table
provides the chapter reference in this book where you can find detailed information about the
functionality of each component.           The circuit symbol for an op amp is really a block diagram symbol, because it representsthe interconnection of dozens of individual components in a nearly complete circuit (power is external
to the op amp). Schematics always use a single symbol to represent the entire circuit, which is packaged
as an integrated circuit (IC).


Digital logic and IC components
    Digital electronic components, such as logic gates, manipulate digital signals that consist of just
two possible voltage levels (high or low). Inside each digital component is a nearly complete circuit
(power is external) consisting of individual transistors or other analogue components. Circuit symbols
for digital components are really block diagram symbols used to represent the interconnection of
individual components that make up the logic. You can build the logic from scratch or obtain it in the
form of an IC. Logic ICs usually contain several gates (not necessarily all the same type) sharing a
single power connection.
  Table 10-3 shows the circuit symbols for individual digital logic gates and logic ICs. You can find
detailed information about the functionality of each logic gate in Chapter 7.























  Some schematics show individual logic gates and others show connections to the full IC. You can
see an example of each in Figure 10-6.
  The 74HC00 IC shown in Figure 10-6 is a CMOS quad 2-input NAND gate. In the top circuit
diagram, each NAND gate is labelled ‘1/4 74HC00' because it's one of four NAND gates in the IC.
(This type of gate labelling is common in digital circuit schematics.) Note that the fourth NAND gate
isn't used in this particular circuit (which is why Pins 11, 12 and 13 aren't used).
  Whether the schematic uses individual gates or an entire IC package, it usually notes the external
power connections. If it doesn't, you have to look up the pinout of the device on the IC datasheet to
determine how to connect power. We discuss pinouts and datasheets in Chapter 7.

Figure 10-6: Two different schematic representations of the same circuit.  Many more digital ICs are available than just those containing logic gates. Most ICs (op amps,
which are linear ICs, are an exception) are shown the same way in schematics: as a rectangle, labelled
with a reference ID (such as IC1) or the part number (such as 74CH00), with numbered pin
connections. The function of the IC is usually determined by looking up the part number, but the
occasional schematic may include a functional label, such as ‘one shot'.


Odds and ends
  Table 10-4 lists the symbols for switches and relays. Refer to Chapter 8 for detailed information
on each of these components.





















  Table 10-5 lists the symbols for various input transducers (sensors) and output transducers. Youcan read about most of these components in Chapter 8, and you can read about LEDs in Chapter 6.













 











  Some circuits accept inputs from and send outputs to other circuits or devices. Schematics often
show what looks like a loose wire leading into or out of the circuit. Usually, it's labelled something like
‘signal input', ‘input from doodad #1' or ‘output' so that you know you're supposed to connect
something up to it. (You connect one wire of the signal to this input point and the other to signal
ground.) Other schematics may show a symbol for a specific connector, such as a plug and jack pair,
which connect an output signal from one device to the input of another device. (We discuss plugs and
jacks in Chapter 8.)
  Table 10-6 shows a few of the ways in which input and output connections to other circuits are
shown in schematics. Symbols for input/output connections can vary greatly among schematics. The
symbols that we use in this book are among the most commonly used. Although the exact style of the
symbol may vary from one schematic to the next, the idea is the same: a connection is to be made to
something external to the circuit.Exploring a Schematic

  Now that you're familiar with the ABCs of schematics, the time is right to put all your knowledge
together and walk through each part of a simple schematic. The schematic shown in Figure 10-7 shows
the LED flasher circuit used in Chapter 14. This circuit controls the on/off blinking of an LED, with the
blinking rate controlled by turning the knob of a potentiometer (variable resistor).

Figure 10-7: The schematic and parts list used for the Brilliant, Blinking, Bright Lights project in
Chapter 14.














  Here's what this schematic is saying:
IC1, an 8-pin 555 timer IC, is at the heart of the schematic, with all eight pins connecting to parts
of the circuit. Pins 2 and 6 are connected together.

 
A 9-volt power supply, which can be a 9-volt battery, powers the circuit:

 
        • The positive terminal of the power supply is connected to Pins 4 and 8 of IC1, and to one
    fixed lead and the variable contact (wiper) lead of R1, which is a potentiometer (variable
    resistor).

 
        • The negative terminal of the power supply (shown as the common ground connection) is
    connected to Pin 1 of IC1, to the negative side of capacitor C1, to capacitor C2 and to the
    cathode (negative side) of the LED.

 
R1 is a potentiometer with one fixed lead connected to Pin 7 of IC1 and to resistor R2, and both the
other fixed lead and the wiper lead connected to the positive battery terminal (and to Pins 4 and 8 of
IC1).

 
R2 is a fixed resistor with one lead connected to Pin 7 of IC1 and to one fixed lead of R1, and the
other lead connected to Pins 2 and 6 of IC1 and the positive side of capacitor C1.

 
C1 is a polarised capacitor with its positive side connected to R2 and to Pins 2 and 6 of IC1, and its
negative side connected to the negative battery terminal (as well as to Pin 1 of IC1, capacitor C2 and
the cathode of the LED).

 
C2 is a non-polarised capacitor connected on one side to Pin 5 of IC1 and on the other side to thenegative battery terminal (as well as the negative side of capacitor C1, Pin 1 of IC1 and the cathode of
the LED).

 
The anode of the LED is connected to resistor R3 and the cathode of the LED is connected to the
negative battery terminal (as well as to the negative side of capacitor C1, capacitor C2 and Pin 1 of
IC1).

 
R3 is a fixed resistor connected between Pin 3 of IC1 and the anode of the LED.

 
The output shown at Pin 3 of IC1 can be used as a signal source (input) for another stage of
circuitry.

 
  Each item in the above walk-through list focuses on one circuit component and its connections.
Although we mention the same connections multiple times in the list, check and double-check your
circuit connections by making sure that each lead or pin of each individual component is connected
correctly. (Ever hear the general rule ‘measure twice, cut once'? Well, the same principle applies here.)
You can't be too careful when it comes to connecting up electronic components.


Alternative Schematic Drawing Styles

  The schematic symbols in this chapter are mostly those that electronics designers use in the UK
and Europe, plus a few others you may come across tossed in so that you're not thrown when you see
them. Different countries (or continents) use some slightly different schematic symbols. You
sometimes may need to do a little bit of schematic translation work to understand all the components.
  Figure 10-8 shows a few more schematic symbols that crop up in schematics drawn in America
and elsewhere. Notice the obvious differences in the resistor symbols, both fixed and variable.

Figure 10-8: Schematic symbols used for circuits designed in America.







  Americans and Europeans organise their symbols differently. In the United States, they express
resistor values over 1,000 ohms in the form of 6.8K or 10.2K, with the K following the value. The
European schematic style sometimes leaves out the decimal point. In the UK, you're quite likely to see
resistor values expressed in the form 6K8 or 10K2. This style substitutes the K (which stands for
kilohms, or thousands of ohms) for the decimal point.
  You may encounter a few other variations in schematic drawing styles, but all are fairly self-
explanatory, and the differences aren't substantial. After you discover how to use one style of drawing,
the others come easily.    Chapter 11: Constructing Circuits



  In This Chapter
Creating no-fuss, no-mess circuits with solderless breadboards
Soldering - safely - like the pros
Owning up to and fixing soldering mistakes
Making your circuits permanent
  You've carefully set up your workbench, strategically positioned your shiny new toys - er, tools -
to impress your friends, shopped around for the best deals on components and now you're ready to get
down to work and build some loud, flashing circuits. So how do you transform a two-dimensional
circuit diagram into a real live working (maybe even moving) electronic circuit?
  In this chapter, we show you various ways to connect up electronic components into circuits that
push electrons around at your command. We describe how to make quick and easy, temporary but
flexible, circuits on solderless breadboards, which provide the ideal platform for testing and tweaking
your designs.
  We also give you the low-down on how to fuse components together safely using a molten
metallic mix called solder. And we introduce you to several ways to make your circuits permanent
using soldering and/or wire-wrapping techniques together with an assortment of today's most popular
circuit boards.
  So arm yourself with screwdrivers, needle-nose pliers and a soldering iron, and don your safety
glasses and anti-static wrist strap: you're about to enter an electronics building site!


Taking a Look at Solderless Breadboards

  Solderless breadboards, also called prototyping boards or plugblocks, allow you to build (and
dismantle) temporary circuits easily. These reusable rectangular boards have several hundred square
sockets, or contact holes, into which you plug your components (for instance, resistors, capacitors,
diodes, transistors and integrated circuits). Flexible metal strips run underneath the surface to
electrically connect together groups of these contact holes.
  You poke a wire or lead into a hole in the breadboard, and it makes contact with the underlying
metal. By plugging in components in just the right way and running wires from your breadboard to
your power supply, you can build a working circuit without permanently fixing components together.
  We highly recommend that you use a solderless breadboard (or two) when you first build a circuit.
That way, you can test the circuit to make sure that it works properly and carry out any necessary
adjustments.
  Often, you can improve on the performance of a circuit just by tweaking a few component values.
You can easily make such changes by simply removing one component and inserting another on the
board - without having to unsolder and resolder. (We discuss soldering in the ‘Soldering On' section
later in this chapter.)
  When you're sure that your circuit works the way you want it to, you can create a permanent
circuit on other types of boards, as described in the later section ‘Committing to a Permanent Circuit'.


          Solderless breadboards are designed for low-voltage DC circuits. Never use a breadboard
for 230 VAC household mains electricity because doing so is extremely dangerous, frying the board,
you or both!Exploring a solderless breadboard, inside and out
  The photo in Figure 11-1 shows a basic solderless breadboard with white lines added to help you
visualise the underlying connections between contact holes. In the centre of the board, the holes link
vertically in blocks of five (for instance, A, B, C, D and E in column 30 are all connected together, and
F, G, H, I and J in column 30 are all connected together). No connections exist across the centre gap
between rows E and F. You can straddle an integrated circuit (IC) across that centre gap and instantly
set up independent sets of connections for each of its pins.
  Across the top and bottom of a breadboard, holes are linked horizontally, but you can't tell exactly
how many holes are electrically connected just by looking at the board. For the 400-hole board in
Figure 11-1, all 25 contacts in each of the four rows across the top and bottom are electrically
connected.
  In many larger breadboards, such as the 840-hole board pictured in Figure 11-2, a break exists in
the connections halfway across each row. We placed small jumper wires between neighbouring
contacts to create a 50-point connection in each row. In some boards, the two rows across the top are
electrically connected, as are the two rows across the bottom.


          You can use a multimeter to check whether or not two points within a row or between
rows are electrically connected. Stick a jumper wire in each hole and then touch one multimeter probe
to one wire and the other probe to the other wire. If you get a low ohm reading, you know that the two
points are connected together. If you get an infinite ohms reading, you know that they're not connected.
See Chapter 12 for more about testing things with your multimeter.

Figure 11-1: Solderless breadboards have lines of contact holes that are electrically connected in small
groups underneath the surface.















Figure 11-2: For larger circuits, you can use bigger solderless breadboards, such as this 840-hole
board.  Holes are spaced 1/10 of an inch apart (2.54 millimetres), a size just right for ICs, most transistors
and discrete components such as capacitors and resistors. You just plug in ICs, resistors, capacitors,
transistors and 20- or 22-gauge solid wire in the proper contact holes to create your circuit. You
typically use the centre two sections of the board to make connections between components, and you
use the top and bottom sections of the board to connect power.
    Breadboard manufacturers make contact strips from a springy metal coated with plating. The
plating prevents the contacts from oxidising, and the springiness of the metal allows you to use
different diameter wires and component leads without seriously deforming the contacts.


          You can damage the contacts if you attempt to use wire larger than 20-gauge or
components with very thick leads. If the wire is too thick to go into the hole, don't try to force it.
Otherwise, you can loosen the fit of the contact, and your breadboard may not work the way you want
it to.


          When you're not using it, keep your breadboard in a resealable sandwich bag to keep out
the dust. Dirty contacts make for poor electrical connections. Although you can use a spray-on
electrical cleaner to remove dust and other contaminants, you make things easier on yourself by
keeping the breadboard clean in the first place.


Sizing up the breadboards
  Solderless breadboards come in many sizes. Smaller breadboards (with 400 to 550 holes)
accommodate designs with up to three or four ICs plus a small handful of other discrete components.
Larger boards, such as the 840-hole board shown in the earlier Figure 11-2, provide more flexibility
and accommodate five or more ICs.
  If you're into really elaborate design work, you can buy extra large breadboards with anywhere
from 1,660 to more than 3,200 contact holes. These boards can handle one to three dozen ICs plus other
discrete components.


          Don't overdo it when buying a solderless breadboard. You don't need a breadboard the size
of Buckinghamshire if you're only making small to medium-sized circuits, such as the ones we show
you in Chapter 14.
  If you get halfway through designing a circuit and find that you need a little more breadboard
space, you can always make connections between two breadboards. Some solderless breadboards evenhave interlocking ridges so that you can put several together to make a larger breadboard.


Building Circuits on Solderless Breadboards

    Essentially, breadboarding consists of sticking components into the board, connecting power to the
board and making connections with wire. But you can do these things in a right way and a wrong way.
This section gives you the low-down on what type of wire to use, efficient breadboarding techniques
and how to give your board a neat, logical design.


Preparing your parts and tools
  Before you start randomly sticking things into your breadboard, make sure that you have
everything you need. Check the parts list - the list of electronic ingredients you need to build your
circuit - and set aside the required components. Gather together essential tools, such as needle-nose
pliers, wire cutters and a wire stripper. Ensure that all component leads are suitable for inserting into
breadboard holes.
  Clip long leads, if possible, so that the components lie flat and snug against the board. (Don't
worry if you can't reuse them for another circuit - they're cheap enough.) You may need to solder
single-core wires to the terminals of any components that don't already have leads (see the section
‘Soldering On' later in this chapter for how to carry out this job).
  Familiarise yourself with the polarity of parts; that is, which leads are what on transistors,
potentiometers and ICs. And finally, get interconnect wires ready, as described in the very next section.


Saving time with pre-stripped wires
  Many of the connections between components on your breadboard are made by the breadboard
itself, underneath the surface, but when you can't make a direct connection via the board, you use
interconnect wires (sometimes called jumper wires). You use solid 20- to 22-gauge (0.8 or 0.7
millimetres in diameter) insulated wire to connect components together on your breadboard. Thicker or
thinner wire doesn't work well in breadboards: when it's too thick, the wire doesn't go into the holes;
when it's too thin, the electrical contact is dodgy.


          Don't use stranded wire in a breadboard. The individual strands can break off, lodging
inside the metal contacts of the breadboard and causing short circuits. This would have you tearing
your hair out!


          While you're buying your breadboard, pick up a set of pre-stripped jumper wires, as we
suggest in Chapter 9. (Believe us, the small cost is worthwhile.) These wires come in a variety of
lengths and are already stripped (obviously) and bent, ready for you to use in breadboards. For a tenner,
you can get an assortment of several hundred. Or you can buy a reel of wire, cut it into little bits and
spend hours painstakingly stripping off about 8 millimetres of the insulation from each end of each
little bit. The choice is yours!
  Even if you purchase a large assortment of pre-stripped wires, the time comes when you have to
make an interconnect wire or two of your own. You start with 20- or 22-gauge (0.8 or 0.7 millimetres
in diameter) wire and cut it to the length you need.
  If you have a wire stripper with a gauge selection dial, set the dial for the gauge of wire that you're
using. Other wire strippers may have several cutting notches labelled for various gauges. Using one of
these gauge-specific devices instead of a generic wire stripper prevents you from nicking the wire when
stripping off the insulation. Nicks weaken the wire, and a weak wire can get stuck inside a breadboard hole and ruin
your whole day.
  To make your own breadboard wire, follow these steps:
        1. Cut the wire to the length you need using a wire cutter.

 2. Strip off about 0.5 to 1 centimetre of insulation from each end.

 If you use a gauge-specific tool, insert one end of the wire into the stripping tool, hold the
    other end with a pair of needle-nosed pliers and draw the wire through the stripping tool. If you
    use a generic wire stripper, how much you squeeze the tool around the wire provides the gauge
    control: too much, and you nick the wire; too little, and you don't cut through all the insulation.

 3. Bend the exposed ends of wire at a right angle (90°).

 You can use needle-nosed pliers to do this job.

 

Laying out your circuit
  You've got your parts and tools ready, a schematic (the circuit diagram, as we discuss in Chapter
10) in your hand and now you want to build your circuit on your breadboard. But where should you
start? What's the best way to connect everything?
  Welcome to the world of circuit layout - figuring out where everything should go on the board so
that it all fits together and is neat, tidy and works perfectly. Don't expect your circuit layout to look
exactly like your schematic - that's not only difficult to do, but usually impractical. You can, however,
orient key circuit elements so that your circuit is easier to understand and debug.


          When building a circuit on a breadboard, concentrate on the connections between
components rather than the position of components in your schematic.
  Here are some guidelines for building your breadboard circuit:
        1. Use one of the top rails (long rows) for the positive power supply, and one of the
    bottom rails for ground (and the negative power supply, if one exists).

 These rails give you plenty of interconnected sockets so that you can easily connect
      components to power and ground.

 2. Position any circuit inputs on the left side of the board and outputs on the right side.

 Plan your component layout to minimise the number of jumper wires. The more wiring you
    have to insert, the more crowded and confusing the board becomes.

 3. Place ICs first, straddling the centre gap.

 Allow at least three - preferably ten - columns of holes between each IC. You can use a chip
    inserter/extractor tool to implant and remove ICs to reduce the chances of damaging the IC while
    handling it. (If you're working with highly static sensitive CMOS chips, which we discuss in
    Chapter 9, you need to ground the tool to eliminate stray static electricity.)

 4. Work your way around each IC, starting from Pin 1, inserting the components that
    connect to each pin.

 Then insert any additional components to complete the circuit. Use needle-nose pliers to
    bend leads and wires to a 90° angle and insert them into the sockets, keeping leads and wires as
    close to the board as possible to prevent them from getting knocked loose.

 5. If you're getting cramped, colonise empty areas of the board.

 If your circuit calls for common connection points in addition to power and you don't have    enough points in one column of holes, use longer pieces of wire to bring the connection out to
    another part of the board where you have more space. You can make the common connection
    point one or two columns between a couple of ICs, for instance.

 Figure 11-3 shows a resistor, jumper wire and light-emitting diode (LED) inserted into a
breadboard.
  Don't worry about urban sprawl on your breadboards. You're better off placing components a little
farther apart than jamming them too close together. Keeping a lot of distance between ICs and
components also helps you to tweak and refine the circuit. You can more easily add parts without
disturbing the existing ones.


          Messy wiring makes debugging a circuit difficult, and a tangle of wires greatly increases
the chance of mistakes. Wires pull out when you don't want them to, or the circuit can malfunction
altogether. To avoid chaos, take the time to plan and construct your breadboard circuits carefully. The
extra effort can save you lots of time and frustration later on.

Figure 11-3: Strip and bend the ends of jump wire, and then clip the leads of components so that they
fit neatly on the breadboard.














Avoiding damaged circuits
  Here are a few other things you need to know in order to keep your breadboard and circuits in
good working order:
When you're using CMOS chips, build the rest of the circuit first. Be sure to provide connections for
the positive and negative power supply and to connect all inputs (tie those inputs that you're not using
to the positive or negative supply rail). When you're ready to test the circuit, put in the CMOS IC.

 
Never expose a breadboard to heat, because you can permanently damage the plastic. ICs and other
components that become very hot (because of a short circuit or excess current, for example) may melt
the plastic underneath them. To check for any signs of overheating, power up your circuit for half a
minute, turn it off again and lightly tap the top of the components with your fingertip.

 
If a small piece of a lead or wire becomes lodged in a socket, use needle-nose pliers to pull it gently
out of the hole - make sure that the power is switched off!

                     My breadboard circuit doesn't work!

    While working with solderless breadboards, you  may encounter the fairly common problem of
    stray capacitance, which is unwanted capacitance (stored electrical energy) in a circuit. All
    circuits have an inherent capacitance that can't be avoided, but when lots of wires are going
    every which way, the capacitance can unexpectedly increase. At a certain point (and it differs
    from one circuit to the next), this stray capacitance can cause the circuit to misbehave.

 
    Because solderless breadboards contain strips of metal and require somewhat longer component
    leads, they tend to introduce a fair amount of stray capacitance into unsuspecting circuits. As a
    result, solderless breadboards have a tendency to change the characteristics of some components,
    most notably capacitors and inductors; these variations can change the way a circuit behaves.

 
    You really do need to be aware of this fact if you're working with RF (radio frequency) circuits,
    such as radio receivers and transmitters, digital circuits that use signals that change at a very fast
    rate (on the order of a couple of million Hertz) and more sensitive timing circuits that rely on
    exact component values.

 
    If you're building a radio or other circuit that stray capacitance can affect, you may have to
    forego the step of first building the circuit on a solderless breadboard and go straight to a solder
    breadboard or a strip board, as we describe in the later section ‘Committing to a Permanent
    Circuit'.

 

 

You won't always be able to finish and test a circuit in one sitting. If you have to put your breadboard
circuit aside for a while, put it out of the reach of children, animals and the overly curious. (Chapter 9
describes how to set up a safe work area.)

 


 Never use a solderless breadboard to carry 230 VAC household mains electricity.

 


Soldering On

    Soldering is the method you use to make conductive connections between components and/or
wire. You use a device called a soldering iron to melt a soft metal called solder so that the solder flows
around the two metal leads you're joining. When the soldering iron is removed, the solder cools and
forms a conductive physical joint, known as a solder joint, between the wires or component leads.
  You may be thinking: why should I care about soldering when I plan to use solderless breadboards
for my circuit construction projects? The answer is because almost every electronics project involves a
certain amount of soldering.
  For instance, you can purchase components, such as potentiometers, switches and microphones,
that don't come with leads, which means that you need to solder two or more wires to their terminals to
create leads so that you can connect them to your breadboard.
  Of course, you also use this technique extensively when you build permanent circuits on solder
boards, strip boards or printed circuit boards, as we describe in the later section, ‘Committing to a
Permanent Circuit'.Preparing to solder
  To get your soldering jobs done, you need a soldering iron (25-30 watts), a spool of standard
solder, a secure soldering stand and a small sponge. (Take a look at Chapter 9 for detailed information
on how to choose soldering equipment for your electronics projects.)


          Make sure that you secure your soldering iron in its stand and position it in a safe place on
your workbench, where it's unlikely to be knocked over.
  Gather up a few other items as follows:
Anti-static wrist strap (which we describe in Chapter 9).

 
  Crocodile clip (which doubles as a heat sink to take heat away from temperature-sensitive
components).

 
Isopropyl alcohol.

 
Piece of paper and a pencil.

 
Safety glasses (to protect your eyes from spluttering solder).

 
Some sticky tape.

 
  Place each part that you need to solder on the paper, securing it with sticky tape. Write a label,
such as R1, on the paper next to the part so that it matches the label on your schematic. Put on your
safety glasses and anti-static wrist strap and make sure that your work area is properly ventilated.
  Wet the sponge, squeezing out excess water. Turn on the soldering iron, wait a minute or so for it
to heat up (to about 400° C), and then wet the tip of the soldering iron by briefly touching it to the
sponge. If the tip is new, tin it before soldering to help prevent solder from sticking to the tip. You tin
the tip by applying a small amount of molten solder to it. (Sticky solder can form an ugly globule,
which can wreak havoc if it falls off into your circuit.) Then wipe off any excess solder on the sponge.


            Periodically tin your solder tip to keep it clean. You can also purchase soldering tip
cleaners if dirt becomes caked on and you just can't get it off during regular tip re-tinning.


Soldering for success
    Successful soldering requires that you follow some simple steps and get a lot of practice.
Remember that timing is the secret of good soldering (just like comedy). As you read through these
steps, pay close attention to words such as ‘immediately' and ‘a few seconds' - and interpret them
literally. Here are the steps for soldering a joint:
        1. Clean the metal surfaces to be soldered.

 Wipe leads, wire ends or etched circuit board surfaces (which we describe in ‘Committing
    to a Permanent Circuit', later in this chapter) with isopropyl alcohol so that the solder adheres
    better.

 

 Let surfaces dry thoroughly before soldering: you don't want them to catch on fire! 2. Secure the items being joined.

 You can use a third hand clamp (as we describe in Chapter 9) or a vice and a crocodile clip
    to hold a discrete component steady as you solder a wire to it, or use needle-nose pliers to hold a
    component in place over a circuit board.

 3. Position the soldering iron.

 Hold the iron like a pen, with the tip at a 30 to 45° angle to the work surface (see Figure 11-
    4).

 4. Apply the tip to the joint you're working on (as shown in Figure 11-4).

 Do not apply heat directly to the solder. Allow the metal a few seconds to heat up.

 5. Feed the cold solder to the heated metal area.

 The solder melts and flows around the joint within a couple of seconds.

 6. Remove the solder immediately, and then the iron.

 As you remove them, hold the component still until the solder cools and the joint solidifies.

 7. Place the soldering iron securely in its stand.

 

 Never place a hot soldering iron on your work surface.

Figure 11-4: Holding the iron at an angle, apply heat to the metal parts you're soldering and then feed
the cold solder into the joint.







  Be careful to use just the right amount of solder (which means applying solder for just the right
amount of time): use too little, and you form a weak connection; use too much, and the solder may
form globs that can cause short circuits.


          You can damage many electronic components if you expose them to prolonged or
excessive heat, so take care to apply the soldering iron only long enough to heat a component lead for
proper soldering - no more, no less.


          To avoid damaging heat-sensitive components, such as transistors, attach a crocodile clip
to the lead between the intended solder joint and the body of the component. This way, any excess heat
is drawn away through the clip and doesn't damage the component.


Inspecting the joint
  After soldering, you need to look at the joint and check that it's strong and conductive. The cooled
solder joint should be shiny, not dull, and be able to withstand a gentle tug from one side. If you
soldered a lead to a circuit board, you should be able to see a fillet (a volcano-shaped raised area of
solder) at the joint. If you see dull solder or jagged peaks, you know that you've a cold solder joint.Cold joints are physically weaker than properly made joints, and they don't conduct electricity as
efficiently.
  Cold solder joints can form when you move the component while the solder is still cooling, if the
joint is dirty or oily or when you fail to heat the solder properly. Resoldering without first desoldering
often produces cold solder joints because the original solder isn't heated enough.
  If you have a cold solder joint, the best solution is to remove the existing solder completely (as we
describe in the next section, ‘Desoldering when necessary'), clean the surfaces with isopropyl alcohol
and re-apply fresh solder.


Desoldering when necessary
  At some point or other in your electronics career, you're bound to run into a cold solder joint, a
backwards-oriented component or some other soldering mishap. To correct these mistakes, you need to
remove the solder at the joint and apply new solder. You can use solder wick, a desoldering pump (also
known as a solder sucker) or both to remove solder from the joint.
  Use a flat braid of copper known as solder wick (also called solder braid, desoldering braid and
variations of those terms) to remove hard-to-reach solder. You place it over unwanted solder and apply
heat. When the solder reaches its melting point, it adheres to the solder wick, which you then remove
and dispose of.


 Exercise care when using solder wick because if you touch the hot braid, you can get a
serious burn.
  A desoldering pump uses a vacuum to suck up excess solder that you melt with your soldering
iron. Two types are available: a spring-loaded plunger and a bulb.
  You use a spring-loaded pump as follows:
        1. Depress the plunger and position the nozzle over the joint that you want to remove.

 2. Position the soldering iron tip carefully into the joint to heat the solder, avoiding
    contact with the end of the pump.

 3. Release the plunger to suck up the solder as the solder begins to flow.

 4. Expel the solder from the pump (into a waste receptacle) by depressing the plunger
    one more time.

 Repeat these steps as needed to remove as much of the old solder as possible.


          Don't store a desolder pump with a cocked plunger because the rubber seal can become
deformed, diminishing the vacuum to the extent that the pump may be unable to suck up any solder.
  A bulb desolder pump works a lot like the spring-loaded variety, except that you squeeze the bulb
to suck up the solder. You may find using this pump difficult unless you mount the bulb on the
soldering iron.


          You can also buy an all-in-one electric desolder pump that melts and removes the solder in
one go.


Cooling down after soldering
  Get into the habit of unplugging - not just shutting off - your soldering iron when you finish your
soldering work. Brush the tip of the still warm iron against a damp sponge to clean off excess solder.
  When the iron has cooled down, you can use tip cleaner paste to remove stubborn dirt. Make surethat the iron is completely cool before storing it. Place your solder reel in a plastic bag to keep it from
getting dirty.


Ensuring safe soldering
  Even if you plan to solder just one connection, you need to take the appropriate precautions to
protect yourself - and those around you.


          The iron reaches temperatures of over 400° C. You (or a nearby friend or pet) may be the
unwittingly recipient of popping, spluttering solder if you meet the occasional air pocket or other
impurity in your reel. Just one small drop of solder hitting you in the eye, or a tumbling soldering iron
that finds rest on a foot, can ruin a day - and a friendship.
  Set up your work area - and yourself - with soldering safety in mind (check out Chapter 9 for more
on electronics safety).
  Make sure that the room is well-ventilated, you have the iron placed snugly in its stand and you
position the electrical cord to avoid snags. Wear shoes (no flip-flops!), safety glasses and an anti-static
wrist strap when soldering.
  Avoid bringing your face too close to hot solder, which gives off fumes and may splutter. Keep
your face to one side and use a magnifying glass if necessary, to see tiny components that you're
soldering.
  Never solder a powered circuit; make sure that the battery or other power supply is disconnected
before applying your soldering iron to components. If your iron has an adjustable temperature control,
dial up the recommended setting for the solder you're using.


          If your soldering iron accidentally goes belly-up, stand back and let it fall. If you try to
grab it, Murphy's Law says you'll grab the hot end.
  Finally, always unplug your soldering iron when you're done and promptly wash your hands.


Committing to a Permanent Circuit

  So you've perfected the world's greatest circuit, and you want to make it permanent. You have a
few options for how to transfer your circuit from the solderless breadboard and make connections that
last.
  Solder breadboards and strip boards are two popular foundations for permanent circuits. You can
solder your connections onto either surface, but if you want additional flexibility, you can use a
technique called wire-wrapping to make connections on a strip board. This section covers the various
methods of making a commitment to your circuit.


Moving your circuit to a solder breadboard
  The solder breadboard (also called a solder board, an experimenter's PC board or a universal
solder board) allows you to take any design that you create on a solderless breadboard and make it
permanent. You can transfer your design to a solder board easily because the solder breadboard has the
exact same layout as the solderless breadboard.
  To transfer your design, you simply pick the parts off your solderless breadboard, insert them in
the solder breadboard and solder them into place in the corresponding spots. Use wires as you did in the
original solderless breadboard to connect components that aren't electrically connected by the metal
strips of the circuit board.          If you design a really small circuit, you can use just one half of a solder breadboard.
Before transferring the components, cut the solder breadboard with a hacksaw. Clean the portion of the
board that you want to use and solder away.


                              Soldering sockets for ICs

    When you build circuit boards that include integrated  circuits, instead of soldering the IC directly
    onto the board, use an IC socket. You solder the socket onto the board, and then, when you're
    done soldering, you plug in the IC and hit the switch.

 
    IC sockets come in different shapes and sizes so as to match the integrated circuits they're meant
    to work with. For example, if you have a 16-pin integrated circuit, choose a 16-pin socket.

 
    Here are some good reasons for using IC sockets:

 
            Soldering a circuit board can generate static. By soldering to the socket rather than the
          actual IC, you can avoid ruining CMOS or other static-sensitive ICs.
            ICs  are  often  one  of  the  first  things  to  go  wrong  when  you're  experimenting  with
          electronics. The ability to pull out a chip you suspect is bad and replace it with a working
          one makes troubleshooting a whole lot easier.
            You can share an expensive IC, such as a microcontroller, among several circuits. Just
          pull the part out of one socket and plug it into another.
    Sockets are available in all sizes to match the different pin arrangements of integrated circuits.
    They don't cost much - just a couple of pennies for each socket.

 

 

  Leave space at the corners of the board so that you can drill mounting holes. You use these holes
to secure the board inside whatever enclosure your project provides (such as the chassis of a robot).
Alternatively, you can secure the board to a frame or within an enclosure by using double-sided foam
tape. The tape cushions the board and prevents breakage, and the thickness of the foam prevents the
underside of the board from touching the chassis.
  Solder breadboards have one main disadvantage: they don't use space very efficiently. Unless you
cram the components onto the board, the breadboard limits you to building circuits with only two or
four integrated circuits and a handful of discrete components. In time, you can figure out how to
conserve space and make good use of the area on a solder board.


Prototyping with strip boards
  You can also use a pre-drilled strip board for your projects. These general-purpose circuit boards
go by many names, such as perf, grid or matrix boards. Some are bare, but most contain copper pads
and traces for wiring. All styles are designed for you to use with ICs and other modern-day electronics
components. The holes are spaced 1/10 of an inch apart (2.54 millimetres). Lots of subtle variations are
available, so look around and choose the one that suits your project (see Figure 11-5).


 A buss runs throughout the circuit board so that you can easily attach components to it.
Many strip boards have at least two busses, one for power and one for ground. The busses run up anddown the board, as you can see in Figure 11-6. This layout works ideally for circuits that use many ICs.
Alternating the busses for the power supply and ground also help to reduce undesirable inductive and
capacitive effects.
  To construct circuits using bare strip boards, which don't have coppers pads and traces for wire,
you use the wire-wrapping method (which we discuss in the following section). Most strip boards
contain pads and traces, so you can solder components directly onto them or use wire-wrapping.
  You can use a strip board just as you use a solder breadboard (see the preceding section ‘Moving
your circuit to a solder breadboard'). After cleaning the board so that the copper pads and traces are
bright and shiny, plug the components into the board and solder them into place. Use insulated wire to
connect components that aren't adjacent to one another.

Figure 11-5: Pre-drilled boards come in many shapes, sizes and other variations, but all are ready for
you to add electronic components after a quick clean if necessary.















Figure 11-6: Several busses run up and down this strip board.















Wrapping with wires
    Wire-wrapping is a point-to-point wiring system that uses a special tool and extra-fine 28- or 30-
gauge wrapping wire. When you carry out the process properly, wire-wrapped circuits are as sturdy as
soldered circuits. And you have the added benefit of being able to make modifications and corrections
without the hassle of desoldering and resoldering.          You have to limit wire-wrapping to projects that use only low-voltage DC. The technique
isn't for anything that requires a lot of current, because the wire you use isn't large enough to carry
much current.
  To wire-wrap, you need the following pieces of equipment:
Strip board: You attach the components to this board. You can use a bare (no copper) board or one
that has component pads for soldering. We personally prefer the padded board.

 
Tie posts: These posts serve as common connection points for attaching components together.

 
  Wire-wrapping sockets for ICs and other parts: These sockets have extra-long metal posts. You
wrap the wire around these posts.

 
  Wire-wrapping tool: You have to use this specific tool to wrap wire around a post and remove it.
The tool also includes an insulation stripper; use this, not a regular wire stripper, to remove the
insulation off wire-wrap wire.

 
Wrapping wire: The wire comes pre-cut or in spools. We prefer pre-cut wire, but try both before
you form an opinion.

 


          Although you can wire-wrap directly to resistor, capacitor, diode and other component
leads, most people prefer using wire-wrap sockets. The reason? Most components have round leads. A
wire-wrap socket has square posts. The square shape helps to bite into the wire, keeping things in place.
If you wrap directly to component leads, you may want to tack on a little bit of solder to keep the wire
in place.
    Wire-wrapping is a straightforward process. You just insert all sockets into the strip board, use the
wire-wrap tool to connect the sockets together and then plug the ICs and other components into their
sockets. If your strip board has solder pads, you'd be wise to touch a little solder between one of the
pads and the post sticking through it. This dab of solder keeps the sockets from coming out.


          A big advantage of wire-wrapping over soldering is that you can make changes relatively
easily. Simply unwrap the wire and re-route it to another post. If the wire gets cruddy, just replace it
with a new one.


 Wire-wrapping involves more than we can cover here. If it sounds like a method you
think may be useful to you, do an Internet search on ‘wire wrapping electronics' (or similar terms) to
find many websites that can help you become an expert wire-wrapper-upper.


Making a custom circuit board
  When you become experienced in designing and building electronics projects, you may want to
graduate to the big time and create your own custom circuit board. You can make - yes, make - your
very own printed circuit board (PCB), just like electronics manufacturers do, which is geared for a
particular circuit design.  A printed circuit board is a surface that supports your circuit and includes interconnections along
the surface of the board. PCBs are reliable, rugged, allow for higher density circuits and enable you to
include non-standard-size components that may not fit in other types of circuit boards.
  To make the board, you glue or laminate a thin sheet of copper, known as cladding, onto the
surface of a plastic, epoxy or phenolic base. Then you form the circuit layout by etching away specific
portions of the copper, leaving behind just the printed circuit design that consists of pads (contact
points for components) and traces (interconnects).
  Next, you drill holes into the centre of each pad so that you can mount components on the top of
the board with leads poking through the holes. Finally, you solder each component lead to the board's
pads.
  To discover more about the ins and outs of making your own PCB, you can search the Internet for
‘make printed circuit board' and find tutorials, illustrations and even videos that explain the process in
great detail.Chapter 12: Measuring and Analysing


                                    Circuits



  In This Chapter
Meeting and measuring with multimeters
Making sure that electronic components are working properly
Probing around your circuits
Identifying the sources of circuit problems
  Your excitement builds as you put the finishing touches to your circuit. With close friends
standing beside you, eager to witness the first of your ingenious electronics exploits, you hold your
breath as you flip the power switch, and . . . nothing happens! At least, nothing at first. Then disbelief
and disappointment as your confidence - and your friends - begin to back away.
  ‘What's gone wrong?' you ask yourself. Then you notice the smoke emanating from what used to
be a resistor. And you realise that you used a 10-Ω resistor instead of a 10-KΩ resistor, trusting your
old eyes and your worn-out mind to read and interpret resistor stripes properly. D'oh!
  In this chapter, you discover how to use an incredibly versatile tool - the multimeter - to perform
important face-saving checks on electronic circuits and components. You come to see that your
multimeter is as important to you as an oxygen tank to a scuba diver: you can both get along all right on
your own for a time, but sooner or later, you're bound to suffer unless you get some help. We also
introduce you to two other testing tools - the logic probe and the oscilloscope - which you may find
useful.
  The tests that all these instruments can do help you to determine if everything is okay before you
go showing off your circuitry to friends and family.


Multitasking with a Multimeter

  You can't follow the electrons in your circuits with your bare eyes, and you certainly don't want to
follow them with your bare hands, so you need help from a versatile electronics test instrument known
as a multimeter.
  A multimeter is an inexpensive handheld testing device that can function as a voltmeter to measure
voltage, an ammeter to measure current and an ohmmeter to measure resistance; some multimeters can
also test diodes, capacitors and transistors.
  With this one handy tool, you can verify proper voltages, test whether you have a short circuit,
determine whether a break exists in a wire or connection, and much more.


          Get to know your multimeter: it can help you make sure that your circuits work properly,
and it's an invaluable tool for detecting circuit problems.
  Figure 12-1 shows a typical digital multimeter. You turn a dial to select the type of measurement
you want to make and a range of values for that measurement. You then apply the metal tips of the two
test leads (one red, one black) to a component or some part of your circuit, and the resulting
measurement is displayed.


 Multimeter test leads have conical tips that you hold in contact with the component you'retesting. You can purchase special test clips that slip over the tips, which allow you to attach the test
leads easily to the component leads or other wires.

Figure 12-1: Multimeters measure voltage, resistance, current and continuity.















It's a voltmeter!
    Multimeters can measure both DC and AC voltages. They provide a variety of voltage
measurement ranges, from 0 volts to a maximum voltage. A typical set of DC voltage ranges is 0-0.25
volts, 0-2.5 volts, 0-10 volts, 0-50 volts and 0-250 volts.
  You can use the multimeter as a voltmeter to measure the voltage of a battery outside of a circuit
or under load (meaning when it's providing power within a circuit). You can also use your multimeter
with your circuit powered up to test voltages dropped across circuit elements and voltages at various
points within a circuit with respect to ground.


          Voltmeters are so important in electronics that they even have their very own circuit
symbol:


  You may see this symbol with leads touching points in a circuit you read about on a website or in
an electronics book. The symbol is telling you to take a voltage measurement across those two points.
  Your multimeter can help you pinpoint the location of a problem in your circuit. It can verify if the
proper voltage reaches a component, such as a light-emitting diode (LED) or a switch. You use
multimeter tests to narrow down the field of suspects until you find the culprit causing all your
headaches.


Now, it's an ammeter!
  Your multimeter also functions as an ammeter, which is the term for a device that measures
current going through a circuit. You may want to check that the current flowing at various points is
what you expected from the circuit you've built, but the most likely reason for checking is to determine
if a circuit or component is drawing too much current.


          If your circuit has more current going through it than it's designed to handle, thecomponents may overheat, which can permanently damage your circuit. In this instance, switch off the
circuit to stop it overheating any further.


Ohm my! It's an ohmmeter, too!
  You can measure the resistance (measured in ohms, as we discuss in Chapter 3) of an individual
component or an entire circuit with your multimeter functioning as an ohmmeter. With your ohmmeter,
you can check up on wires, resistors, motors and many other components. You almost always test
resistance with the circuit unpowered.


          When you measure the resistance of an individual component, take it out of the circuit
before you test it. If you test a resistor that's wired in to a circuit, you get the equivalent resistance
between two points, which isn't necessarily the resistance of just your resistor. See Chapter 3 for more
on equivalent resistance.
  Resistance, or lack of resistance, can reveal short circuits and open circuits, and therefore you use
your ohmmeter to suss out problems such as breaks in wires and hidden shorts between components. A
short circuit generates an ohmmeter reading of zero (or virtually zero) resistance, whereas an open
circuit generates an infinite resistance readout. If you test the resistance from one end of a wire to the
other and you get an infinite readout, you know that a break must exist somewhere along the length of
the wire. Such tests are known as continuity tests.
  By measuring resistance, you can tell whether or not the following circuit elements and
connections are working properly:
Circuit board traces: A bad copper trace (line) on a printed circuit board acts like a broken wire and
generates an infinite resistance reading.

 
Fuses: A blown fuse generates an infinite resistance reading, indicating an open circuit.

 
Solder joints: A bad joint may generate an infinite resistance reading.

 
Switches: An ‘on' switch should generate a zero (or low) resistance reading, whereas an ‘off' switch
should generate an infinite reading.

 


          Many multimeters include an audible continuity testing feature. By turning the meter's
selector to Continuity or Tone, you can hear a beep whenever the meter detects continuity in a wire or
connection. If the wire or connection doesn't have continuity, the meter stays silent. The audible tone
gives you a convenient way to check an entire circuit without having to keep your eye on the meter.


Meeting Your First Multimeter

    Multimeters range from bare-bones handheld models that cost around a tenner to sophisticated
industrial worktop models that cost thousands of pounds. Even a basic multimeter can really help you
understand what's going on in low-voltage circuits, but if you can afford to splash out a little more on a
multimeter with more features, that's going to come in handy in the future. Multimeters can be digital
or analogue.
  Digital multimeters, like the one in Figure 12-1 earlier, display each measurement result as a
precise number, taking the guesswork out of the reading process. Most handheld digital multimeters are
accurate to within 0.8 per cent for DC voltages, whereas the pricey benchtop varieties are over 50 timesmore accurate.
  Many digital multimeters also include an auto-ranging feature, which means that the meter
automatically adjusts itself to display the most accurate result possible, and some have special testing
features for checking diodes, capacitors and transistors.


          You may see older-style analogue multimeters like the one in Figure 12-2, which have a
needle on a scale. Analogue multimeters outperform digital multimeters as regards detecting changing
readings, but if you don't have much of a need for that function, we recommend that you get a digital
multimeter because of its ease of use and more accurate readings.

Figure 12-2: An analogue multimeter uses a needle to indicate voltage, current and other values, but
we suggest you start with a digital model.















Unpacking your digital multimeter
  All digital multimeters perform the basic voltage, resistance and current measurements. Where
they differ is in the range of values they can measure, the additional measurements they can perform,
the resolution and sensitivity of their measurements and the extra bells and whistles they come with.


          Be sure to at least browse through the manual for the multimeter you purchase, to check
the description of its features and specifications, as well as important safety precautions.
  Here's what you can expect to find when you explore a digital multimeter:
Power switch/battery/fuse: The on/off switch connects and disconnects the battery that powers the
multimeter. Many multimeters use standard-size batteries, such as a 9-volt or AA cell, but pocket-size
meters use a coin-type battery. (Avoid using rechargeable batteries, which may produce erroneous
results for some models.)

 
Most multimeters use an internal fuse to protect themselves against excessive current or voltage, and
some come with a spare fuse (if yours doesn't, we suggest that you buy one).

 
Function selector: Dial this knob to the test you want to perform (voltage, current, resistance or
something else) and, on some models, the range setting you want to use. Some multimeters also include
one or more of the following categories: AC amperes, capacitance, transistor gain (hFE) and diode test. 
Many models further divide some measurement categories into 3-6 different ranges; the smaller the
range, the greater the sensitivity of the reading. Figure 12-3 shows a close up of a function selector dial.

 
Test leads and receptacles: Inexpensive multimeters come with basic test leads, but you can
purchase higher-quality coiled leads that stretch out to a metre or so, and yet recoil to a manageable
length when not in use. You may also want to purchase spring-loaded clip leads that stay in place and
are insulated to prevent the metal tip from coming in contact with other parts of your circuit.

 
Some multimeters with removable test leads provide more than two receptacles for the leads. You
insert the black test lead into the receptacle labelled GROUND or COM, but the red lead may be
inserted into a different receptacle depending on what function and range you've dialled up. Most
meters provide additional input sockets for testing capacitors and transistors, as shown in the top right
corner of Figure 12-3. Refer to your multimeter manual for details.

 

Figure 12-3: Digital multimeters provide a wide variety of measurement options.














Digital display: The readout is given in units specified by the range you dial up. For instance, a
reading of 15.2 means 15.2 volts if you dial a 20-volt range, or 15.2 millivolts if you dial a 200-
millivolt range.

 
Most digital multimeters designed for hobbyists have what's called a 3 1/2 digit display: this means that
the readout contains three or four digits, where each of the three rightmost digits can be any digit from
0 to 9, but the optional fourth digit (the leftmost, or most significant, digit) is limited to 0 or 1. For
instance, if set to a 200-volt range, such a multimeter can give readouts ranging from 00.0 to 199.9
volts.

 


Homing in on the range
  Many digital multimeters require that you select the range before the meter can make an accurate
measurement. For example, if you're measuring the voltage of a 9-volt transistor battery, you set the
range to the setting closest to, but above, 9 volts. For most meters, this requires that you select the 20-
or 50-volt range.
  If you select too large a range, the reading you get isn't as accurate. (For instance, on a 20-voltrange setting, your 9-volt battery may produce a reading of 8.27 volts, but on a 200-volt range setting,
the same battery produces a reading of 8.3 volts. You often need as much precision in your readings as
possible.)
  If you select too small a range, a digital multimeter typically displays a flashing 1 (or OL), and the
needle on an analogue meter shoots off the scale, possibly damaging the precision needle movement (so
make sure that you start with a large range and dial it down, if necessary). If you see an over range
indicator when testing continuity, the resistance is so high that the meter can't register it; in which case
you can fairly safely assume that's an open circuit.
  The auto-ranging feature found on many digital multimeters makes getting a precise reading even
easier. For instance, when you want to measure voltage, you set the meter function to volts (to DC or
AC) and take the measurement. The meter automatically selects the range that produces the most
precise reading. If you see an over range indicator (a flashing 1 or OL), the value is too high to be
measured by the meter. Auto-ranging meters don't require range settings, so their dials are a lot simpler.
  A limit exists to what a multimeter can test, and you call that limit its maximum range. Most
consumer multimeters have roughly the same maximum range for voltage, current and resistance. For
your hobby electronics, any meter with the following maximum ranges (or better) works just fine:
AC volts: 500 volts

 
DC volts: 1000 volts

 
DC current: 200 milliamps

 
  Resistance: 2 MΩ (two megohms, or 2 million ohms)

 


                  What if you need to test higher currents?

    Most digital multimeters limit current measurements  to less than one amp. The typical digital
    multimeter has a maximum range of 200 milliamps. Attempting to measure substantially higher
    currents may cause the fuse in the meter to blow. Many analogue meters, especially older ones,
    support current readings of 5 or 10 amps, maximum.

 
    You may find analogue meters with a high ampere input handy if you're testing motors and
    circuits that draw a lot of current. If you have only a digital meter with a limited milliamp input,
    you can still measure higher currents indirectly by using a low-resistance, high-wattage resistor.
    To do this, you place a 1-Ω 10-watt resistor in series with your circuit so that the current you
    want to measure passes through this test resistor. Then you use your multimeter as a voltmeter,
    measuring  the  voltage  dropped  across  the  1-Ω  resistor.  Finally,  you  apply  Ohm's  Law  to
    calculate the current flowing through the test resistor as follows:

 

 
    Because the nominal value of the resistor is 1 Ω, the current (in amps) through the resistor has
    roughly the same value as the voltage (in volts) you measure across the resistor. (Note that the
    resistor value is not going to be exactly 1 Ω in practice, so your reading may be off by as much
    as 5-10 per cent, depending on the tolerance of your resistor and the accuracy of your meter.)
    You can read about Ohm's Law in Chapter 3.

 

 Setting Up Your Multimeter

  Before testing your circuits, you must make sure that your meter is working properly. Any
malfunction gives you incorrect testing results - and you may not even realise it. To test your
multimeter, follow these steps:
        1. Make sure that the test probes at the end of the test leads are clean.

 Dirty or corroded test probes can cause inaccurate results. Use an electronic contact cleaner
    to clean both ends of the test probes and, if necessary, the connectors on the meter.

 2. Turn on the meter and dial it to the Ohms (Ω) setting.

 If the meter isn't auto-ranging, set it to low ohms.

 3. Plug both test probes into the proper connectors of the meter and then touch the
    ends of the two probes together (see Figure 12-4).

 Avoid touching the ends of the metal test probes with your fingers while you're performing
    the meter test. The natural resistance of your body can throw off the accuracy of the meter.

 4. The meter should read 0 (zero) ohms or very close to it.

 If your meter doesn't have an auto-zero feature, press the Adjust (or Zero Adjust) button.
    On analogue meters, rotate the Zero Adjust knob until the needle reads 0 (zero). Keep the test
    probes in contact and wait a second or two for the meter to set itself to zero.

 5. If you don't get any response at all from the meter when you touch the test probes
    together, recheck the dial setting of the meter.

 Nothing happens if you have the meter set to register voltage or current. If you make sure
    that the meter has the right settings and it still doesn't respond, you may have faulty test leads. If
    necessary, repair or replace any bad test leads with a new set.

 
Figure 12-4: Touch the test probes of the meter together and verify a 0 (zero) ohms reading to make
sure that the meter is working properly.








  You can consider the meter calibrated when it reads zero ohms with the test probes shorted
together (held together so that they're touching each other). Carry out this test each time you use your
meter, especially if you turn off the meter between tests.


 If your meter has a Continuity setting, don't use it to zero-adjust (calibrate) the meter. The
tone may sound when the meter reads a few ohms, so it doesn't give you the accuracy that you need.
Recalibrate the multimeter using the Ohms setting, and not the Continuity setting, to ensure proper
operation.Operating Your Multimeter

  When you use your multimeter to test and analyse circuits, you must consider what settings to dial
up, whether you're testing components individually or as part of a circuit, whether the circuit should be
powered up or not and where you place the test leads (in series or in parallel with whatever you're
testing).


 Think of your multimeter as an electronic component in your circuit (because in a way, it
is). If you want to measure voltage, your meter must be placed in parallel with the section of the circuit
you're measuring, because voltages across parallel branches of a circuit are the same. If you want to
measure current, your meter must be placed in series with the section of the circuit you're measuring,
because components in a series circuit carry the same current.
  In the following sections, we explain exactly how to measure voltage, current and resistance using
a multimeter.


Measuring voltage
  To examine voltage levels throughout your circuit using a multimeter, your circuit must be
powered up. You can test the voltage at almost any point in a circuit, not just the battery connections.
  After setting up your meter as described in the earlier section ‘Setting Up Your Multimeter', dial
up the type of voltage (AC or DC) and the range. Choose the range that gives you the most sensitivity.
Attach the black lead of the meter to the ground connection of the circuit and the red lead of the meter
to the point in the circuit that you want to measure. (This process places your multimeter in parallel
with the voltage drop you want to measure.)
  Figure 12-5 shows an example of using a multimeter to measure the voltage at a couple of
different points in a simple circuit containing a 555 timer integrated circuit (IC). The multimeter is set
to DC volts with a range of 0-20 volts.
  In the top image the meter is measuring the voltage that powers the entire circuit, while in the
bottom image the meter is measuring the voltage at the output of the 555 timer IC. Because the output
of the 555 timer IC is a low or high voltage, the reading on the multimeter alternates between 0 (zero)
and 9 volts (the positive power supply voltage).


 Depending on the resistor and capacitor values in the 555 timer circuits shown in Figure
12-5, the output may change so rapidly that your multimeter can't keep up with the voltage swings. To
test fast-changing signals, you need a logic probe (for digital signals only) or an oscilloscope. We
discuss these two test instruments in later sections ‘Probing the depths of logic' and ‘Scoping out
signals with an oscilloscope'.

Figure 12-5: Measuring two different voltages on a 555 timer IC circuit.Measuring current
  When you use the multimeter as an ammeter, you connect the meter in series with the component
you want to measure current through, so that the exact same current you want to measure passes
through the meter. This set up, as shown in Figure 12-6, is very different from the voltmeter
configuration.
  After setting up your meter as described in the earlier section ‘Setting Up Your Multimeter', dial
up the type of current (AC or DC) and the range. Choose the range that gives you the most sensitivity.
Then interrupt the circuit at the point where you want to measure current.
  You attach the black lead of the meter to the more negative side of the circuit and the red lead to
the more positive side, which places your multimeter in series with the component you want to measure
current through. Make sure that the circuit is powered up. If you don't get a reading, try reversing the
connections of the leads to the multimeter.

Figure 12-6: Measuring current involves connecting the meter in series with the circuit or component. To measure how much overall current an entire circuit draws, insert your meter in series
with the positive power supply. But remember that many digital meters are limited to testing currents of
200 milliamps or less. Be careful: don't test higher current if your meter isn't equipped to do so.


          Never leave your multimeter in an ammeter position after measuring current. You can
damage the meter. Get into the habit of turning the meter off immediately after running a current test.


                                Don't blow your fuse!

    Many meters provide a separate input (test lead  receptacle) for testing current, usually marked as
    A (for amps) or mA (for milliamps). Some multimeters provide an additional input for testing
    higher currents, typically up to 10 amps. The multimeter shown in the earlier Figure 12-3 has
    two inputs for testing current, labelled mA and 10A.

 
    Be sure to select the appropriate input before making any current measurement. Forgetting to do
    this step may blow a fuse (if you're lucky) or damage your meter (if you're unlucky).

 

 


Measuring resistance
  You can run lots of different tests using your multimeter as an ohmmeter to measure resistance.
Obviously, you can test resistors to check their values or see if they've been damaged, but you can also
examine capacitors, transistors, diodes, switches, wires and more using your ohmmeter. Before you
measure resistance, make sure that you calibrate your ohmmeter as described in the earlier section
‘Setting Up Your Multimeter'.


          If your multimeter has specific features for testing capacitors, diodes and/or transistors, we
recommend that you use those features rather than the methods that we give you in the following
sections. But if you have a bare-bones multimeter without those features, the following methods can
really help you.Testing resistors
  Resistors are components that limit current through a circuit. (See Chapter 3 for all about
resistors.) Sometimes you need to verify that the nominal resistance value marked on the body of a
resistor is accurate, or you may want to investigate whether a suspicious-looking resistor with a bulging
centre and third-degree burns has died.
  Here's how to test a resistor:
        1. Disconnect it from your circuit. Make sure that you turn the power off before you touch
    it!

 2. Set your multimeter to read ohms. If you don't have an auto-ranging meter, start at a
    high range and dial down the range as needed.

 3. Position the test leads on either side of the resistor. Take care not to let your fingers
    touch the metal tips of the test leads or the leads of the resistor. (If you touch them, you add the
    resistance of your body into the reading, producing an inaccurate result.)

 The resistance reading should fall within the tolerance range of the nominal value marked on the
resistor. For instance, if you test a resistor with a nominal value of 1 K ohms and a tolerance of 10 per
cent, your test reading should fall in the range of 900 to 1,100 ohms. A bad resistor can be completely
open inside, in which case you may get a reading of infinite ohms, or it can be shorted out, in which
case you get a reading of zero ohms.


Testing potentiometers
  Like a resistor, you can test a potentiometer (also called a pot), which is a variable resistor, using
the Ohms setting on your multimeter. (We discuss pots in Chapter 3.)
  Remove the potentiometer from your circuit. Figure 12-7 shows multimeter test leads applied to
one fixed end (point 1) and the wiper, or variable lead (point 2), of a pot. Turning the dial shaft in one
direction increases the resistance; turning the dial shaft in the other direction decreases the resistance.
With the meter applied to the wiper (point 2) and the other fixed end (point 3), the opposite resistance
variation happens. If you connect the meter to both fixed ends (points 1 and 3), the reading that you get
should be the maximum resistance of the pot, no matter how you turn the dial shaft.

Figure 12-7: Connect the test leads to the first and centre, centre and third, and first and third terminals
of the pot.










          As you turn the shaft of the potentiometer, take note of any sudden changes in resistance,
which may indicate a fault inside the pot. Should you find such a fault, replace the pot with a new one.


Testing capacitors
  You use a capacitor to store electrical energy for a short period of time. (We cover capacitors in
Chapter 4.) If your multimeter doesn't have a capacitor-testing feature, you can still use it in theohmmeter setting to help you decide whether or not to replace a capacitor.


 Before you test a capacitor, you must discharge it to clear all the electrical energy out of
it. That's because large capacitors can retain a charge for long periods of time - even after you remove
power.
  To discharge a capacitor, you short out its terminals through an insulated bleeder jumper (as
shown in Figure 12-8), which is simply a wire with a large (1 or 2 megohm) resistor attached. The
resistor prevents the capacitor from being shorted out, which would make it unusable.
  After discharging the capacitor and removing the bleeder jumper, dial your multimeter to ohms
and touch the test leads to the capacitor leads. Unpolarised capacitors don't care which way you connect
the leads, but when you're testing a polarised capacitor, connect the black lead to the negative terminal
of the capacitor and the red lead to the positive terminal.
  Wait a second or two and then note the reading. A good capacitor shows a reading of infinity
when you perform this step. A zero reading may mean that the capacitor is shorted out. A reading of
between zero and infinity can be indicative of a leaky capacitor, one that's losing its ability to hold
charge.

Figure 12-8: Purchase or make a bleeder jumper, used for draining excess charge from a capacitor.










 This test doesn't tell you when the capacitor is open, which can happen if the component
becomes structurally damaged inside or if its dielectric (insulating material) dries out. An open
capacitor reads infinite ohms just like a good capacitor. For a conclusive test, use a multimeter with a
capacitor-testing function.


Testing diodes
  A diode is a semiconductor component that acts like a one-way value for current. (We discuss
diodes in gory detail in Chapter 6.) If your multimeter doesn't have a diode-check setting, you can use
the Ohms setting to test most types of diodes.
  Set your meter to a low-value resistance range. Connect the black lead to the cathode (negative
side, with a stripe) and the red lead to the anode (positive side). The multimeter should display a low
resistance. Then reverse the leads, and you should get an infinite resistance reading.


 If you're not sure which end is up in a diode you've got on hand, you can use your
multimeter to identify the anode and the cathode. Run resistance tests with leads connected one way,
and then the other. For the lower of the two resistance readings, the red lead is connected to the anode
and the black lead is connected to the cathode.


Testing transistors  A bipolar transistor is essentially two diodes in one package, as illustrated in Figure 12-9. (For a
PNP transistor, both diodes are reversed.) If your multimeter has neither a transistor-checking feature
nor a diode-checking feature, you can use the Ohms setting to test most bipolar transistors, in a similar
fashion to how you test diodes (see the preceding section). You simply set your meter to a low-value
resistance range and test each diode within your transistor in turn.
  For instance, if you're testing an NPN transistor, such as the one shown in Figure 12-9, connect the
black lead to the collector of the transistor and the red lead to the base. If everything is working
correctly, the multimeter displays a low resistance. Then reverse the leads, and you get an infinite
resistance reading. Next, connect the black lead to the emitter and the red lead to the base and the meter
displays a low resistance. Reverse the leads and the meter displays infinite resistance.

Figure 12-9: A bipolar transistor is like two diodes in one package.









          For a PNP transistor, the readings should be the opposite of what they are for an NPN
transistor.


 Testing with a multimeter can permanently damage some types of transistors, especially
field effect transistors (FETs). Use this test with bipolar transistors only. If you're not sure what type of
transistor you have, look it up in a datasheet before testing. You can often find the datasheet by
searching the Internet for the component identification number (for instance, search on ‘2n3906
datasheet').


Testing wires and cables
  You can use your multimeter as an ohmmeter to run continuity tests on wires and cables. You may
want to do this so that you can detect breaks inside wires and short circuits, or unintended continuity,
between two wires in a cable.
  To test for continuity in a single wire, you connect the multimeter test leads to either end of the
wire and dial up a low-range Ohms setting. You should get a reading of zero ohms, or a very low
number of ohms. A reading of more than just a few ohms indicates a possible break in the wire, causing
an open circuit.
  To test for a short between different wires that shouldn't be electrically connected, you set the
meter to measure ohms, and then connect one of the test leads to an exposed end of one wire and the
other test lead to an exposed end of the other wire. If you get a reading of zero or a low number of
ohms, you may have a short circuit between the wires. A higher reading usually means your wires
aren't shorted together.


          Note that you may get a reading other than infinite ohms if the wires are still connected to
your circuit when you make the measurement. Rest assured that your wires aren't shorted unless you
get a very low or zero reading.                    Even wire resists the flow of electrons

    Why  don't  you  always  get  zero  ohms  when  testing   wire,  especially  a  long  wire?  Well,  all
    electrical circuits exhibit some resistance to the flow of current, and the ohms measurement tests
    this resistance. Even short lengths of wire have resistance, although usually well below 1 ohm,
    so these aren't an important test subject for continuity or shorts.

 
    However,  the  longer  the  wire,  the  greater  the  resistance,  especially  if  the  wire  has  a  small
    diameter. Usually, the thicker the wire, the lower its resistance per metre. Even though the
    multimeter doesn't read exactly zero ohms, you can assume proper continuity in this instance if
    you get a low ohms reading.

 

 


Testing switches
    Mechanical switches can get dirty and worn, or sometimes even break, making them unreliable or
completely unable to pass electrical current. In Chapter 8, we describe four common types of switches:
single-pole single-throw (SPST), single-pole double-throw (SPDT), double-pole single-throw (DPST)
and double-pole double-throw (DPST). Depending on the switch, you may see zero, one or two ‘off'
positions, and one or two ‘on' positions.
  You can use your multimeter, set to ohms, to test any of these switches. You need to familiarise
yourself with the on/off position(s) and the terminal connections of the particular switch you're testing,
and run tests for each possibility. With your test leads connected across the terminals of any
input/output combination placed in the ‘off' position, the meter should read infinite ohms; the ‘on'
position should give you a reading of zero ohms.
  You can most easily test switches by taking them out of a circuit. If you have the switch wires in a
circuit, the meter may not show infinite ohms when you place the switch in the ‘off' position. If,
instead, you get a reading of some value other than zero ohms, you can assume the switch is operating
properly as an open circuit when in the ‘off' position.


Testing fuses
  Fuses are designed to protect electronic circuitry from damage caused by excessive current flow
and, more importantly, to prevent a fire if a circuit overheats. A blown fuse is an open circuit that's no
longer providing protection, so it must be replaced.
  To test a fuse, set your multimeter to the Ohms setting and touch one test lead to either end of the
fuse. If the meter reads infinite ohms, you have a burned-out fuse.


Running other multimeter tests
  Many digital multimeters include extra functions that test specific components, such as capacitors,
diodes and transistors. These tests provide more definitive results than the resistance measurements we
discuss in the previous few sections.
  If your multimeter has a capacitor-testing feature, it displays the value of the capacitor, which can
come in handy because not all capacitors follow the industry-standard identification scheme. Refer to
your multimeter manual for the exact procedure because the specifics vary from model to model. Be
sure to observe the proper polarity when connecting the capacitor to the test points on the meter.
  If your multimeter has a diode-check feature, you can test a diode by attaching the red test lead tothe anode (positive terminal) of the diode, and the black lead to the cathode (negative terminal). You
should get a fairly low, but not zero, reading (for instance, 0.5). Then reverse the leads and you should
get an over range reading. If you get two zero readings or two over range readings, chances are your
diode is bad (short or open).


          You can use the diode-check feature to test bipolar junction transistors, treating them as
two individual diodes, as shown in the earlier Figure 12-9.
  If your multimeter has a transistor-checking feature, follow the procedure outlined in the manual,
which varies from one model to another.


Using a Multimeter to Check Your Circuits

  One of the top benefits of a multimeter is that it can help you analyse the rights and wrongs of
your circuits. By using the various test settings, you can verify the viability of individual components
and confirm that voltages and currents are what they should be. Say that you hook up a circuit that
doesn't work right away: your multimeter can help you sniff out the problem when you can't resolve the
problem by physically checking all your connections.
  To troubleshoot your circuit, mark up your circuit diagram with component values, estimated
voltage levels at various points in the circuit and expected current levels in each branch of the circuit.
(Often, the process of marking up the diagram uncovers a maths error or two.) Then, use your
multimeter to probe around.
  Here are some of the things to check as you troubleshoot your circuits:
Check power supply voltages.

 
Check individual component functionality and actual values (out of the circuit).

 
Check continuity of wiring.

 
Check voltage levels at various points in the circuit.

 
Check current levels through part of the circuit (without exceeding the current capabilities of your
multimeter).

 
  Using a step-by-step procedure, you can test various components and parts of your circuit and
narrow down the list of suspects until you uncover the cause of your circuit problem or wave the white
flag of surrender (never!).


Introducing Logic Probes and Oscilloscopes

  Your multimeter is the most important tool on your workbench, but it's not the only instrument
you can use to test your circuits. If you're really, really serious about electronics, you can buy a logic
probe or an oscilloscope. Neither is a must-have tool when you're starting out, but as you work your
way into intermediate and advanced electronics, you should consider adding them to your electronics
workbench.
  The detail of how these tools work is beyond this book and here we just introduce you to them
briefly so that you can decide when and if to invest in them.


Probing the depths of logic  A logic probe (a fairly inexpensive tool costing under £15), like the one shown in Figure 12-10, is
specifically designed to test digital circuits, which handle just two voltage levels: low (zero volts or
thereabouts), indicating logical 0 (zero); or high (12 volts or less, but most commonly 5 volts),
indicating logical 1 (one). (You can read all about digital logic in Chapter 7.)
  The logic probe simply checks for high or low signals and turns on a different LED indicator
depending on the signal it detects. A third LED indicator glows when the logic probe detects pulsing,
which is when a signal alternates between high and low very quickly. Most logic probes also include a
tone feature, so you can hear highs and lows while keeping your eyes on your circuit.

Figure 12-10: The logic probe is useful for troubleshooting digital circuits.













  Logic probes receive power from the circuit under test. Most probes work with a minimum supply
voltage of about 3 volts and a maximum of no more than 15 volts (sometimes more, sometimes less).
Check whether the supply voltage of your circuit falls within the acceptable range for a logic probe.


Scoping out signals with an oscilloscope
  For the average amateur electronics hobbyist working at home or at school, the oscilloscope is a
nice tool to have around but isn't absolutely necessary. An oscilloscope is a piece of test equipment that
displays how a voltage varies with time as a trace across a cathode-ray tube (CRT) or other display.
  This ability makes an oscilloscope useful for checking whether digital signals have the right
timing, or for testing pulsating signals that change too quickly for a logic probe to detect (faster than
about 5 MHz).
  With a dual trace oscilloscope, which is a scope with two input channels, you can test the
relationship between two signals. You may need to do this test when you work with some digital
circuits, for example. Often, one signal triggers the circuit to generate another signal. Being able to see
both signals together helps you determine whether the circuit is working as required.
  Serious electronics engineers spend small fortunes on serious bench oscilloscopes like the one
shown in Figure 12-11, but you can purchase a battery-operated handheld scope with a liquid crystal
display for under £100. You don't get the advanced features of the better bench scopes, but you're still
able to view signal variations over time - something that your multimeter simply can't do.
  Another option is to spend £100 or so on a PC-based oscilloscope that uses your personal
computer to store and display the electrical signals that you measure. Most PC-based scopes are self-
contained in a small external module that connects to the desktop PC or laptop through a parallel, serial,
or USB port.

Figure 12-11: A typical bench oscilloscope with its important controls identified.                                    Part III

Putting Theory into Practice





















    In this part . . .

  Finding out how electronics components control electric current in theory

is great, but seeing the process in action lets you discover what electronics

can really do.

  In this part, you find out how to set up simple circuits to demonstrate the

principles of electronics. We show you how to use your multimeter - and a

little  bit  of  maths  -  to  compile  enough  evidence  to  prove  to  anyone  that

electronic components really can do what they're supposed to. You may even

make a few LEDs glow to show where and when electric current is flowing

through your test circuits.

  We also share with you the plans for several fun electronics projects you

can build in 30 minutes or less - without breaking open your piggy bank.

Using sensors, lights and buzzers, you can put electronics to work to create a

variety of practical - and sometimes entertaining - circuits. You may find that

these projects spark some creative ideas for other circuits that you can build

to impress your friends and family.  Chapter 13: Exploring Some Simple


                                    Circuits



  In This Chapter
Putting Ohm's Law through its paces
Following the ups and downs of capacitor voltage
Zeroing in on Zener diodes
Testing out current with transistors
  You may be thinking that electronics theory (which we cover in Chapters 1-6) is well and good,
but does it really work in your own home-built circuits? Are your resistors really going to resist and are
logic gates always strictly logical? Do your semiconductors actually do what you want them to? When
you charge up a capacitor, does it faithfully hang on to its electrical energy until you give it the go-
ahead to discharge?
  In this chapter, we put theory to the test. We show you some simple circuits that answer all your
electronic concerns by demonstrating how various components and the laws that govern them work.
You can build any of these circuits in less than ten minutes, and see for yourself how one or more
components shape electrical current. Using your multimeter as your guide - with some visual cues from
a few strategically placed LEDs - you can get a real sense of what's going on inside each circuit.


Getting Equipped

  To prepare to build the circuits in this chapter, make sure that you have a few supplies at the
ready. At a minimum, you need the following items to build and explore the circuits we discuss in this
chapter:
Batteries: All the circuits in this chapter run off one or two 9-volt batteries. Make sure that you have
a few extra ones around in case you leave a circuit powered up for a long time. To make circuit
building easier, buy two 9-volt battery clips and, if they don't already have them, solder 22-gauge solid
wires onto the clip leads so that you can easily connect and disconnect your batteries from any circuit
(avoiding the need for a switch). You can find information on how to solder leads in Chapter 11.

 
  Calculator: If you don't trust your brain to perform mathematical calculations accurately, bring your
calculator to your workbench. Remember to check your units carefully and convert values to ohms,
amps and volts before you calculate anything.

 
Multimeter: You need a multimeter to measure voltage, resistance and current as you watch what's
happening to the electrons your circuits are manipulating. Review Chapter 12 if you need a refresher on
how to wield a multimeter.

 
Solderless breadboard: You need at least one solderless breadboard to enable you to build, update,
tear down and re-build the circuits we discuss. If necessary, review the breadboarding techniques
discussed in Chapter 11, so that you know which holes are connected to which before you start to plug
components in at random.

 
  Just to make your shopping trip a little easier, we provide you with a list of all the electronic
components that we use in the simple circuits in this chapter:  Capacitor: One 470μF electrolytic capacitor rated at a minimum of 25 volts.

 
Diodes: One 4.3V 1W Zener diode or similar ratings.

 
IC: One quad 2-input NAND gate IC such as the 4011.

 
LEDs: Two standard 5-millimetre LEDs of any colour (same as each other, all different or a mix of
colours).

 
  Potentiometers (pots): One each of 10 kΩ, 100 kΩ and 1 MΩ. If they don't already come with
connectors suitable for a solderless breadboard, solder wires around 7 or 8 centimetres long to each of
their three leads. Remember that the middle lead is connected to the wiper arm inside the device, and
the leads on either end are fixed.

 
Resistors: With one exception, which is noted, resistors rated at 1/4 watt or 1/8 watt with 10 or 20
per cent tolerance are fine. You need the following fixed resistors: one 220 Ω, one 330 Ω, two 470 Ω
1/2 watt, two 1 kΩ, two 10 kΩ and one 100 kΩ.

 
Transistors: Two general-purpose NPN bipolar transistors, such as a 2N3904 or BC548.

 
  In the next section, we walk you through the process of building the first circuit on a solderless
breadboard. For circuits after that, we just give you the schematic diagram and leave the construction
up to you. As you build each circuit, use a row along the top of your solderless breadboard for
connections to the positive side of the power supply, and a row along the bottom for ground
connections (the negative side of the power supply), as we explain and illustrate for the first simple
circuit.


Seeing Is Believing: Ohm's Law Really Works!

  In Chapter 3, we discuss one of the most important principles in electronics: Ohm's Law. This law
governs all resistive electronic components and tells us that the voltage, V, dropped across a component
with a fixed resistance, R, is equal to the current, I, flowing through the component multiplied by the
value of the resistance (R). You can sum it up with this equation:

  You can also rearrange the terms of that equation to get two other equations that really say the
same thing in two different ways:

  You use Ohm's Law to help you analyse circuits, from simple series circuits to more complex
series-parallel circuits. In this section, you can test Ohm's Law to make sure that it works (it does!) and
to take your first steps in circuit analysis.


 As you explore these circuits, keep in mind another important rule that applies to every
circuit: the voltage rises and drops around a circuit always add up to zero. In DC-powered circuits, such
as the ones we explore in this section, another way to say the same thing is that the voltage drops across
all the components in a circuit add up to the source voltage. If you'd like to review these concepts, refer
back to Chapter 2.


Analysing a series circuit  Figure 13-1 shows a simple series circuit containing a 9-volt battery, a 470-Ω resistor (R1) and a
10-kΩ potentiometer, or variable resistor (R2). We also label the voltage drops across R1 and R2. For
this circuit, you use the middle lead and one outer lead of the potentiometer, leaving the other outer
lead unconnected. This way, you can vary the resistance of R2 between 0 (zero) ohms and 10 kΩ.

Figure 13-1: With a simple series circuit, you can witness Ohm's Law in action.









          To avoid confusion, bend the wire extending from the unused lead out of the way, so
you're clear about which outer lead you're using.
  Before using a pot in your circuit, use your multimeter set on ohms to measure the resistance from
one lead of the pot to the other. Turn the pot all the way down so that your multimeter reads 0 (zero)
ohms.


Building the simple series circuit
  Refer to the photo in Figure 13-2 for making connections on your solderless breadboard. Build the
circuit one step at a time, connecting the battery last, as follows:
        1. Insert the fixed resistor (R1). Plug one lead (either one) into a hole along the top row of
    the breadboard and the other lead into a hole in the centre section of the breadboard.

 2. Insert the potentiometer (R2). Plug one lead (either one) into a hole in the centre
    section, in the same column as the lead for resistor R1, and plug the other lead into a hole along
    the bottom row.

 3. Insert the battery. Plug the lead for the negative terminal into a hole along the bottom
    row and then plug the lead for the positive terminal into a hole along the top row to complete the
    circuit.

 
Figure 13-2: Setting up the simple series circuit on a solderless breadboard is a snap.  So, now the time has come to probe around your live circuit using your multimeter.


Adding up voltages around the circuit
  We start by exploring some voltages. Set your multimeter to DC volts with a range of 10 volts.
  With a simple test, you can determine the exact voltage of your battery. Touch the black voltmeter
probe to the negative terminal of the battery and the red voltmeter probe to the positive terminal of the
battery. You do this by gently inserting the tip of each probe into a hole in the breadboard that's
connected to the point you're measuring in the circuit. You should see a reading of roughly 9 volts (for
a fresh battery). Note the reading.
  Next, test the voltage across the pot (R2). Place the black voltmeter probe at the point where the
R2 is connected to the negative terminal of the battery, and place the red probe at the point where R1
and R2 are connected. What reading do you get? What reading would you expect to get, and why?
(Hint: the pot is turned all the way down to zero ohms.)
  Test the voltage across R1. Take care to orient the voltmeter probes so that you get a positive
voltage reading, placing the black probe at the point where R1 meets R2, and the red probe at the point
where R1 is connected to the battery. What reading do you get, and why? When you add the voltages
you've measured together, you should get the full battery voltage, as follows:

  Try adjusting the pot to a few different settings and measuring V1 and V2 again. Do they always
add up to Vbattery?


Zeroing in on Ohm's Law
  To test Ohm's Law, zero the pot again and think about what current you expect to see in this series
circuit with the pot turned all the way down to zero ohms. With the probes disconnected from the
circuit, change the multimeter setting to DC amps and set the range to 200 milliamps. (You'll probably
turn this down to a 20-milliamp range, but starting with a larger range and turning it down is preferable
to doing things the other way around.)


          To measure current, you need to insert your meter in series with whatever you're
measuring current through. But before you break the circuit, disconnect the battery by simply removing
one of its leads from the breadboard. Get into the habit of removing power before fiddling with circuit
components.
  With the power disconnected, simply move the R2 (pot) lead that's connected to R1 to another
column in your breadboard. Now you've broken the circuit. Then connect the red lead of your meter to
the open side of R1 and the black lead of your meter to the open side of R2. Then connect the battery to
the circuit, and you should get a current reading. If the reading is less than 20 milliamps, you can turn
down your meter setting to the 20-milliamp range to get a more precise reading.
  Now do a quick little bit of maths and use Ohm's Law, the values of your components and the
readings you've just taken to check that everything adds up.
  With your meter still connected between R1 and R2, slowly turn up the potentiometer and observe
the change in current. Is the reading heading in the right direction? Turn the pot all the way to the end
and check that your readings and component values all add up under the equation for Ohm's Law.


          The current through a series circuit is limited by all the resistances in the circuit, and
resistances in series add up. (Keep in mind, too, that the meter adds a certain amount of resistance,
albeit tiny, to the circuit.)
  Now, turn the pot down until the current reading is about 10 milliamps. Calculate the value of the
resistance R2 that you expect. Next, disconnect the battery and then remove the pot from the circuit.Switch your multimeter setting to ohms with a range of 2 kΩ. Measure the resistance across the pot
leads. Again, check that these figures add up under Ohm's Law.
  You can experiment as much as you want, varying the pot and measuring currents and voltages to
verify that Ohm's Law really does work. You'll also see that the voltage drops across R1 and R2 vary as
the pot resistance changes, and that those voltages always add up to the battery voltage.
  Try filling in the chart below as you run your tests, adding rows for other pot settings.









Dividing up voltage
  Using the same series circuit (as shown in Figure 13-1), you can test the concept of the voltage
divider that we discuss in Chapter 3. Say, for instance, you need to supply a circuit with 5 volts, but
you've got a 9-volt power supply. You can divide the battery voltage between two or more resistive
components, adjusting the resistances so that one of the voltages is 5 volts.
  Using Ohm's Law, you know that the voltage across R2 is equal to the current, I, through the
circuit times the resistance, R2. You also know that the current, I, is equal to the battery voltage divided
by the total resistance of the circuit, which is R1 + R2. From these two equations, you can write an
expression for the voltage across R2:




  Notice that the expression on the right side of the above equation is equal to a ratio of resistances
multiplied by the supply voltage. With the pot out of the circuit, turn its dial to some point and measure
its resistance. Given this resistance, what would you expect the voltage across the pot to be? Insert the
pot into the circuit, power it up and measure the voltage across the pot. Was your estimate close?
  Use the chart below to test your voltage divider for a range of R2 values.












  Now, imagine that you want to design a voltage divider circuit to produce 5 volts across R2. You
calculate the value of R2 that results in 5 volts across R2, which means plugging in 5 volts for VR2 in
the voltage divider equation shown above to determine the value of R2. (Note that you don't need to
know the current passing through the circuit in order to design the voltage divider.)  After a bit of mathematical manipulation (which we don't go into here), and assuming your battery
measures 9 volts, you end up with the following equation for R2:

  R1 equals 470 ohms (nominally, anyway), so you expect to produce 5 volts across R2 when the
pot is set to about 588 ohms (that's 1.25 × 470 ohms).
  To test this calculation, set your multimeter to DC volts with a range of 10 volts and measure the
voltage across the pot. Next, turn the pot until the voltage reading is about 5 volts. Then remove the pot
from the circuit and measure the resistance, which should be in the vicinity of 588 ohms.
  You can test the voltage divider concept on your own. Pick a value of R2 and adjust the pot to that
value. Calculate the expected voltage across R2 and then measure the actual voltage with the pot in the
circuit. You get the idea.


Parallel parking resistors
  Want to see current split right before your very eyes? Set up the circuit in Figure 13-3 and measure
each current, following these steps:
        1. Set up your multimeter. Set it to DC amps, with a range of 20 milliamps.

 2. Measure the supply current, I1. Break the circuit between the battery and R1 and then
    insert the multimeter in series with the battery and R1, with the red probe connecting to the
    positive battery terminal and the black probe connecting to the open side of the resistor. Note the
    current reading.

 3. Remove the multimeter. Reconnect the battery and the resistor.

 4. Measure the branch current, I2. Remove one of the leads of resistor R2 and then insert
    the multimeter in series with R2, using the proper lead orientation. Note the current reading.

 5. Remove the multimeter. Reconnect the R2 lead into the circuit.

 6. Measure the other branch current, I3. Remove one of the leads of R3 and then insert
    the multimeter in series with R3, using the proper lead orientation. Note the current reading.

 7. Remove the multimeter and turn it off. Reconnect the R3 lead into the circuit.

 
Figure 13-3: The supply current splits between the two branches of this circuit.






  Unless the forces of nature have changed (or your multimeter has gone berserk), the branch
currents you've measured add up to the supply current you measured: I2 + I3= I1.
  You can use maths to calculate these currents by applying Ohm's Law and the rules for series and
parallel resistances. To calculate the total supply current, I1, you determine the total resistance of the
circuit, Rtotal, and apply Ohm's Law using the battery voltage.


 In Chapter 3, we discuss how to calculate the equivalent resistance, Rtotal, of a combined
series and parallel circuit like the one in Figure 13-3, as follows:


  If you run the numbers for the resistor values we've chosen here, you should find that Rtotal = 602Ω.
  Then, you calculate the total supply current as follows:


    Assuming Vbattery = 9 volts, you get:

  Now that you know I1, you can calculate the voltage V1 across resistor R1, as follows:

  If 7 volts is dropped across R1, and then V2, the voltage across the parallel resistors must be 2
volts (9 volts - 7 volts). Using V2 and applying Ohm's Law to each parallel resistor, you can calculate
the branch currents:



    Amazingly, the two branch currents add up to the supply current.


          Use your multimeter as a voltmeter to verify your voltage calculations. Then take out the
fixed resistor R3 and substitute in a 10 kΩ potentiometer. Vary the resistance and watch what happens
to the currents and voltages. Having completed all these tests, you're an Ohm's Law expert!


Charging and Discharging a Capacitor

  In this experiment, you can observe a capacitor charging up, holding its charge and discharging.
You can also vary the time a capacitor takes to charge and discharge. Take a peek at Chapter 4 to
review how capacitors work and how you can control their operation.


Watching your charges go up and down
  The circuit in Figure 13-4 is really two circuits in one. The changeover switch alternates between
positions labelled ‘charge' and ‘discharge', creating two circuit options:
Charging circuit: When the switch is in the charge position, the circuit consists of the battery,
resistor R1 and the capacitor, C. Resistor R2 is not connected to the circuit.

 
Discharge circuit: When the switch is in the discharge position, the capacitor is connected to
resistor R2 in a complete circuit. The battery and R1 are disconnected from the circuit (they're open).

 


          Use a jumper wire for the changeover switch. Poke one end of the jumper wire into your
breadboard so it's electrically connected to the positive side of the capacitor. Then, you can use the
other end to alternately connect the capacitor to R1 or R2. You can also leave the other end of the
jumper wire unconnected, which we suggest you do later in this section. You'll see why.

Figure 13-4: Move the switch in this circuit alternately to charge and discharge the capacitor.






  Set up the circuit using a 9-volt battery, but don't connect the free end of the jumper wire switch toanything just yet.


 Make sure that you insert the electrolytic capacitor the right way around by connecting
the negative side of the cap to the negative terminal of the battery. Get it wrong and it may explode!


Charging the capacitor
  Set your multimeter to DC volts with a range of 10 volts and connect it across the capacitor (red
lead connected to the positive side of the cap, black lead connected to the negative side of the cap).
Now, connect the changeover switch to the ‘charge' position (at R1) and observe the voltage reading on
your meter. You should see the reading rise to approximately 9 volts - but not instantaneously - as the
capacitor charges up through resistor R1. This charging takes a couple of seconds.


Holding the charge
  Remove the end of the jumper wire and just let it hang. Observe the reading on your voltmeter,
which should continue to read 9 volts or thereabouts. (You may see the reading decrease a tiny bit,
because capacitors can and do leak charge.) The capacitor is holding its charge (really, holding
electrical energy), even without the battery connected.


Letting the charge go
  Now, connect the free end of the jumper wire to the ‘discharge' position (at R2) and observe the
voltage reading on your meter. You should see it decrease fairly slowly as the capacitor discharges
through resistor R2 to zero volts. This discharging takes several minutes.


Calculating the charge and discharge times
  In Chapter 4, we explain that a capacitor in a simple RC circuit reaches nearly its full charge at
approximately five times the RC time constant, T. T is simply the value of the resistance (in ohms)
times the value of the capacitance (in farads). So, you can calculate the time taken to charge and
discharge the capacitor in your circuit as follows:





  Did you observe this result? Repeat the charging and discharging experiment and see if your
calculations seem about right.


Varying the RC time constant
  Inserting a couple of potentiometers in your charging and discharging circuits allows you to
observe different RC time constants and watch your capacitor charge and discharge at different time
intervals.
  Set up the circuit in Figure 13-5, leaving the switch open (one end of the jumper wire disconnected
from the board). Notice that a 1-kΩ resistor is in series with the capacitor; that's to protect the capacitor
by limiting current flow regardless of the potentiometer setting.

Figure 13-5: Adjust the potentiometers in this circuit to vary the capacitor charging and discharging
times.  The total resistance in the charging circuit times the capacitance determines the RC time constant
of your charging circuit. This total resistance is the sum of the fixed resistance (1 kΩ) and the variable
resistance dialled up on potentiometer R1. So the capacitor charge time is given by:

  If you set R3 to zero ohms, your total resistance is simply 1000 ohms, and the capacitor charges up
in approximately 2.35 seconds, just as it did in the earlier section (‘Watching your charges go up and
down'). Move the jumper wire to the charge position and observe the reading on the voltmeter.
  The total resistance of the discharge circuit times the capacitance determines the RC time constant
of your discharge circuit. This total resistance is the sum of the fixed resistance (1 kΩ) and the variable
resistance of potentiometer R4. So, the capacitor discharge time is given by:

  If you set R4 to its maximum resistance, 100 kΩ, expect a discharge time of approximately 237
seconds or 4 minutes (nearly the same as in the earlier section ‘Watching your charges go up and
down'). Switch the jumper wire to the discharge position and observe the voltmeter reading.
  When the capacitor has discharged, remove the jumper wire. Adjust R3 to its maximum value, 10
kΩ. Move the switch to the charge position and observe the meter reading. The capacitor will take
longer to charge, starting off quickly but then slowing down.


          In Chapter 4, you can see the voltage versus time waveform of a charging/discharging
capacitor. This waveform shows that, at first, a capacitor charges quickly and then charges more
slowly. The same holds true when a capacitor discharges: it initially discharges quickly and then more
slowly.
  Now remove the jumper wire. Adjust R4 to zero ohms. Move the switch to the discharge position
and observe the meter reading. Did the capacitor discharge rather quickly? You would expect it to
discharge in about 21/2 seconds.
  Try adjusting each potentiometer to different values and alternately charging and discharging the
capacitor. You can even get out your kitchen timer and try to time the charge/discharge cycles. Then
remove each potentiometer, measure each resistance and calculate 5RC. Do your calculations roughly
match your observations?


Dropping Voltages across Diodes

  Diodes, which we discuss in Chapter 6, are like one-way valves for electrical current. By applying
a small voltage from anode to cathode, current flows in the forward direction and the voltage drop
across the diode remains fairly constant, even as the current increases.
  In this section, you see some of the ways diodes are used in electronic circuits. You can also use
your multimeter to explore voltage drops and current in circuits with diodes.


Turning on an LED
  For red, yellow and green LEDs, a forward voltage of about 2 volts turns on the valve, so to speak,
allowing current to flow and the LED to light up. LEDs can carry currents of up to about 20 milliamps.
(Check the ratings of the particular LED you choose.)
  The circuit in Figure 13-6 is designed to demonstrate the on/off operation of an LED, and howincreasing current strengthens the light emitted by the diode. Turn a 10-kΩ pot to its maximum
resistance. Then set up the circuit shown in Figure 13-6, using a standard red, yellow or green LED.
Make sure that you orient the LED properly, with the cathode (negative side) connected to the negative
battery terminal. On many LEDs, the shorter of the two leads is the cathode.

Figure 13-6: Use this circuit to turn an LED on and off, and to vary the intensity of the light.







  Set your multimeter to DC volts with a range of 10 volts and place the leads across the LED. Is the
LED lit up? What voltage reading do you get? The LED voltage should be less than 1 volt, which isn't
enough to turn the diode on.
  Now, turn the pot down slowly, keeping your eye on the LED. When the LED turns on, stop
turning the pot. Observe the reading on the multimeter. The LED voltage should be close to 2 volts.
Now, continue to turn the pot down as you watch the LED. Observe what's happening to the light. Turn
the pot all the way down to zero ohms and watch the brightness of the LED. Note the voltage reading
on your multimeter. Did the LED voltage change much as the light got brighter?


          To understand why the LED was off when the pot was set to 10 kΩ, and then turned on as
you lowered the pot resistance, consider the circuit as if you'd removed the LED. The circuit is a
voltage divider, and the voltage across resistor R3 (which is the same as the LED voltage) is given by a
ratio of resistance times the supply voltage:





  If the resistance of the potentiometer is high (say, 10 kΩ), the voltage across the LED is rather low
(about 0.75 volts). When the resistance of the pot is low enough, the voltage across the LED rises
enough to turn the LED on. VLED climbs to about 2 volts when R2 falls down to about 2.5 kΩ. (Plug
in 2,500 for R2 in the equation above and see for yourself!)
  Of course, your particular LED may turn on at a slightly different voltage, say in the range of 1.7
volts to 2.2 volts. If you measure the resistance of your pot at the point at which your LED turns on,
you may see a somewhat lower or higher resistance value than 2.5 kΩ.
  You can also observe the current flowing through the LED. Break the circuit between the cathode
(negative side) of the LED and the negative battery terminal. Insert your multimeter in series where you
broke the circuit and set it to measure DC amps.
  Start with the pot turned all the way up to 10 kΩ. As you turn the pot down, observe the current
reading. Note the reading when the LED first turns on. Then continue to turn the pot down and observe
the current readings. You should see the current increase to over 5 milliamps as the light intensifies.


          Overall, you expect to notice that the LED turns on when its voltage approaches 2 volts,
with just a tiny current passing through it at this point. As you increase the current through the LED,
the light brightens but the voltage across it remains fairly steady.Clipping voltages
  When a large enough reverse-bias voltage is applied to a Zener diode, it maintains a steady voltage
drop, even as the current through it increases within a certain range. (Check out Chapter 6 for more
detail on Zener diodes.)
  Set up the simple voltage divider circuit in Figure 13-7, connecting two 9-volt batteries in series to
create the 18-volt DC source. Be sure to use resistors rated at 1/2 watt for this circuit.
  Measure the total supply voltage and then measure the voltage across R2, which should be roughly
half the supply voltage, or about 9 volts. Measure the voltage across R1; you'd expect it to be about 9
volts as well. The resistors are dividing the supply voltage equally.
  Now modify the circuit, as shown in Figure 13-8, by placing a 4.3V 1W Zener diode across R2,
with the anode (positive side) of the diode connected to the negative battery terminal.

Figure 13-7: This simple voltage divider splits the supply voltage evenly between the two resistors.








          If you can't find a Zener diode with exactly this rating, use one with a rating close to that
but remember to adjust your calculations accordingly.
  Measure the voltage across R2, which is the same as the voltage across the Zener diode. The
voltage has changed from 9 volts to roughly 4.3 volts. Zener diode tolerance can be ±10 per cent, so the
voltage can vary from 3.9-4.7 volts.

Figure 13-8: Adding a Zener diode regulates the voltage across R2.






  The Zener diode is regulating the voltage across R2. So where did the rest of the supply voltage
go? Measure the voltage across resistor R1. Did the result increase after you added the Zener diode? (It
should measure roughly 13.7 volts.)
  Now remove the power and replace resistor R2 with a 10-kΩ potentiometer (see Figure 13-9).
Power up the circuit and measure the voltage across R2. Vary the potentiometer from zero ohms to 10
kΩ and observe the voltage reading.
  You should see the voltage rise steadily from zero volts until it reaches the Zener voltage, and then
remain at that voltage as you continue to increase resistance R2. The Zener diode holds the output
voltage steady, even when the load on the circuit (represented by the potentiometer) varies.

Figure 13-9: Even when the load resistance varies, the Zener diode holds the output voltage steady.Gaining Experience with Transistors

  In this section, you see how tiny transistors are used to control the current in one circuit (at the
output of the transistor) using electronic components in another circuit (at the input of the transistor).
That's what transistor action is all about!


Amplifying current
  You can use the circuit in Figure 13-10 to demonstrate the amplification capabilities of a
transistor. Build the circuit using a general-purpose NPN bipolar transistor, such as a 2N3904 or one of
the many others available.


          Be careful to connect the base, collector and emitter leads properly.
  Turn the potentiometer all the way up so that the resistance is 1 MΩ. You probably see a tiny glow
from LED2, but may not see any light coming from LED1 although a tiny current is passing through
LED1.
  Now slowly turn the pot down and watch the LEDs. You should see LED2 getting steadily
brighter as you turn the pot down. At some point, you start to see light from LED1 as well. As you
continue to turn the pot down, both LEDs glow brighter, but LED2 is clearly much brighter than LED1.

Figure 13-10: A pair of LEDs helps you visualise the amplification capabilities of a transistor.














  You're witnessing transistor action. The tiny base current passing through LED1 is amplified by
the transistor, which allows a much larger current to flow through LED2. You see a dim glow from
LED1 due to the tiny base current, and a bright glow from LED2 due to the stronger collector current.
  You can measure each current if you like. (See the following section ‘Measuring tiny currents' for
how to measure the small base current.)
  With the pot set to 1 MΩ, we measured a base current of 6.1μAmp (that's 0.0000061 amps) and a
collector current of 0.8 milliamps. Dividing the collector current by the base current, we find that thecurrent gain of this transistor circuit is 131. With the pot set to 0 Ω, we measured a base current of 0.61
milliamps and a collector current of 14 milliamps, for a current gain of 23.


Measuring tiny currents
  The base current of the bipolar transistor in Figure 13-10, which passes through LED1, is very
small, especially when the pot is set to its maximum resistance. If you want to measure this tiny current,
you can do so in two different ways.
  You can make the measurement directly, by breaking the circuit on one side of LED1, inserting
your multimeter and setting it to DC amps. The current is so small that it may not register on your
meter.
  Or, you can also measure the current indirectly, using Ohm's Law to help you. The same current
that passes through LED1 and into the base of the transistor also passes through two resistors: the 10-
kΩ resistor and the potentiometer. You can measure the voltage drop across either resistor and divide
the voltage reading by the resistance. (Remember, Ohm's Law tells you that the current passing through
a resistor is equal to the voltage across the resistor divided by the resistance.)
  If you really want an exact measurement, power the circuit down, pull the resistor out of the circuit
and measure its exact resistance with your multimeter. Then perform the current calculation. Using this
method, we measured a base current of 6.1μAmp (that's 0.0000061 amps).


Creating light at your fingertip
  The circuit in Figure 13-11 is a touch switch. It uses a pair of NPN transistors to amplify a really
tiny base current enough to light the LED. This piggyback configuration of two bipolar transistors, with
their collectors connected and the emitter of one feeding into the base of the other, is known as a
Darlington pair.
  Set up the circuit, using any general-purpose NPN transistors (such as 2N3904). Close the circuit
by placing your finger across the open circuit shown in the figure (don't worry, it doesn't hurt).
  The LED should turn on. When you close the circuit, your skin conducts a teeny tiny current (a
few microamps), which is amplified by the pair of transistors, lighting the LED. That's the light touch!

Figure 13-11: A Darlington pair can be used as a touch switch.















Using Your Logic

  Tiny digital circuits called logic gates accept one or more bits (binary digits) as inputs and produce
an output bit that depends on the function of the particular gate. (You can read up on logic gates inChapter 7.) Logic gates form the basic building blocks of advanced digital systems, such as the
microprocessor that does all the thinking in your computer.
  Inside each logic gate is a bunch of electronic components strung together in just the right way to
perform the designated logic function. You find logic gates housed in integrated circuits (ICs) complete
with several pins that allow you to access the inputs, outputs and power connections of the digital
circuit inside.
  In this section, you discover how to make the right connections to a NAND logic gate IC, and you
watch the output change as you fiddle around with various combinations of inputs. Then you find out
how to create another type of logic gate, an OR gate, by combining NAND gates in just the right way.


Seeing the light with a logic gate
  The circuit in Figure 13-12 uses an LED to indicate the high or low state of the output of a two-
input NAND gate. Set up the circuit, using one of the four NAND gates on the quad 2-input NAND
4011 IC.


          The NAND 4011 IC is a CMOS chip that's sensitive to static, so be sure to review the
precautions outlined in Chapter 9 to avoid damaging it.
  For the switches, you can simply use jumper wires, inserting one end into your solderless
breadboard and moving the other end to close or open the switch.


          The output of a NAND (NOT AND) gate is high whenever either one or both inputs are
low, and the output of a NAND gate is low only when both inputs are high. (You can review the
functionality of basic logic gates in Chapter 7.) High in this case is defined by the positive power
supply (9 volts) and low is 0 volts.

Figure 13-12: Use an LED to show the output of a NAND logic gate.












  When you close one of the switches, you make that input high because you connect the positive
power supply voltage to the input. When you open one of the switches, you make that input low
because the connection is through a resistor to ground (0 volts).
  Test the functionality of the NAND gate by trying all four combinations of open and closed
switches, filling in the chart below (which is essentially a truth table).  The LED lights up when one or both switches are open and turns off when both are closed.


Turning three NAND gates into an OR gate
  You can combine several NAND gates to create any other logical function. In the circuit in Figure
13-13, three NAND gates are combined to create an OR gate. Switches SW3 and SW4 control the
inputs to the OR gate and the on/off state of the LED indicates the output of the OR gate.
  Each of the two NAND gates on the left functions as a NOT gate (or inverter); it ties the inputs
together so that a low input produces a high output and a high input produces a low output. The NAND
gate on the right produces a high output when one or both of its inputs are low, which happens when
one or both switches (SW3 and SW4) are closed.
  The bottom line is that when one or both switches are closed, the output of the circuit is high.
That's an OR gate!
  Set up the circuit, being careful to avoid static.


          You can use the remaining three NAND gates on the quad 2-input NAND IC that you
used to build the circuit in Figure 13-12.
  Open and close the switches to test that everything works. If so, the LED turns on when either one
or both switches are closed.

Figure 13-13: Three NAND gates configured to create an OR gate.  Chapter 14: Great Projects You Can


            Build in 30 Minutes or Less



  In This Chapter
Stocking up on project supplies
Playing around with light and sound
Exploring the extraordinary world of piezoelectrics
Wiring up some new projects
  Getting up to speed on electronics really begins to pay off when you get to the point of actually
building a project or two. In this chapter, you get to play with some fun, surprising and educational
electronics gadgets, which are simple enough to build within half an hour. We keep the number of
required parts to a minimum, and the most expensive project costs under £20 or so to build.
  We give you some detailed steps for the first project, so we suggest that you work through that
first. Then, you should be able to follow the circuit schematics and build the rest of the projects on your
own. Check out Chapter 10 if you need a little help reading or understanding the schematics.


What to Get and Where to Get It

  You can build all the projects in this chapter, except for the electronic compass in the later section
‘Lighting the Way with an Electronic Compass', on a solderless breadboard (see Chapter 11 for all
about breadboards). Of course, feel free to build any of the projects on a regular soldered circuit board
if you want to make them permanent.


 We cover all the parts you need for these projects, such as capacitors, transistors,
integrated circuits and even wire, in Chapters 4, 6, 7 and 8 respectively, and you can find more detail
about breadboarding and building circuits in Chapters 11 and 12. If you get stuck on any of these
projects, hop to one of those chapters to help you through.
  With one exception (that tricky but worthwhile electronic compass project, again), you can find
the parts that you need to construct the projects in this chapter at an electronics hobby shop such as
Maplin. Check out both Chapter 16 and the Appendix for the details of electronic components suppliers
online, too.
  Unless we tell you otherwise:
All resistors have 1/4 or 1/8 watt, 5 per cent or 10 per cent tolerance.

 
All capacitors are rated at a minimum of 25 volts. We note the type of capacitor that you need
(ceramic, electrolytic or tantalum) in the parts list for each project.

 


Building Brilliant, Blinking, Bright Lights

  The first project that one of us ever built was a light that blinked on and off. That's all it did, but
that was enough. The project involved soldering together all the transistors, resistors and diodes. Start
to finish, the whole project took two days. Today, thanks to one specific integrated circuit, making your
first blinking light project doesn't take you more than a few minutes and costs only a few pounds in
parts.  The special ingredient that makes the blinking light circuit easy to build is the 555 timer IC. This
particular chip is the cornerstone of many projects that you build, including several in this chapter. You
can use the 555 in a variety of ways, but the most important use is to provide pulses at regular intervals,
like a kind of electronic metronome. Throughout this chapter we show you several ways to use this
feature to produce a number of cool effects.


 You can easily find the 555 timer IC in Maplin shops or order online. The price for one
may be anywhere from 25p to 60p, but when you purchase in quantity, the price goes down to nearly
half that price per circuit. Online retail stores that sell the 555 by the tube tend to offer the best price.
These tubes contain as many as a couple of dozen chips. Don't worry about overstocking; you use them
up soon enough.


Following the 555 fast flasher
  You can see the schematic of the blinking light project in Figure 14-1, which shows you how to
connect a 555 timer IC to a light-emitting diode (LED). By turning variable resistor (potentiometer) R1,
you change the rate of blinks from a slow march to a machine-gun strobe.


 If you need a quick course on reading schematics, head to Chapter 10.
  This circuit provides a useful demonstration of how you can use the 555 as an astable
multivibrator. This name is just a fancy term for a timer that goes off (not turns off, but goes off like an
alarm clock) over and over again, forever (or until it runs out of juice to power it).


 This circuit also makes a handy piece of test equipment. Connect the output of the 555
(Pin 3 on the chip) to some other project and use this circuit as a signal source. You see how this works
in several of the other projects in this chapter, which are built around the 555 chip.

Figure 14-1: Schematic of the LED flasher circuit.














  Building the LED flasher circuit is easy. Use the schematic you see in Figure 14-1 and the picture
in Figure 14-2 to guide you. Note that we add a bit more space between components to help you see
where all the parts go. You should usually build in a little bit of space, rather than squeezing things
together, so that you can see what you're doing.
  Follow these steps to build the circuit:        1. Collect all the components you need for the project ahead of time. See the parts list
    below for a rundown of what you need.

 Nothing is worse than starting a project, only to have to stop halfway through because you
    don't have everything to hand!

 2. Carefully insert the 555 timer chip into the middle of the board.

 The IC should straddle the empty middle row of the breadboard. The clocking notch of the
    chip (that little indentation or dimple on one end) should face the left of the board. Though this
    positioning isn't mandatory, it's considered good practice in electronics.

 3. Insert the two fixed resistors, R2 and R3, into the board, following the schematic
    and the sample breadboard in Figure 14-2.

 As noted in Chapter 7, the pins on integrated circuit chips are numbered counter-clockwise,
    starting at the clocking notch. So, if you're facing the breadboard with the 555 on it, and the
    clocking notch is on your left, Pin 1 is to the left of the clocking notch and Pins 2, 3 and 4 run in
    a row down the left side of the IC. On the right side of the IC, Pin 5 is opposite Pin 4, and Pins 6,
    7 and 8 run up in a row (with Pin 8 opposite Pin 1).

 4. Insert the two capacitors, C1 and C2, into the board, following the schematic and
    the sample breadboard in Figure 14-2.

 5. Connect the potentiometer (R1) to the breadboard.

 If necessary, first solder wire of any colour to the potentiometer's three connections. Use
    22-gauge solid core hook-up wire. One connection (the first or the third - it doesn't matter) goes
    to Pin 7 of the 555; the other two connections are joined (or bridged) and attach to the V+ of the
    power supply.

 6. Connect the LED as shown in the schematic and the sample breadboard.

 You must insert this component the right way round. Connect the cathode of the LED to
    ground. Check the packaging of your LED to make sure that you get it right. (If you don't, and
    you insert the LED backwards, nothing bad happens, but the LED doesn't light up. Simply
    remove the LED, and reinsert it the other way around.)

 7. Finish making the connections.

 People commonly refer to the wires used to make the circuit connections as jump leads or
    jumpers. Most of the circuits you build have at least one or two. You can make your own from
    22-gauge single strand wire, but we recommend the packets of ready-made leads designed for
    breadboards. Use the schematic in Figure 14-1 and the sample breadboard in Figure 14-2 as a
    guide to making these connections.

 8. Before you switch on the power, double-check your work. Verify all the proper
      connections by cross-checking your wiring against the schematic.

 9. Attach a 9-volt battery to the V+ and ground rows of the breadboard.

 The V+ row is at the top, and the ground row is at the bottom. Using a 9-volt battery clip is
    easier, and you can get one at any electronics shop. A good idea is to solder 22-gauge solid
    hook-up wire to the ends of the leads from the clip, which makes inserting the wires into the
    solderless breadboard easier. Remember: the red lead from the battery clip is V+; the black lead
    is ground.

 When you apply power to the circuit, the LED should flash. Rotate the R1 knob to change the
speed of the flashing. If your circuit doesn't work, disconnect the 9-volt battery and check the
connections again.
  Here are some common mistakes to look out for:
You inserted the 555 IC backwards. This error can damage the chip, and you may want to try another555.

 
You inserted the LED backwards. Pull it out and reverse the leads.

 

Figure 14-2: An LED flasher with parts mounted on a solderless board.














You didn't press the connection wires and component leads into the breadboard sockets firmly
enough. Be sure that each wire fits snugly into the breadboard, so that no loose connections remain.

 
The component values are wrong. Double-check, just in case!

 
The battery is dead. Try a new one.

 
Change the LED for one with a lower operating voltage - 1 volt should be fine.

 
If the LED lights up but doesn't flash, check the polarity of both the power supply and the LED. You
may need to reverse both.

 
You wired the circuit wrong. Have a friend take a look. Fresh eyes can catch mistakes that you may
not notice.

 


 Good electronics practice requires that you build a circuit that's new to you on a
breadboard first, because you often need to tweak a circuit to get it working just the way you want it to.
When you have it working to your satisfaction on a breadboard, you can make the circuit permanent if
you like. Just take your time and remember to double- and even triple-check your work. Don't worry -
you'll be a pro in no time, and soon be building fairly complex circuits on your solderless breadboard.


Gathering parts for the LED flasher
  Here are the parts that you need to build the LED flasher circuit:
IC1: 555 timer IC

 R1: 1-MΩ potentiometer

 
R2: 47-kΩ resistor

 
R3: 330-Ω resistor

 
C1: 1-μF tantalum (polarised) capacitor

 
C2: 0.1-μF ceramic (non-polarised) capacitor

 
LED: Light-emitting diode (any colour)

 


Putting the Squeeze on with Piezoelectricity

  Not all electronic circuits require batteries, resistors, capacitors, transistors or any of the other
usual components that you find in an electronic circuit. This project generates its own electricity, and
you end up with a light drum consisting of a neon light that glows when you tap on a piezo disc. This
project serves as a great demonstration of something called piezoelectrics.


Experimenting with piezoelectricity
  A simple and fun way to experiment with piezoelectricity is to get a piezo transducer. You can get
these discs in various sizes, all for under a pound each.


          Get a disc with the two wires already soldered onto it. Some discs have only one wire and
these discs work just fine, too. You can clip a wire to the edge of the disc's metal for the ground
connection.
  Figure 14-3 shows a demonstrator circuit with one disc and one neon bulb. Neon bulbs are special
in that they don't light up unless you feed them at least 90 volts. That's a lot of juice! But the piezo disc
easily generates this much voltage.

Figure 14-3: Try this simple circuit to demonstrate the properties of piezoelectricity.









                                      Piezo - what?

    The term piezo comes from a Greek word meaning  to press or squeeze. A century ago some
    smart  people  discovered  that  you  can  generate  electricity  when  you  press  certain  kinds  of
    crystals really hard. Lo and behold, these same crystals change shape - though only slightly -
    when you apply electricity to them. At first these people didn't know what to do with their
    discovery, but it turned out to be really important because we now use piezoelectricity in loads    of everyday gadgets, such as quartz watches, alarm buzzers, barbecue grill starters and much
    more.

 

 

  To build the circuit in Figure 14-3, follow these steps:
        1. Place the disc on an insulated surface.

 A wooden or plastic table surface works fine, but don't use a surface made of metal.

 2. Connect the disc and neon bulb together by using two crocodile clips, as shown in
    Figure 14-4.

 Place one test lead from the red wire of the disc to one connection of the neon lamp (it
    doesn't matter which connection). The other test lead goes from the black wire of the disc to the
    other connection of the neon lamp.

 3. Place the disc flat on the table.

 4. Rap very hard on the disc with the plastic end of a screwdriver.

 Each time you rap the disc, the neon bulb flickers.

 
Figure 14-4: Connect the disc and neon lamp using crocodile clips.
















          Avoid touching the two wires that come from the disc. Although the shock you get isn't
dangerous, it definitely doesn't feel very good!
  What on earth can you do with this strange but surprising contraption? Now you're ready to build
your very own light drum to dazzle friends and family. Just follow these steps:
        1. String up a whole bunch of discs and bulbs in a row.

 2. Tape or glue these disc-bulb sets to a plastic base.

 3. Get a pair of drumsticks, turn down the lights and tap on the discs in time with your
    favourite music.

 You can save money by building the circuit with LEDs rather than neon bulbs. Just substitute each
bulb for an LED and 330-Ω resistor.


Getting the parts for the piezoelectric circuit  For the circuit that demonstrates piezoelectricity, you just need:
A bare piezo transducer disc (around 50 millimetres in diameter, preferably with two wires soldered
on)

 
A neon bulb

 
Two crocodile clips

 
  Something to whack the disc with, such as a screwdriver or drumsticks (not a cricket bat)

 


Assembling the Amazing See-in-the-Dark Infrared Detector

  Did you ever want to see in the dark like a cat? Now you can, by building this simple infrared
detector. The circuit uses just three parts (plus a battery). You can make the circuit a little fancier by
adding an SPST (single-pole single-throw) toggle switch between the + (positive) side of the battery
and the phototransistor to turn the detector on and off; or you can just unplug the battery when you
aren't using the detector.
  Figure 14-5 shows the schematic for the infrared detector. Be sure to use a phototransistor, and not
a photodiode, in this circuit. Also, make sure that you get the proper orientation for both the
phototransistor and the LED. If you hook up either of them back to front, the circuit fails.

Figure 14-5: Schematic of the infrared detector.











Searching for infrared light
  Using the infrared detector, you can test for infrared light from a number of sources. Here are just
two ideas to try:
Getting to the bottom of a remote control dilemma: Because remote controls use invisible
infrared light, you have a hard time figuring out what's wrong when they stop working. Does the
remote have a problem, or should you blame your TV or other appliance? To test the remote control,
place it up against the infrared phototransistor. Press any button on the remote; if the LED on your
project flashes, you know that you have a working remote.

 
  Carrying out counter-surveillance: Check to see if somebody's hidden camera is in your room.
These days, covert cameras (such as the one in Figure 14-6) can see in the dark by using a built-in
bright infrared light source. You can use the infrared detector circuit to find these sources, even if you
can't see them yourself. Turn off the lights and wave it around slowly to scan the room. If you see the
LED brighten, even though you can't see a light source, you may have just found the infrared light
coming from a hidden camera! 


          Although the infrared phototransistor is most sensitive to infrared light, it also responds to
visible light. For best results, use the infrared detector in a dimly lit room. Sunlight, and direct light
from desk lamps and other sources, can influence the readings.

Figure 14-6: This miniature camera can see in the dark, thanks to its six infrared-emitting diodes.















Tracking down parts for the infrared detector
  Here's what you need to build this project:
Q1: Infrared phototransistor (almost any phototransistor should work fine)

 
R1: 330-Ω resistor

 
LED: Light-emitting diode (any colour)

 


Keeping People Away with a Siren!

  Okay, so you don't really get home any quicker, but the warbling siren that you build in this
project encourages other members of your family to steer clear of you. You'll certainly have fun
playing around with it, but other people in the house may not like the sound quite as much! The warbler
sounds cool, and you can build it into an alarm to alert you if somebody's trying to snatch your football
cards, Star Wars DVDs or whatever.


Making your siren sound
  This circuit (see Figure 14-7) uses two 555 timer chips. You rig both chips to act as astable
multivibrators; that is, they constantly change their output from low to high to low to high . . . over and
over again. The two timers run at different frequencies. The timer chip on the right in the figure
produces an audible tone. If you connect a speaker directly to the output of this timer, you hear a steady
medium-pitch sound.
  The output of the 555 chip on the left, which produces a slower rising and falling tone, connects
into Pin 5 of the 555 chip on the right in the figure. You connect the speaker to the output of the 555chip on the right.
  Adjust the two potentiometers, R2 and R4, to change the pitch and speed of the siren. You can
produce all sorts of siren and other weird sound effects by adjusting these two potentiometers and
operating this circuit at any voltage between 5 and about 15 volts.

Figure 14-7: A police-type siren made from two 555 timer ICs.
















Sorting the siren parts list
  To start alarming your friends, gather these parts together to build the circuit:
IC1, IC2: 555 timer IC

 
R1, R3: 2.2-kΩ resistor

 
R2: 50-kΩ potentiometer

 
R4: 100-kΩ potentiometer

 
C1: 47-μF electrolytic (polarised) capacitor

 
C2: 0.01-μF ceramic (non-polarised) capacitor

 
C3: 0.1-μF ceramic (non-polarised) capacitor

 
C4: 1-μF electrolytic or tantalum (polarised) capacitor

 
Speaker: 8-Ω, 1-watt speaker

 


Lighting the Way with an Electronic Compass

    Discover where in the world you are with this very cool electronic compass! This magnetic
compass uses the same technology that manufacturers build into many cars to show you your direction
electronically. Four LEDs light up to show you the four points on the map: N (north), S (south), E(east) and W (west). The circuit illuminates adjacent LEDs to show the in-between directions, SW, SE,
NW and NE.


Checking under the compass bonnet
  At the heart of this project is a special compass module, the Dinsmore 1490. This module isn't a
common, everyday part. You have to special-order it, but you can have a lot of fun with the project,
making it worth the £10 to £15 that you pay for the compass module. Check out the manufacturer's
website www.dinsmoresensors.com for more details. The module can be bought online from a UK-
based supplier that for some strange reason is called Chocolate Labrador (www.choclab.eu), and don't
forget to try other possible sources by doing a Google or Yahoo! Search on ‘dinsmore compass'.
  The 1490 compass module is about the size of a small thimble. The bottom of the sensor has a
series of 12 tiny pins, as you can see in the pinout drawing in Figure 14-8. The pins are arranged in four
groups of three and each group consists of the following connection types:
Power

 
Ground

 
Output (or signal)

 

Figure 14-8: A pinout drawing of the Dinsmore compass module.









  You can see the schematic for the electronic compass in Figure 14-9. By doing some careful
soldering, you can build a nice portable electronic compass that you can take anywhere. Put it in a
small enclosure, with the LEDs arranged in typical clockwise N, E, S, W circular orientation. You can
buy enclosures at good electronics shops. They come in many different shapes, sizes and finishes.
Select an enclosure large enough to contain the circuit board and batteries.
  You can power the compass with a 9-volt battery. Add a switch from the + (positive) terminal of
the battery to turn the unit on or off, or simply remove the battery from its clip to cut the juice and turn
off your compass.

Figure 14-9: Schematic of the handheld compass.Locating your electronic compass parts
  To point you in the right direction, here are the parts that you need to gather to build your
compass:
COMPASS: Dinsmore 1490 magnetic electronic compass (see the preceding section ‘Checking
under the compass bonnet')

 
R1-R4: 1-kΩ resistors

 
C1: 10-μF electrolytic (polarised) capacitor

 
  LED1-LED4: Light-emitting diodes (any colour)

 
MISC: Project box, switch, battery clip (all optional)

 


Alarming Way to Sense the Light

  Figure 14-10 shows you a schematic of a light alarm. The idea of this project is simple: if a light
comes on, the alarm goes off. You build the alarm around a 555 timer chip, which acts as a tone
generator. When light hits the photoresistor, the change in resistance triggers transistor Q1. This
response turns the 555 on, and it squeals its little heart out. You can adjust the sensitivity of the alarm
by turning R1, which is a variable resistor (potentiometer).

Figure 14-10: Schematic of a light alarm.Making your alarm work for you
  What's the use of an alarm that goes off whenever it senses light? Well, this clever little circuit has
several practical uses:
Put the light alarm inside a pantry so that it goes off whenever someone raids the sweet jar. Keep
other family members out of your treats - or keep yourself on that diet! When the food cupboard door
opens, light comes in and the alarm goes off.

 
Place the alarm inside your tool shed or workroom, near the door. If someone opens the door during
the day, light comes through and the alarm goes off: a great way to ensure that no one touches that
complex electronics project you're halfway through.

 
Build your own electronic rooster that wakes you up at daybreak. (Who needs an alarm clock?)

 


Assembling a light alarm parts list
  Here's the shopping list for the light alarm project:
IC1: 555 timer IC

 
Q1: 2N3906 PNP transistor

 
R1: 100-kΩ potentiometer

 
R2: 3.9-kΩ resistor

 
R3: 10-kΩ resistor

 
R4: 47-kΩ resistor

 
C1, C3: 0.01-μF ceramic (non-polarised) capacitor

 C2: 1.0-μF electrolytic or tantalum (polarised) capacitor

 
Speaker: 8-Ω, 0.5-watt speaker

 
  Photoresistor: Experiment with different sizes; for example, a larger photoresistor makes the circuit
a little more sensitive

 


'Lil but Loud Amp

  Give your electronics projects more volume with this little amplifier designed around parts that are
inexpensive and easy to find at most electronics suppliers. The LM386 power amplifier IC boosts the
volume from microphones, tone generators and many other signal sources.
  Figure 14-11 shows the schematic for this project, which consists of just six parts, including the
speaker. You can operate the amplifier at voltages between 5 and about 15 volts. A 9-volt battery does
the trick.
  To use the amplifier, connect a signal source, such as a microphone or the melody maker circuit in
the following section, to Pin 3 of the LM386. Also make sure that you connect the ground of the signal
source to the common ground of the amplifier circuit.

Figure 14-11: Schematic of the little amplifier.











          Depending on the source signal, you may find that you get better sound if you place a 0.1-
to 10-μF capacitor between the source and Pin 3 of the LM386. For smaller values (less than about 0.47
μF), use a ceramic capacitor; for larger values (1 μF or higher), use a tantalum capacitor. When you use
a polarised capacitor, orient the + (positive) side of the component towards the signal source.
  This little amp doesn't come with a volume control, and the sound quality may be like a railway
station platform tannoy, but this simple circuit packs quite a good little punch in a small and portable
package.
  Here's a rundown of the parts that you have to gather for this project:
IC1: LM386 amplifier

 
R1: 10-Ω resistor

 
C1: 10-μF electrolytic (polarised) capacitor

 
C2: 220-μF electrolytic (polarised) capacitor

 
C3: 0.047-μF ceramic (non-polarised) capacitor 
Speaker: 8-Ω, 0.5-watt speaker

 


          The better the microphone and speaker, the better the sound!


Making Music with a Melody Maker

  Ever wondered how those musical greetings cards work? They use circuits like this one, which is
the easiest circuit to build in this chapter and makes a great signal source for the 'Lil but Loud Amp in
the preceding section.
  Most of the work in this circuit is done by the M66T Simple Melody Generator, a range of CMOS
chips costing a little over a pound each. You can buy an M66T that plays songs ranging from ‘Rock-a-
Bye Baby' to the Star Trek theme.
  Take one of the M66T chips (the short but sweet Looney Tunes theme is a good one), and follow
the schematic in Figure 14-12 to connect its three pins to a speaker and a power supply (anything
between 1.2 and 3.6-volt; an AA battery works just fine).
  To make Looney Tunes louder, simply replace the speaker with the 'Lil but Loud Amp. Connect
Pin 1 of the M66T to Pin 3 of the LM386 power amplifier IC and Pin 2 of the M66T to Pin 2 of the
LM386.

Figure 14-12: Schematic of the melody maker.






  The parts for the melody maker are just as simple:
IC1: M66T CMOS device

 
Speaker: 8-Ω, 0.5-watt speaker

 


Building the Pocket Water Tester

  You may not be able to divine underground water with the water tester circuit in Figure 14-13, but
it can help you check for moisture in plants or find water trapped under wall-to-wall carpet.


Understanding how the water tester works
  The pocket water tester is deceptively simple and works under the principle of the electrical
conductivity of water (a principle that says you don't take a bath with a plugged-in toaster on your lap).
  The tester contains two small metal probes. When you place the probes in water, the conductivity
of the water completes a circuit. This completed circuit drives current to a transistor. When the
transistor turns on, it lights an LED. When the probes aren't in contact with water (or some other
conductive body), your tester has a broken circuit, and the LED doesn't light up.

Figure 14-13: Schematic of the pocket water tester.  You make the two probes with small nails. Place the nails about 1 centimetre apart on a piece of
plastic (but not wood or metal). The nails should be parallel to one another. File down the tips of the
nails to make sharp points. These points help you drive the probes deep into the material that you're
testing. For example, you can drive the probes into a carpet and pad to determine if water has seeped
under the carpeting after a pipe in the next room burst.
  You can adjust the sensitivity of the tester by turning potentiometer R2. Start with the
potentiometer in its middle position and turn one way or another, depending on the amount of moisture
or water in the object that you're testing.
  Power the water tester by using 5 to 12 volts. A 9-volt battery works well.


Gathering water tester parts
  Go out and get the following parts to build your water tester project:
Q1: 2N2222 NPN transistor

 
R1: 470-Ω resistor

 
R2: 50-kΩ potentiometer

 
LED: Light-emitting diode (any colour)

 
Probes: Use two small nails or jump leads with hardened ends

 


Generating Cool Lighting Effects

  If you're a fan of the Knight Rider television series from the 1980s, you'll remember the sequential
light chaser that the Kitt Car sported. You can build your own (light chaser setup, not car) in the garage.
  To build your own mesmerising lighting effects generator (see the schematic in Figure 14-14), you
need just two low-priced integrated circuits and a handful of inexpensive parts.
  The circuit has two sections:
The brains: A 555 timer IC makes up the first section, on the left of the schematic. You wire this
chip to function as an astable multivibrator (in fact, you make the same basic circuit as the LED flasher
that we describe in the earlier section ‘Building Brilliant, Blinking, Bright Lights'). The 555 produces a
series of pulses; turn potentiometer R1 to determine the speed of the pulses.

 
The body: The second section, on the left of the schematic, contains a 4017 CMOS decade counter
chip. The 4017 chip switches each of 10 LEDs on, in succession. The LEDs are switched on when the
4017 receives a pulse from the 555. You wire the 4017 so that it repeats the 1-to-10 sequence over andover again, for as long as the circuit has power.

 


Arranging the LEDs
  You can build the lighting effects generator on a solderless breadboard just to try it out. If you
plan to make it into a permanent circuit, give some thought to the arrangement of the ten LEDs. For
example, to achieve different lighting effects, you can try the following:
Put all the LEDs in a row, in sequence: The lights chase each other up (or down) over and over
again.

 
Put all the LEDs in a row, but alternate the sequence left and right: Wire the LEDs so that the
sequence starts from the outside and works its way inside.

 
Place the LEDs in a circle so that the LEDs sequence clockwise or counter-clockwise: This light
pattern looks like a roulette wheel.

 
  Arrange the LEDs in a heart shape: You can use this arrangement to make a unique Valentine's
Day present.

 

Figure 14-14: Schematic for a lighting effects generator.

























Chasing down the parts  To start chasing lights, you need the following parts:
IC1: 555 timer IC

 
IC2: 4017 CMOS decade counter IC

 
R1: 1-MΩ potentiometer

 
R2: 47-kΩ resistor

 
R3: 330-Ω resistor

 
C1: 0.47-μF disc (non-polarised) capacitor

 
C2: 0.1-μF disc (non-polarised) capacitor

 
LED1-10: Light-emitting diodes (any colour)

 


Making an Electronic Die

  Press the button switch on this circuit to ‘throw' a die; the dot patterns look like those on regular
dice that you roll physically. The 4017 CMOS decade counter cycles through the numbers one to ten,
just as you can see it do with the LEDs in the project in preceding section, ‘Generating Cool Lighting
Effects'. So how does the die generate the numbers one to six?
  This ingenious design uses clever pin combinations until the die resets on the sixth pin.
Meanwhile, Pin 12 is on during the count up to five but then switches off. It generates a new pattern in
the seven LEDs every time the 555 timer IC pulses.
  Here's how to make your electronic die:
        1. Arrange the LEDs: Follow the pattern shown in Figure 14-15 and connect them
    together as shown in Figure 14-16. This process may require you to cut the LED pins short. Be
    careful not to let pins touch and short-circuit the LED pattern.

 2. Build the circuit: Insert 4017, the diodes and then the rest of the components and jump
    leads. Double-check the circuit and apply the power supply.

 
Figure 14-15: Electronic die LED pattern.







Figure 14-16: Schematic for an electronic die.  Here's what you need for the electronic die:
IC1: 555 timer IC

 
IC2: 4017 CMOS decade counter IC

 
R1-3: 330-Ω resistors

 
D1-6: 1N4148 diodes

 
S1: push switch

 
C1: 0.01-μF ceramic (non-polarised) capacitor

 
C2: 0.1-μF ceramic (non-polarised) capacitor

 
LED1-7: Light-emitting diodes (red, 5-millimetre)

                                     Part IV

The Part of Tens


















    In this part . . .

  This book wouldn't be a bona fide For Dummies book without a handful

of top-ten lists. These chapters contain golden nuggets that, at the very least,

give you something more interesting to browse at the breakfast table than the

back of a cereal packet.

  We offer some top tips to help you find even more circuits to build, save

you time with your circuit design and provide other ideas to feed and foster

your habit if (as we expect!) you're now addicted to electronics. And, of

course,  don't  forget  our  ten  terrific  sources  for  electronic  parts,  tools  and

other supplies, which appear in Chapter 16.  Chapter 15: Ten Exciting Electronics


                                      Extras



  In This Chapter
Jump-starting your electronics experience with a project kit
Trying out extra equipment
Finding great deals on testing tools
  So you feel ready to get serious about electronics, and you're wondering what else exists, other
than basic test equipment, which can help you hone your skills and give you insight into what goes on
inside all those wires and components. In addition, you may be anxious to impress your friends and
neighbours by showing off cool gadgets you've made right now (not next week or next month) and to
arm yourself with some impressive tools that come with lots of indicator lights, adjustable knobs and
dazzling displays.
  If this desire is resonating with you, you're ready to explore some of the toolkits, specialised test
equipment and even the useful (gulp) software we describe in this chapter.


 You don't absolutely, positively need all these extras just to play around with some LEDs
and resistors. A basic multimeter, and maybe a logic probe, are all you need for that. But you may want
to consider the ready-made project kits we describe in the next section to jump-start your experience
with circuits and look into the additional test gear we list after you've gained some experience and want
to graduate to bigger and better projects.


Trying Out Ready-Made Electronics Kits

  If you want to make some really cool things happen with electronics, but don't want to start from
scratch (at least, not yet), you can purchase one of many different electronics hobby kits. These kits
include everything you need to build a functional circuit: all the electronic components, wire, circuit
board and detailed instructions for putting the circuit together. Some even include an explanation of
how the circuit works.
  You can find kits for light-sensitive alarms, simulated traffic signals, electronic combination locks,
adjustable timers, decorative light displays and much more. Many of the parts sources mentioned in
Chapter 16 provide ready-made kits at reasonable prices. You can practise your circuit-building and
analysis skills using these kits, and then move on to designing, building and testing your own circuits
from scratch.


Varying Your Voltage

  You can use a variable power supply instead of batteries to power circuits you build and test at
your workbench. A power supply produces a well-regulated (meaning very, very, very steady) voltage,
and most models offer voltage outputs ranging from 0 to 20 volts. The model in Figure 15-1 offers a
variable output range, controllable by a continuous dial, of about 2 to 20 volts, as well as preset outputs
of -5, +5 and +12 volts.

Figure 15-1: A variable power supply.  A power supply is characterised by its voltage range as well as its current capacity. The higher the
current rating of the power supply, the heavier the load it can power. Avoid choosing a power supply
with only a modest current output - say, less than one amp. You can't adequately drive all circuits with
lower currents. Instead, consider a power supply that delivers a minimum of two amps at +5 volts and
at least one amp at any other voltage.


Counting Up Those Megahertz

  You can use a frequency counter (or frequency meter) to help you determine whether or not your
AC circuit is operating properly. By touching the leads of this test device to a signal point in a circuit,
you can measure the frequency of that signal. For example, imagine you create an infrared transmitter
and the light from the transmitter is supposed to pulse at 40,000 cycles per second (also known as 40
kHz). With a frequency counter connected to the output of the circuit, you can verify that the circuit is
indeed producing pulses at 40 kHz - not 32 kHz, 110 kHz or some other Hz.
  You can use most models, such as the one in Figure 15-2, on digital, analogue and most radio
frequency (RF) circuits (such as radio transmitters and receivers). For most hobby work, you need only
a basic frequency counter.


 Newer multimeters also come with a frequency counter built-in.

Figure 15-2: A digital frequency counter measures the frequency of a signal.










 In digital circuits, signal voltages are limited to a range of zero up to about 12 volts, but in
analogue circuits, voltages can vary widely. Most frequency counters are designed to work with
analogue voltages ranging from a few hundred millivolts to 12 or more volts. Check the manual that
came with your frequency counter for specifics.
    Frequency counters display the frequency signal from 0 (zero) Hz to a maximum limit that's based
on the design of the counter. This limit usually goes well into the megahertz; some counters have an
upper limit of 25 to 50 MHz.
    Higher-priced frequency counter models come with or offer a prescaler as an option. A prescaler
is a device that extends the useful operating frequency of the frequency counter to much higher limits.Go for the prescaler feature if you're working with high-frequency radio gear or computers.


Generating All Kinds of Signals

  To test a circuit's operation, a helpful idea is to apply a known signal input to the circuit and
observe how the circuit behaves. You can use a function generator to create repeating signal
waveforms in a variety of shapes and sizes and apply the generated waveform to the input of the circuit
under test.
  Most function generators develop three kinds of waveforms: sine, triangle and square. You can
adjust the frequency of the waveforms from a low of 1 Hz to a high between 20 and 50 kHz. Some
function generators come with a built-in frequency counter so that you can accurately time the
waveforms you generate. You can also use a stand-alone frequency counter to fine-tune the output of
your function generator.
  Say that you're building a two-stage circuit containing both a transmitter and a receiver that work
using visible light (as opposed to radio frequency - RF - waves). To test the receiver stage accurately,
you set the function generator to produce a signal that simulates a transmitted signal with a frequency in
the visible light range. Then you attach the two leads from your function generator to the input of your
receiver circuit and test that your receiver circuit is indeed receiving the signal. When you get the
receiver done, you can build the transmitter, knowing, thanks to the function generator, that the receiver
is working properly.


Sweeping Frequencies Up and Down

  When you need to test the behaviour of a circuit in response to a whole slew of input frequencies,
you may need to use a sweep generator. A sweep generator is a type of function generator that
produces a signal with a frequency that continuously varies (sweeps) within a range around a specified
centre frequency.
  Sweep generators typically vary the frequency of the output waveform within pre-selected limits,
such as 100 Hz to 1 kHz or 1 kHz to 20 kHz, and allow you to control the sweep rate (how fast the
signal frequency changes). Not only does this sweep sound like E.T. calling home (connect a speaker to
the output of the sweep generator to hear this effect), but it also helps you identify frequency-related
problems in frequency sensitive circuits.
  A frequency sensitive circuit is designed to operate differently depending on the frequency of the
input signal. Filter circuits, resonant circuits and RF transmitter/receiver circuits are examples of
frequency sensitive circuits. If you're building a radio receiver circuit, for example, you need to ensure
that it operates properly over a range of frequencies. By applying a sweep signal to the input of your
circuit, you can observe (in one fell swoop) how your circuit behaves in response to a range of
frequencies. A sweep generator is useful in troubleshooting audio and video equipment, where altering
the input frequency can reveal faulty components.


 Some function generators also have a sweep feature, covering two functions with one
tool.


Taking the Pulse

  You can use an inexpensive handheld logic pulser to help you test and troubleshoot digital
circuits. This pen-like device, shown in Figure 15-3, injects a high or low digital pulse into a digital
circuit. (A pulse is simply a signal that alternates between high and low very rapidly, just like the
beating of your heart produces your pulse.) Many logic pulsers allow you to switch between injecting a
single pulse and injecting a train of pulses at a desired frequency.  You normally use a logic pulser in conjunction with a logic probe or an oscilloscope to trace the
effect of the injected pulse on your circuit. (You can read about both logic probes and oscilloscopes in
Chapter 12.) For instance, you may inject a pulse into the input pin of an integrated circuit (IC) while
measuring or probing the output of the IC to test whether the chip is operating properly. Logic pulsers
come in handy for tracking down circuit problems because you can inject pulses in various portions of
a circuit.

Figure 15-3: A logic pulser feeds a short signal burst or a train of bursts into a circuit.














 Most pulsers get their power from the circuit under test, and multiple power supplies are
available. You need to be careful which supply you use to power the logic pulser. For instance, if you're
testing a chip that's powered by five volts, you don't want to give it a pulse powered by a 12-volt supply
or you ruin the chip. Also, some circuits work with split (+, - and ground) power supplies, so make sure
that you connect the pulser's supply clips to the correct power points to avoid damage to the
components.


 Make sure that you don't apply a pulse to an IC pin that's designated as an output but not
as an input. Some ICs are sensitive to unloaded pulses at their output stages, and you can destroy the
chip by applying the pulse incorrectly. (An unloaded pulse produces current that has no way to drain
safely to another part of the circuit. If the current is applied to an output of an IC, for example, that
output can be damaged, because it's exposed to current that it's not meant to take.)


Analysing Your Logic

  To really get the low-down on what's happening in a digital circuit, you need a logic analyser,
which is like a souped-up oscilloscope (you can read about oscilloscopes in Chapter 12): it shows you
the waveforms of several inputs or outputs of a digital circuit at the same time. Many people who are
well versed in the black arts of electronics find this analyser much more useful than an oscilloscope for
troubleshooting digital circuits.
    Digital circuits often rely on the proper sequencing of signals throughout the circuit. Logic
analysers enable you to check a whole bunch of signals simultaneously. You can freeze-frame all the
signals in time and observe the relationships between the signals. Then you can see whether a signal is
missing or doesn't come at the right time.
  You can buy a stand-alone logic analyser or one that connects to your PC. Stand-alone units cost a
pretty penny, and they're fairly sophisticated. Therefore, consider getting a less expensive logicanalyser adapter that connects to the USB, serial or parallel ports of your computer. You need special
software that comes with the adapter. Most PC-based logic analysers handle between 8 and 16 digital
inputs at the same time.


Simulating with Software

  If you've got a complicated circuit design, or just want to understand more about how a particular
circuit behaves when powered up, you can use a circuit simulator. This is a software program that uses
computer-based models of circuit components to predict the behaviour of real circuits. You tell it what
components and power supplies you're using and how they should be wired up, and the software tells
you whatever you want to know about the operation of the circuit: the current through any component,
voltage drops across components, circuit response across various frequencies and so forth.
  Many circuit simulators are based on an industry-standard algorithm called SPICE (Simulation
Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis) and can be used for analogue, digital and mixed-signal
(both analogue and digital) circuits. You can find free circuit simulators online, but you should know
that they aren't guaranteed to be accurate, and they don't come with any technical support.
    Commercially available simulators can be expensive, but they include lots of value-added features
as well as technical support. For instance, Multisim from National Instruments includes the following
features (and more):
An extensive model library that contains software models of hundreds of specific manufacturer part
numbers, so your simulation shows you exactly how stray capacitance from the Acme Widget #2
affects your sensitive circuit, for example.

 
A broad array of waveform display tools, including software versions of every test instrument
described in this chapter (yes, your computer monitor can be made to look like an oscilloscope screen!).

 
A set of in-depth analysis tools that help you troubleshoot your circuit and understand exactly how it
behaves under various conditions, such as extreme temperature settings, or when every single
component in your circuit gangs up on you by varying significantly from its nominal value (this is
known as a worst-case condition).

 
A group of schematic capture tools that allow you to control where to place the circuit symbols for
your chosen circuit components on a grid displayed on your computer, how to wire-up components and
so forth, to build up a circuit diagram.

 


 You can download a free 30-day evaluation of Multisim and try it out yourself by visiting
the National Instruments site at www.ni.com/multisim. Alternatively, you could download a simulator
called Yenka. Produced by a British company called Crocodile Clips, Yenka is available at
www.yenka.com and is free for you to use at home. Another simulator developed in the UK is Circuit
Wizard. You can buy Circuit Wizard for £60 at Maplin stores, and download a trial version from the
New Wave Concepts website (at www.new-wave-concepts.com) before you buy.


Buying Testing Tool Deals

  We aren't going to kid you - electronics test equipment can cost you a lot of money. Much of what
you pay for is the accuracy of the device. Manufacturers strive for high accuracy to tout their products
to businesses or to meet necessary government regulations. If you're an electronics hobbyist working at
home, you don't really need all that extra precision. Usually you can get by with less precise - and lessexpensive - models. The low-end model of a family of test products is likely to be good enough for
most hobby applications, and assuming that you take good care of it, should last many years.
  Also, you can buy used or surplus equipment instead of buying everything brand new. In the case
of electronics, surplus seldom means used, as it can for other surplus components, such as motors or
mechanical devices that have been reconditioned. Surplus just means that the original maker or buyer
of the goods doesn't need the items any more: surplus is simply excess stock for resale.
  Used and surplus items can save you a load of cash, but this stuff doesn't always come with
instruction manuals. Sometimes you can buy the manual separately or find it online. Owners of popular
test gear often scan the pages of their old equipment manuals and post them online for the benefit of
others.
  The Appendix lists some useful sources for surplus equipment. Try checking out these sources,
too:
eBay and other online auction sites: Before you bid, check the listing carefully for the condition of
the equipment and the return policy if the equipment doesn't work as promised. Then check out other
auctions, including those that have already ended, to see what the going price is for similar products.
And you'd be wise to check the seller's reviews to get an idea of the integrity of the seller you're dealing
with.

 
  Electronics mail order and local surplus outlets: These shops are another good source for used test
equipment and are handy if you don't want to wait for an auction to finish or you prefer to know the
price up front. On the downside, surplus retailers may have limited selections - whatever components
the shop was able to purchase. Don't expect to find every value and size of resistor or capacitor, for
example.

 
  Whether you use an auction, mail order or a local shop, be sure that the test gear you buy actually
works. Have the seller guarantee that the equipment is in working order by giving you a warranty. You
may pay a little bit more, but if you don't make sure that it works and you're not so good at fixing
broken test gear, you may just be buying an expensive paper weight. If you're brand new to electronics,
have a more experienced friend or work associate check out the gear for you.


 Pass up sellers, especially on eBay or other auction sites, who aren't willing to guarantee
that their products are in working order. Plenty of sellers do take the time to check out their wares and
guarantee that the item isn't dead on arrival.
  When you're shopping around for parts, you may see the term ‘RoHS Compliant' next to some of
the items. This term (pronounced row-haas) stands for Restriction of Hazardous Substances and refers
to a recent European Union (EU) directive restricting the placement on the EU market of new electrical
and electronic devices that contain more than a certain level of lead and five other hazardous
substances. Companies producing consumer and industrial electronics need to worry about RoHS
compliance if they want to sell products in EU countries (and China, which has its own RoHS
specification). Everything you're likely to buy in the UK should be compliant by now anyway, so you
don't need to worry about it.


Boxing Your Tricks - With Knobs On

    Having worked out what you want to build, drawn a schematic and built a prototype circuit on a
breadboard, you naturally want your creation to look the part. Your gizmo does everything you want it
to, but the bits and pieces sticking out make it look vulnerable to bumps, knocks and cups of coffee
spilt in the wrong direction. You're ready to make the circuit permanent on a printed circuit board, but
if you're going to the trouble of all that soldering you want to put it in a nice, neat-looking box, perhapswith some controls on the front, too. What you need is the right enclosure.
  An enclosure is just the electronics industry term for a fancy box. Enclosures come in just about
any shape or size you can imagine; you just need to find the right one for your project. You can choose
from miniature ones, big ones, wide ones, narrow ones, waterproof ones and enclosures designed for
keypads and handheld scanners. You can also buy enclosures made of metals, such as aluminium, or
plastics, such as the very tough ABS.
  To give your gizmo some pizzazz, why not add some knobs and switches on the front? You can
choose from big ones, small ones, round ones, waterproof ones, key-operated ones and toggles. So find
your enclosure, select the best-looking knobs, switches or lights, and start building your own unique
gizmo. OK, so it may not be slick enough to beat the latest iPod in any design awards, but if you're
going to all that trouble to build a fully functioning gadget and you need a cover on it for protection
anyway, you might as well get the finishing touches right.
  You can find a huge variety of enclosures, knobs, switches and the like for sale at the component
suppliers we list in Chapter 16.    Chapter 16: Ten Great Sources for


                          Electronics Parts



  In This Chapter
Parts sources from the UK
Buying from US suppliers
  If you're looking for some excellent sources for your electronic parts, this chapter gives you some
perennial favourites, both inside and outside the UK. This list is by no means exhaustive; you can find
literally thousands of outlets for new and used electronics. But the sources we list here are among the
more established in the field, and all have websites for online ordering (some also offer a print
catalogue).


Buying British: Suppliers within the UK

  Check out these suppliers if you're shopping within the UK. If you live in a different country, you
can still consider buying from these outlets because most of them ship worldwide. Remember that
shipping costs may be higher, and you may have to pay an import duty, depending on your country's
regulations. So it's a good idea to look for local suppliers in your own country first.


Maplin
    www.maplin.co.uk
  These electronics specialist's shops are a familiar sight on the high streets and shopping centres of
towns and cities all over Britain. You can buy components at the special components counters that you
can usually find towards the back of larger shops. They carry a good stock, but don't be surprised if a
store has sold out of your item or has just nine of the LEDs left when you need ten.
  Don't be afraid to ask the staff technical questions - someone working in the shop always seems to
be willing and able to offer answers when you need them. You can order components online too, and
you can even pay by Paypal, the small-payments service that's become popular on eBay. Delivery costs
a few pounds for small orders, but you don't have to spend a lot of money on one order to get free
delivery.


RS Components
    rswww.com
  RS started life in 1937 as Radiospares Limited. Today the shop is well known in the electronics
industry as well as among hobbyists. Posties should be glad for the invention of the CD-ROM and the
day when the infamously huge RS catalogue went digital, which gives you some idea of the vast range
of components that this distributor can supply. It offers around 160,000 product lines for same-day
dispatch and access to another 100,000.


Farnell
    www.farnell.co.uk
  Farnell is based in the UK but supports shoppers from countries worldwide (you can see which
countries at a glance by going to the international page at www.farnell.com). It stocks around 250,000
products. You can order through Farnell's website but a handling charge applies to small orders.RSH Electronics
    www.rshelectronics.co.uk/
    Although RSH stocks a smaller range than the giant distributors, it does have one of the lowest
delivery charges of just a few pounds with no minimum order and delivers free for orders of over £30
or so. Overseas postage is only £4 too. As well as around 1,500 components, it also supplies the
Electronics Club electronic project kits.


Bitsbox
    www.bitsbox.co.uk
  Bitsbox delivers within the UK for just £1.50 per order and just a pound or two more to other
countries. Order on the fun and friendly website, which accepts Paypal as well as card payments. Lots
of special offers are always available online, including a pound shop and bargain prices for parts such
as the timer chips we use for projects in Chapter 14.


ESR Electronic Components
    www.esr.co.uk
  This small firm in the North-East of England supplies components to hobbyists as well as schools
and colleges. You can order from them by post, phone (at UK local rate), email or online using a credit
card. You can then collect your order from their shop in Tyne and Wear or pay for delivery, which
costs just a couple of pounds for orders weighing up to 1 kilogram, just over a fiver for orders up to 5
kilograms or free if you spend over £100.


Ordering from across the Pond

  For more specialist components, you may have to turn to America, the original heartland of the
electronics industry. Here are some of the largest suppliers in the USA that also ship to Europe, but
ordering probably costs you more than using a UK supplier.


Digikey
    www.digikey.com
  If you want a part, Digikey probably has it, carrying thousands upon thousands of items, which it
ships all over the world from Minnesota, USA. Go to the main home page and click on Change Country
in the top right corner to shop in UK sterling. The firm's online ordering system includes detailed
product information, price, available stock levels and even links to product datasheets. The site offers a
handy search engine so that you can quickly locate what you're looking for, as well as an online
interactive catalogue (with magnification capabilities that you'll certainly need). Digikey will also send
a free printed catalogue to the UK, although the text is tiny to fit everything in.


All Electronics
    www.allelectronics.com
  All Electronics runs a shop in the Los Angeles area and sends mail orders worldwide. Most of its
stock is new surplus (see the Appendix for more sources of surplus goods), meaning that the
merchandise is brand new but was overstocked. All Electronics has a printed catalogue, which is also
available in pdf format on its website. Stock changes frequently, and the latest updates are available
only on the website. Be sure to check out the Web Only items.


B.G. Micro
    www.bgmicro.com  Selling primarily surplus odds and ends, B.G. Micro has great prices and terrific customer service.
Stock tends to come and go quickly, so if you see something you especially like, be sure to order it
now!


Mouser Electronics
    www.mouser.com
    Similar to Digikey, Mouser is a stocking distributor with tens of thousands of parts on hand. If you
can't find a part at Mouser, it probably doesn't exist. Mouser carries over 165,000 resistors alone, listed
under Passive Components. You can order from its online store or its humungous print catalogue.
Mouser now has a UK office serving parts of Europe and South Africa.          Appendix: Internet Resources

  In this Appendix, we suggest a selection of interesting and useful Internet resources for all things
electronic. Some of them are run by businesses for profit and others by individuals or groups of
individuals for nothing but the fame and glory! Loads of good sites are out there, some of which come
and go as websites do, but try looking for the latest and most popular ones with search engines such as
Google or Yahoo!
  Here we introduce you to what we consider to be some of the best websites at the time of writing,
to give you a head start.


Finding Guides and Advice

  All the websites in this section contain worthwhile information. Browse through them to decide
which ones meet your needs. We give the Electronics Club and the North Carolina State University
Electronics Tutorial the highest marks, but all these sites have cool and useful information:
All About Circuits (www.allaboutcircuits.com): This site contains a series of online books on
electronics. They haven't yet posted some sections, but the material they do have is well produced.

 
AOGFB (http://library.thinkquest.org/16497/home/index.html): AOGFB stands for An Online Guide
for Beginners, which is just what it provides. The website contains quick guides on basic principles and
techniques, such as soldering, and half a dozen beginner circuits to get you going.

 
The Electronics Club (www.kpsec.freeuk.com): This site has a lot of good advice for newcomers to
electronics projects, including a tutorial on how to read a circuit diagram, explanations of components
and a list of circuit symbols. Also known as the Kelsey Park School Electronics Club, which explains
the kpsec part of the web address.

 
  Electronics Hobbyist (www.amasci.com/amateur/elehob.html): This American site is for really
keen hobbyists, and offers some interesting articles, news snippets, magazine links and links to
discussion forums and online user groups. You can even use their links to ‘geek dating sites'!

 
  Graham Knott's Website (http://homepage.ntlworld.com/g.knott/): Enjoy exploring this site that
Graham Knott, an electronics teacher in Cambridge, organised to make finding information on both
beginning and intermediate electronics topics simple.

 
The Institution of Engineering and Technology (www.theiet.org/education): Browse issues of
E&T Education magazine to find some fun and amazing ideas for circuits - one even measures the
speed of light. Or just print out the poster of UK schematic symbols to put up next to your workbench.

 
The North Carolina State University Electronics Tutorial
      (www.courses.ncsu.edu:8020/ece480/common/htdocs): This site contains good explanations of various
electronics topics. Many of the illustrations are animated, which makes understanding the concepts
easier.

 
  Williamson Labs Electronics Tutorial (www.williamson-labs.com/home.htm): This site provides
explanations of basic electronics concepts with good illustrations and fun animations.

 Working Things Out with Calculators

  You can perform calculations on the sites in this section without having to look up equations or
pick up a handheld calculator. Choose a website that covers the particular equation that you want to
use:
  Bowden's Hobby Circuits (www.bowdenshobbycircuits.info/): The calculators on this site include
the standard calculations for Ohm's Law, RC time constants and resistor colour-code conversions. You
can also find calculators for functions that you don't find on most other sites, such as a voltage divider
calculator.

 
The Electronics Calculator Website (www.cvs1.uklinux.net/calculators/index.html): Use tools on
this site to perform calculations for Ohm's Law, RC time constants and a few other handy equations.

 
  Electronics Converters and Calculators (www.csgnetwork.com/electronicsconverters.html): This
site has calculators that perform Ohm's Law calculations, parallel resistance calculations and resistor
colour-code conversions, among other operations.

 


Surfing for Circuits

  If you're hungry for even more circuits to build, they're just a mouse click away! Thanks to the
magic of the Internet, you can find hundreds - no, make that thousands - of electronic circuits, from
basic light and sound demonstrators to advanced projects for your car or boat. Here are a few of the
best:
  Bowden's Hobby Circuits (www.bowdenshobbycircuits.info/): This personal site from hobbyist
Bill Bowden gives you the why, not just the how. Here you find both circuit descriptions and
alternative design suggestions.

 
Discover Circuits (www.discovercircuits.com): This site has thousands of electronic circuits,
categorised and cross-referenced, with links back to the original designer's pages, where you can find
schematics and so on. The site also has a problem-solving forum.

 
The Electronics Club (www.kpsec.freeuk.com/proj.htm): You can find some fun projects for
beginners on this website. For each project, you see an explanation of how it works and a circuit layout
in addition to a schematic.

 
  Electronics Project Design (www.electronics-project-design.com): This well-designed site has
concise descriptions and schematics for more cool circuits arranged under subject headings such as
amplifiers, timers, motion control and surveillance.

 


Asking Questions in Discussion Forums

  Use the forums on the websites in this section to get answers to your questions about projects or
general electronics. Every discussion area has its own style, so spend a little time on each site to decide
which forum is right for you. Post your question, and others who've already worked through the same
problem may provide the answer that you need.
  We found the discussion groups on the following sites especially interesting and helpful:
All About Circuits Forum (http://forum.allaboutcircuits.com/): Here you can find both a general
electronics discussion forum and a forum to ask for help from other forum members on any stickyprojects.

 
EDA Board (www.edaboard.com): Explore these active discussions about problems with projects
and general electronics, along with several more specialised forums, such as one on PCB design.

 
  Electronics Lab (www.electronics-lab.com/forum/index.php): Another good site with discussions
on projects, circuits and general electronics. Check out the Project Q/A section, where readers post
questions and get answers on the many projects provided in the projects area of the site.

 
  Electronics Zone Discussion (www.electronic-circuits-diagrams.com/forum/): This site has
extremely active discussions on electronic circuits and projects.

 


 Be sure to take the answers that you get on forums with a pinch of salt. Think through the
advice that you get before you build a project based solely on some well-meaning stranger's word.


Getting Things Surplus

  Looking for some good deals? Try buying surplus or second-hand. Because surplus merchandise
comes and goes, you have to be sharp to catch the good stuff - but if you're lucky, you can pick up
some bargains.
  To check out some suppliers and search their online catalogues, start by typing ‘surplus electronic
components' into a search engine such as Google or Yahoo! Some suppliers are more geared up to
manufacturers that assemble finished circuit boards for industry than hobbyists looking for a few fun
parts, but here are a few to start you off:
Greenweld (www.greenweld.co.uk): Surplus electronic gadgets and tools as well as some parts.

 
  Surplectronics (www.surplectronics.co.uk): A good range of useful and fun components at
knockdown prices. Postage is under £4 or free if you spend over a certain amount. Usefully, you can
pay by Paypal, the system used by millions of people on eBay.

 
UES&S (www.surplus-electronics.co.uk): Used Equipment Surplus & Storage offers second-hand
equipment for your workbench, including multimeters and oscilloscopes. However, you can't pay
online; you have to send a personal cheque or have a credit card ready when you call by phone.

 


 In addition to these sources, also make sure that you check out our top-ten list of online
electronics outlets in Chapter 16.