                      INTRODUCTORY REAL

                                  ANALYSIS






                        A. N. KOLMOGOROV

                                S. V. FOMIN



                              Revised English Edition

                              Translated and Edited by


                          Richard A. Silverman







                DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC.

                                    NEW YORK        Copyright © 1970 by Richard A. Silverman.
        All rights reserved.



        This Dover edition, first published in 1975, is an unabridged, slightly corrected
      republication of the work originally published by Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs,
    N.J., in 1970.




      International Standard Book Number: 0-486-61226-0
      Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 74-18669

                    Manufactured in the United States by Courier Corporation
                                        61226021
                                  www.doverpublications.com                                EDITOR’S PREFACE




  The present course is a freely revised and restyled version of pp. 1–380

of the second edition of the Russian original (Moscow, 1968). The result is a

comprehensive,  but  manageably  proportioned  and  entirely  elementary

introduction to real and functional analysis, from a consistently modern point

of view.

  As in the other volumes of this series, I have not hesitated to make a

number of pedagogical and mathematical improvements that occurred to me

in the course of the translation. In particular, more theorems, examples and

remarks have been explicitly identified as such. Each of the 37 sections has

been equipped with a problem set, leading to a total of some 350 problems.

Most of the problem material can be found in one form or another in the

Russian original (either explicitly, or in the guise of side comments, or even

as text deemed to be of an ancillary character), but quite a few extra problems

have been introduced. In the same spirit of free adaptation, the bibliography

has  been  modified  to  meet  the  needs  of  those  who  cannot  easily  read

languages  other  than  English.  These  changes  have  not  been  made

capriciously, but with a view to enhancing the readability and “learnability”

of the course.

  A theorem or problem cited without giving a page number always refers

to the corresponding theorem or problem in the section where the reference is

made. The same applies to examples cited in a given subsection.

                                                                                    R. A. S.                                      CONTENTS





1 SET THEORY


      1.Sets and Functions

            1.1.Basic definitions

            1.2.Operations on sets

            1.3.Functions and mappings. Images and preimages

              1.4.Decomposition of a set into classes. Equivalence relations

      2.Equivalence of Sets. The Power of a Set

            2.1.Finite and infinite sets

            2.2.Countable sets

            2.3.Equivalence of sets

            2.4.Uncountability of the real numbers

            2.5.The power of a set

            2.6.The Cantor-Bernstein theorem

      3.Ordered Sets and Ordinal Numbers

            3.1.Partially ordered sets

              3.2.Order-preserving mappings. Isomorphisms

            3.3.Ordered sets. Order types

            3.4.Ordered sums and products of ordered sets

              3.5.Well-ordered sets. Ordinal numbers

            3.6.Comparison of ordinal numbers

            3.7.The well-ordering theorem, the axiom of choice and

                  equivalent assertions

            3.8.Transfinite induction

            3.9.Historical remarks

      4.Systems of Sets

            4.1.Rings of sets

              4.2.Semirings of sets

            4.3.The ring generated by a semiring

            4.4.Borel algebras2 METRIC SPACES


      5.Basic Concepts

            5.1.Definitions and examples

            5.2.Continuous mappings and homeomorphisms. Isometric

                  spaces

      6.Convergence. Open and Closed Sets

            6.1.Closure of a set. Limit points

            6.2.Convergence and limits

            6.3.Dense subsets. Separable spaces

            6.4.Closed sets

            6.5.Open sets

            6.6.Open and closed sets on the real line

        7.Complete Metric Spaces

            7.1.Definitions and examples

            7.2.The nested sphere theorem

            7.3.Baire’s theorem

            7.4.Completion of a metric space

        8.Contraction Mappings

            8.1.Definition of a contraction mapping. The fixed point theorem

            8.2.Contraction mappings and differential equations

            8.3.Contraction mappings and integral equations


3 TOPOLOGICAL SPACES


      9.Basic Concepts

            9.1.Definitions and examples

            9.2.Comparison of topologies

            9.3.Bases. Axioms of countability

            9.4.Convergent sequences in a topological space

            9.5.Axioms of separation

            9.6.Continuous mappings. Homeomorphisms

            9.7.Various ways of specifying topologies. Metrizability

      10.Compactness

            10.1.Compact topological spaces

          10.2.Continuous mappings of compact spaces            10.3.Countable compactness

            10.4.Relatively compact subsets

      11.Compactness in Metric Spaces

          11.1.Total boundedness

            11.2.Compactness and total boundedness

            11.3.Relatively compact subsets of a metric space

            11.4.Arzelà’s theorem

          11.5.Peano’s theorem

      12.Real Functions on Metric and Topological Spaces

          12.1.Continuous and uniformly continuous functions and

                  functionals

          12.2.Continuous and semicontinuous functions on compact spaces

          12.3.Continuous curves in metric spaces


4 LINEAR SPACES


      13.Basic Concepts

            13.1.Definitions and examples

          13.2.Linear dependence

            13.3.Subspaces

          13.4.Factor spaces

          13.5.Linear functionals

          13.6.The null space of a functional. Hyperplanes

      14.Convex Sets and Functionals. The Hahn-Banach Theorem

          14.1.Convex sets and bodies

          14.2.Convex functionals

          14.3.The Minkowski functional

          14.4.The Hahn-Banach theorem

            14.5.Separation of convex sets in a linear space

      15.Normed Linear Spaces

            15.1.Definitions and examples

            15.2.Subspaces of a normed linear space

      16.Euclidean Spaces

          16.1.Scalar products. Orthogonality and bases

            16.2.Examples

            16.3.Existence of an orthogonal basis. Orthogonalization

          16.4.Bessel’s inequality. Closed orthogonal systems            16.5.Complete Euclidean spaces. The Riesz-Fischer theorem

            16.6.Hilbert space. The isomorphism theorem

            16.7.Subspaces. Orthogonal complements and direct sums

            16.8.Characterization of Euclidean spaces

            16.9.Complex Euclidean spaces

      17.Topological Linear Spaces

            17.1.Definitions and examples

            17.2.Historical remarks


5 LINEAR FUNCTIONALS


      18.Continuous Linear Functionals

          18.1.Continuous linear functionals on a topological linear space

          18.2.Continuous linear functionals on a normed linear space

          18.3.The Hahn-Banach theorem for a normed linear space

    19.The Conjugate Space

            19.1.Definition of the conjugate space

          19.2.The conjugate space of a normed linear space

          19.3.The strong topology in the conjugate space

          19.4.The second conjugate space

    20.The Weak Topology and Weak Convergence

          20.1.The weak topology in a topological linear space

          20.2.Weak convergence

          20.3.The weak topology and weak convergence in a conjugate

                  space

          20.4.The weak* topology

      21.Generalized Functions

            21.1.Preliminary remarks

          21.2.The test space and test functions. Generalized functions

            21.3.Operations on generalized functions

          21.4.Differential equations and generalized functions

          21.5.Further developments


6 LINEAR OPERATORS


      22.Basic Concepts            22.1.Definitions and examples

            22.2.Continuity and boundedness

          22.3.Sums and products of operators

      23.Inverse and Adjoint Operators

          23.1.The inverse operator. Invertibility

          23.2.The adjoint operator

          23.3.The adjoint operator in Hilbert space. Self-adjoint operators

          23.4.The spectrum of an operator. The resolvent

      24.Completely Continuous Operators

            24.1.Definitions and examples

          24.2.Basic properties of completely continuous operators

            24.3.Completely continuous operators in Hilbert space


7 MEASURE


      25.Measure in the Plane

            25.1.Measure of elementary sets

          25.2.Lebesgue measure of plane sets

      26.General Measure Theory

            26.1.Measure on a semiring

            26.2.Countably additive measures

      27.Extensions of Measures


8 INTEGRATION


      28.Measurable Functions

          28.1.Basic properties of measurable functions

            28.2.Simple functions. Algebraic operations on measurable

                  functions

          28.3.Equivalent functions

            28.4.Convergence almost everywhere

            28.5.Egorov’s theorem

    29.The Lebesgue Integral

            29.1.Definition and basic properties of the Lebesgue integral

          29.2.Some key theorems

      30.Further Properties of the Lebesgue Integral          30.1.Passage to the limit in Lebesgue integrals

          30.2.The Lebesgue integral over a set of infinite measure

          30.3.The Lebesgue integral vs. the Riemann integral


9 DIFFERENTIATION


      31.Differentiation of the Indefinite Lebesgue Integral

          31.1.Basic properties of monotonic functions

            31.2.Differentiation of a monotonic function

            31.3.Differentiation of an integral with respect to its upper limit

      32.Functions of Bounded Variation

      33.Reconstruction of a Function from Its Derivative

            33.1.Statement of the problem

            33.2.Absolutely continuous functions

          33.3.The Lebesgue decomposition

    34.The Lebesgue Integral as a Set Function

          34.1.Charges. The Hahn and Jordan decompositions

            34.2.Classification of charges. The Radon-Nikodým theorem


10 MORE ON INTEGRATION


      35.Product Measures. Fubini’s Theorem

          35.1.Direct products of sets and measures

          35.2.Evaluation of a product measure

          35.3.Fubini’s theorem

    36.The Stieltjes Integral

            36.1.Stieltjes measures

          36.2.The Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral

            36.3.Applications to probability theory

          36.4.The Riemann-Stieltjes integral

          36.5.Helly’s theorems

          36.6.The Riesz representation theorem

    37.The Spaces L and L
                          12

            37.1.Definition and basic properties of L
                                                            1

            37.2.Definition and basic properties of L
                                                            2        BIBLIOGRAPHY


      INDEX                                          1



                                SET THEORY









1. Sets and Functions


    1.1. Basic definitions. Mathematics habitually deals with “sets” made up

of “elements” of various kinds, e.g., the set of faces of a polyhedron, the set

of points on a line, the set of all positive integers, and so on. Because of their

generality, it is hard to define these concepts in a way that does more than

merely replace the word “set” by some equivalent term like “class,” “family,”

“collection,”  etc.  and  the  word  “element”  by  some  equivalent  term  like

“member.” We will adopt a “naive” point of view and regard the notions of a

set and the elements of a set as primitive and well-understood.

  The set concept plays a key role in modern mathematics. This is partly

due to the fact that set theory, originally developed towards the end of the

nineteenth century, has by now become an extensive subject in its own right.

More important, however, is the great influence which set theory has exerted

and continues to exert on mathematical thought as a whole. In this chapter,

we introduce the basic set-theoretic notions and notation to be used in the rest

of the book.

    Sets will be denoted by capital letters like A, B, . . ., and elements of sets

by small letters like a, b, . . . . The set with elements a, b, c, . . . is often

denoted by {a, b, c, . . .}, i.e., by writing the elements of the set between

curly brackets. For example, {1} is the set whose only member is 1, while {1,

2, . . ., n, . . .} is the set of all positive integers. The statement “the element a

belongs to the set A” is written symbolically as a ∈ A, while a ∉ A means that“the element a does not belong to the set A.” If every element of a set A also

belongs to a set B, we say that A is a subset of the set B and write A ⊂ B or B

⊃ A (also read as “A is contained in B” or “B contains A”). For example, the

set of all even numbers is a subset of the set of all real numbers. We say that

two sets A and B are equal and write A = B if A and B consist of precisely the

same elements. Note that A = B if and only if A ⊃ B and B ⊃ A, i.e., if and

only if every element of A is an element of B and every element of B is an

element of A. If A ⊂ B but A ≠ B, we call A a proper subset of B.

    Sometimes it is not known in advance whether or not a certain set (for

example, the set of roots of a given equation) contains any elements at all.

Thus it is convenient to introduce the concept of the empty set, i.e., the set

containing no elements at all. This set will be denoted by the symbol ∅. The

set ∅ is clearly a subset of every set (why?).












                                        FIGURE 1












                                        FIGURE 2

    1.2. Operations on sets. Let A and B be any two sets. Then by the sum or

union of A and B, denoted by A ∪ B, is meant the set consisting of all

elements which belong to at least one of the sets A and B (see Figure 1). More

generally, by the sum or union of an arbitrary number (finite or infinite) ofsets A (indexed by some parameter α), we mean the set, denoted by
    α




of all elements belonging to at least one of the sets A.
                                                            α

  By the intersection A ∩ B of two given sets A and B, we mean the set

consisting of all elements which belong to both A and B (see Figure 2). For

example, the intersection of the set of all even numbers and the set of all

integers  divisible  by  3  is  the  set  of  all  integers  divisible  by  6.  By  the

intersection of an arbitrary number (finite or infinite) of sets A, we mean the
                                                                          α

set, denoted by




of all elements belonging to every one of the sets A. Two sets A and B are
                                                              α

said to be disjoint if A ∩ B = ∅, i.e., if they have no elements in common.

More generally, let  be a family of sets such that A ∩ B = ∅ for every pair of

sets A, B in . Then the sets in  are said to be pairwise disjoint.

  It  is  an  immediate  consequence  of  the  above  definitions  that  the

operations ∪ and ∩ are commutative and associative, i.e., that






Moreover, the operations ∪ and ∩ obey the following distributive laws:






For example, suppose x ∈ (A ∪ B) ∩ C, so that x belongs to the left-hand                                        FIGURE 3












                                        FIGURE 4

side of (1). Then x belongs to both C and A ∪ B, i.e., x belongs to both C and

at least one of the sets A and B. But then x belongs to at least one of the sets A

∩ C and B ∩ C, i.e., x ∈ (A ∩ C) ∪ (B ∩ C), so that x belongs to the right-

hand side of (1). Conversely, suppose x ∈ (A ∩ C) ∪ (B ∩ C). Then x

belongs to at least one of the two sets A ∩ C and B ∩ C. It follows that x

belongs to both C and at least one of the two sets A and B, i.e., x ∈ C and x

∈ A ∪ B or equivalently x ∈ (A ∪ B) ∩ C. This proves (1), and (2) is

proved similarly.

  By the difference A − B between two sets A and B (in that order), we

mean the set of all elements of A which do not belong to B (see Figure 3).

Note that it is not assumed that A ⊃ B. It is sometimes convenient (e.g., in

measure theory) to consider the symmetric difference of two sets A and B,

denoted by A  B and defined as the union of the two differences A − B and

B − A (see Figure 4):


                            A Δ B = (A − B) ∪ (B − A).


  We will often be concerned later with various sets which are all subsetsof some underlying basic set R, for example, various sets of points on the real

line. In this case, given a set A, the difference R − A is called the complement

of A, denoted by CA.

  An  important  role  is  played  in  set  theory  and  its  applications  by  the

following “duality principle”:







In  words,  the  complement  of  a  union  equals  the  intersection  of  the

complements, and the complement of an intersection equals the union of the

complements. According to the duality principle, any theorem involving a

family  of  subsets  of  a  fixed  set R  can  be  converted automatically  into

another, “dual” theorem by replacing all subsets by their complements, all

unions by intersections and all intersections by unions. To prove (3), suppose




Then x does not belong to the union




i.e., x does not belong to any of the sets A. It follows that x belongs to each
                                                α

of the complements R − A, and hence
                              α




Conversely, suppose (7) holds, so that x belongs to every set R − A. Then x
                                                                                α

does not belong to any of the sets A, i.e., x does not belong to the union (6),
                                          α

or equivalently (5) holds. This proves (3), and (4) is proved similarly (give

the details).


  Remark. The designation “symmetric difference” for the set A  B is not

too apt, since A  B has much in common with the sum A ∪ B. In fact, in A

∪ B the two statements “x belongs to A” and “x belongs to B” are joined bythe conjunction “or” used in the “either . . . or . . . or both . . .” sense, while in

A  B the same two statements are joined by “or” used in the ordinary “either

. . . or . . .” sense (as in “to be or not to be”). In other words, x belongs to A ∪

B if and only if x belongs to either A or B or both, while x belongs to A  B if

and only if x belongs to either A or B but not both. The set A  B can be

regarded as a kind of “modulo-two sum” of the sets A and B, i.e., a sum of the

sets A and B in which elements are dropped if they are counted twice (once in

A and once in B).


  1.3.  Functions  and  mappings.  Images  and  preimages.  A  rule

associating a unique real number y = f(x) with each element of a set of real

numbers X is said to define a (real) function f on X. The set X is called the

domain (of definition) of f, and the set Y of all numbers f(x) such that x ∈ X is

called the range of f.

    More generally, let M and N be two arbitrary sets. Then a rule associating

a unique element b = f(a) ∈ N with each element a ∈ M is again said to

define a function f on M (or a function f with domain M). In this more general

context, f is usually called a mapping of M into N. By the same token, f is said

to map M into N (and a into b).

  If a is an element of M, the corresponding element b = f(a) is called the

image of a (under the mapping f). Every element of M with a given element b

∈ N as its image is called a preimage of b. Note that in general b may have

several preimages. Moreover, N may contain elements with no preimages at

                                                                      −1
all. If b has a unique preimage, we denote this preimage by f(b).

  If A is a subset of M, the set of all elements f(a) ∈ N such that b = f(a) is

called the image of A, denoted by f(A). The set of all elements of M whose

images belong to a given set B ⊂ N is called the preimage of B, denoted by f

−1−1
(B). If no element of B has a preimage, then f(B) = ∅. A function f is said

                                                                                          1
to map M into N if f (M) ⊂ N, as is always the case, and onto N if f(M) = N.

Thus every “onto mapping” is an “into mapping,” but not conversely.

    Suppose f maps M onto N. Then f is said to be one-to-one if each element

                                    −1
b ∈ N has a unique preimage f(b). In this case, f is said to establish a one-

                                                                        −1
to-one correspondence between M and N, and the mapping f associating f

−1
(b) with each b ∈ N is called the inverse of f.


  THEOREM 1. The preimage of the union of two sets is the union of the

preimages of the sets:                            −1−1−1
                            f(A ∪ B) = f(A) ∪ f B.

                      −1
    Proof. If x ∈ f(A ∪ B), then f(x) ∈ A ∪ B, so that f(x) belongs to at

least one of the sets A and B. But then x belongs to at least one of the sets f

−1−1−1−1
(A) and f(B), i.e., x ∈ f(A ∪ f (B).

                            −1
    Conversely, if x ∈ f (A ∩ B), then x belongs to at least one of the sets f

−1−1
(A) and f(B). Therefore f(x) belongs to at least one of the sets A and B,

                                      −12
i.e., f(x) ∈ A ∪ B. But then x ∈ f (A ∪ B). 


  THEOREM 2. The preimage of the intersection of two sets is the intersection

of the preimages of the sets:

                            −1−1−1
                            f (A ∩ B) = f(A) ∩ f(B)

                            −1
    Proof. If, then x ∈ f(A ∩ B), then f(x) ∈ A ∩ B, so that f(x) ∈ A and

                            −1−1−1−1
f(x) ∈ B. But then x ∈ f(A) and x ∈ f(B), i.e., x ∈ f(A) ∩ f(B).

                              −1−1−1−1
    Conversely, if x ∈ f(A) ∩ f(B), then x ∈ f(A) and x ∈ f(B).

                                                                                  −1
Therefore f(x) ∈ A and f(x) ∈ B, i.e., f(x) ∈ A ∩ B. But then x ∈ f (A ∩

B). 


  THEOREM 3. The image of the union of two sets equals the union of the

images of the sets:


                              f(A ∪ B) = f(A) ∩ f(B).


    Proof. If y ∈ f(A ∪ B), then y = f(x) where x belongs to at least one of

the sets A and B. Therefore y = f(x) belongs to at least one of the sets f(A) and

f(B), i.e., y ∈ f(A) ∪ f(B).

    Conversely, if y ∈ f(A) ∪ f(B), then y = f(x) where x belongs to at least

one of the sets A and B, i.e., x ∈ A ∪ B and hence y = f(x) ∈ f(A ∪ B). 


  Remark 1. Surprisingly enough, the image of the intersection of two sets

does  not  necessarily  equal  the  intersection  of  the  images  of  the  sets.  For

example,  suppose  the  mapping f  projects  the xy-plane  onto  the x-axis,

carrying the point (x, y) into the (x, 0). Then the segments 0  x  1, y = 0

and 0  x  1, y = 1 do not intersect, although their images coincide.


  Remark 2. Theorems 1–3 continue to hold for unions and intersections ofan arbitrary number (finite or infinite) of sets A:
                                                      α











  1.4.  Decomposition  of  a  set  into  classes.  Equivalence  relations.

Decompositions  of  a  given  set  into  pairwise  disjoint  subsets  play  an

important  role  in  a  great  variety  of  problems.  For  example,  the  plane

(regarded as a point set) can be decomposed into lines parallel to the x-axis,

three-dimensional  space  can  be  decomposed  into  concentric  spheres,  the

inhabitants of a given city can be decomposed into different age groups, and

so on. Any such representation of a given set M as the union of a family of

pairwise disjoint subsets of M is called a decomposition or partition of M into

classes.

  A decomposition is usually made on the basis of some criterion, allowing

us to assign the elements of M to one class or another. For example, the set of

all  triangles  in  the  plane  can  be  decomposed  into  classes  of  congruent

triangles or into classes of triangles of equal area, the set of all functions of x

can be decomposed into classes of functions all taking the same value at a

given point x, and so on. Despite the great variety of such criteria, they are

not completely arbitrary. For example, it is obviously impossible to partition

all real numbers into classes by assigning the number b to the same class as

the number a if and only if b > a. In fact, if b > a, b must be assigned to the

same class as a, but then a cannot be assigned to the same class as b, since a

< b. Moreover, since a is not greater than itself, a cannot even be assigned to

the class containing itself! As another example, it is impossible to partition

the points of the plane into classes by assigning two points to the same class

if and only if the distance between them is less than 1. In fact, if the distance

between a and b is less than 1 and if the distance between b and c is less than

1, it does not follow that the distance between a and c is less than 1. Thus, by

assigning a to the same class as b and b to the same class as c, we may well

find that two points fall in the same class even though the distance between

them is greater than 1!    These  examples  suggest  conditions  which  must  be  satisfied  by  any

criterion if it is to be used as the basis for partitioning a given set into classes.

Let M be a set, and let certain ordered pairs (a, b) of elements of M be called

“labelled.” If (a, b) is a labelled pair, we say that a is related to b by the

                                      3
(binary) relation R and write aRb. For example, if a and b are real numbers,

aRb might mean a < b, while if a and b are triangles, aRb might mean that a

and b have the same area. A relation between elements of M  is  called  a

relation on M if there is at least one labelled pair (a, b) for every a ∈ M. A

relation R on M is called an equivalence relation (on M) if it satisfies the

following three conditions:

    1)Reflexivity: aRa for every a ∈ M;

    2)Symmetry: If aRb, then bRa;

    3)Transitivity: If aRb and bRc, then aRc.


  THEOREM 4. A set M can be partitioned into classes by a relation R (acting

as a criterion for assigning two elements to the same class) if and only if R is

an equivalence relation on M.


  Proof. Every partition of M determines a binary relation on M, where aRb

means that “a belongs to the same class as b.” It is then obvious that R must

be reflexive, symmetric and transitive, i.e., that R is an equivalence relation

on M.

    Conversely, let R be an equivalence relation on M, and let K be the set
                                                                              a

of all elements x ∈ M such that xRa (clearly a ∈ K, since R is reflexive).
                                                              a

Then two classes K and K are either identical or disjoint. In fact, suppose an
                      ab

element c belongs to both K and K, so that cRa and cRb. Then aRc by the
                                ab

symmetry, and hence




by the transitivity. If now x ∈ K, then xRa and hence xRb by (8) and the
                                      a

transitivity, i.e., x ∈ K. Virtually the same argument shows that x ∈ K
                            bb

implies x ∈ K. Therefore K = K if K and K have an element in common.
                aabab

Therefore the distinct sets K form a partition of M into classes. 
                                a


  Remark. Because of Theorem 4, one often talks about the decompositionof M into equivalence classes.


  There  is  an  intimate  connection  between  mappings  and  partitions  into

classes, as shown by the following examples:


  Example 1. Let f be a mapping of a set A into a set B and partition A into

sets, each consisting of all elements with the same image b = f (a) ∈ B. This

gives a partition of A into classes. For example, suppose f projects the xy-

plane onto the x-axis, by mapping the point (x, y) into the point (x, 0). Then

the  preimages  of  the  points  of  the x-axis  are  vertical  lines,  and  the

representation of the plane as the union of these lines is the decomposition

into classes corresponding to f.


  Example 2. Given any partition of a set A into classes, let B be the set of

these classes and associate each element a ∈ A with the class (i.e., element

of B) to which it belongs. This gives a mapping of A into B. For example,

suppose we partition three-dimensional space into classes by assigning to the

same class all points which are equidistant from the origin of coordinates.

Then every class is a sphere of a certain radius. The set of all these classes

can be identified with the set of points on the half-line [0, ∞), each point

corresponding  to  a  possible  value  of  the  radius.  In  this  sense,  the

decomposition of space into concentric spheres corresponds to the mapping

of space into the half-line [0, ∞).


  Example 3. Suppose we assign all real numbers with the same fractional

  4
part to the same class. Then the mapping corresponding to this partition has

the effect of “winding” the real line onto a circle of unit circumference.


  Problem 1. Prove that if A ∪ B = A and A ∩ B = A, then A = B.


  Problem 2. Show that in general (A − B) ∪ B ≠ A.


  Problem 3. Let A = {2, 4, . . ., 2n, . . .} and B = {3, 6, . . ., 3n, . . .}. Find A

∩ B and A − B.


  Problem 4. Prove that

  a)(A − B) ∩ C = (A ∩ C) − (B ∩ C);

  b)A Δ B = (A ∪ B) − (A ∩ B).  Problem 5. Prove that




  Problem 6. Let A be the set of all positive integers divisible by n. Find the
                      n

sets


  a)


  Problem 7. Find

  a)



  Problem 8. Let A be the set of points lying on the curve
                      α





What is





  Problem 9. Let y = f(x) = 〈x〉 for all real x, where 〈x〉 is the fractional part

of x. Prove that every closed interval of length 1 has the same image under f.

What is this image? Is f one-to-one? What is the preimage of the interval  

y  ? Partition the real line into classes of points with the same image.


  Problem 10. Given a set M, let  be the set of all ordered pairs on the form

(a, a) with a ∈ M, and let aRb if and only if (a, b) ∈ . Interpret the relation

R.


  Problem 11. Give an example of a binary relation which is

    a)Reflexive and symmetric, but not transitive;

    b)Reflexive, but neither symmetric nor transitive;

    c)Symmetric, but neither reflexive nor transitive;

    d)Transitive, but neither reflexive nor symmetric.2.Equivalence of Sets. The Power of a Set


  2.1. Finite and infinite sets. The set of all vertices of a given polyhedron,

the set of all prime numbers less than a given number, and the set of all

residents  of  New  York  City  (at  a  given  time)  have  a  certain  property  in

common, namely, each set has a definite number of elements which can be

found in principle, if not in practice. Accordingly, these sets are all said to be

finite. Clearly, we can be sure that a set is finite without knowing the number

of elements in it. On the other hand, the set of all positive integers, the set of

all points on the line, the set of all circles in the plane, and the set of all

polynomials with rational coefficients have a different property in common,

namely, if we remove one element from each set, then remove two elements,

three elements, and so on, there will still be elements left in the set at each

stage. Accordingly, sets of this kind are said to be infinite.

    Given two finite sets, we can always decide whether or not they have the

same number of elements, and if not, we can always determine which set has

more elements than the other. It is natural to ask whether the same is true of

infinite sets. In other words, does it make sense to ask, for example, whether

there are more circles in the plane than rational points on the line, or more

functions defined in the interval [0, 1] than lines in space? As will soon be

apparent, questions of this kind can indeed be answered.

  To  compare  two  finite  sets A  and B,  we  can  count  the  number  of

elements in each set and then compare the two numbers, but alternatively, we

can try to establish a one-to-one correspondence between (the elements of) A

and B, i.e., a correspondence such that each element in A corresponds to one

and  only  one  element  in B  and  vice  verse.  It  is  clear  that  a  one-to-one

correspondence between two finite sets can be set up if and only if the two

sets have the same number of elements. For example, to ascertain whether or

not the number of students in an assembly is the same as the number of seats

in the auditorium, there is no need to count the number of students and the

number of seats. We need merely observe whether or not there are empty

seats or students with no place to sit down. If the students can all be seated

with no empty seats left, i.e., if there is a one-to-one correspondence between

the set of students and the set of seats, then these two sets obviously have the

same number of elements. The important point here is that the first method

(counting  elements)  works  only  for  finite  sets,  while  the  second  method

(setting up a one-to-one correspondence) works for infinite sets as well as forfinite sets.


    2.2. Countable sets. The simplest infinite set is the set Z of all positive
                                                                        +

integers. An infinite set is called countable if its elements can be put in one-

to-one correspondence with those of Z. In other words, a countable set is a
                                            +

set whose elements can be numbered a, a, . . ., a, . . . . By an uncountable
                                              12n

set we mean, of course, an infinite set which is not countable.

  We now give some examples of countable sets:


    Example  1.  The  set Z  of  all  integers,  positive,  negative  or  zero,  is

countable. In fact, we can set up the following one-to-one correspondence

between Z and the set Z of all positive integers:
                          +





More explicitly, we associate the nonnegative integer n  0 with the odd

number 2n + 1, and the negative integer n < 0 with the even number 2 |n|, i.e.,





(the symbol ↔ denotes a one-to-one correspondence).


  Example 2. The set of all positive even numbers is countable, as shown by

the obvious correspondence n ↔ 2n.


                                            n
  Example 3. The set 2, 4, 8, . . ., 2, . . . of powers of 2 is countable, as

                                                    n
shown by the obvious correspondence n ↔ 2.


  Example 4. The set Q of all rational numbers is countable. To see this, we

first note that every rational number α can be written as a fraction p/q, q > 0

in lowest terms with a positive denominator. Call the sum |p| + q the “height”

of the rational number α. For example,is the only rational number of height 0,





are the only rational numbers of height 2,





are the only rational numbers of height 3, and so on. We can now arrange all

rational  numbers  in  order  of  increasing  height  (with  the  numerators

increasing in each set of rational numbers of the same height). In other words,

we  first  count  the  rational  numbers  of  height  1,  then  those  of  height  2

(suitably arranged), those of height 3, and so on. In this way, we assign every

rational  number  a  unique  positive  integer,  i.e.,  we  set  up  a  one-to-one

correspondence between the set Q of all rational numbers and the set Z of all
                                                                                  +

positive integers.


  Next we prove some elementary theorems involving countable sets:


  THEOREM 1. Every subset of a countable set is countable.


  Proof. Let A be countable, with elements a, a, . . ., and let B be a subset
                                                      12

of A. Among the elements a, a, . . ., let a, a, . . . be those in the set B. If
                                12nn
                                                  12

the set of numbers n, n, . . . has a largest number, then B is finite. Otherwise
                      12

B is countable (consider the correspondence i ↔ a). 
                                                          n
                                                            i


  THEOREM 2. The union of a finite or countable number of countable sets

A, A, . . . is itself countable.
12


  Proof. We can assume that no two of the sets A, A, . . . have elements in
                                                            12

common, since otherwise we could consider the sets


                          A, A − A, A − (A ∪ A), . . .
                            121312


instead, which are countable by Theorem 1 and have the same union as the

original sets. Suppose we write the elements of A, A, . . . in the form of an
                                                          12infinite table








where the elements of the set A appear in the first row, the elements of the
                                    1

set A appear in the second row, and so on. We now count all the elements in
    2

(1)  “diagonally,”  i.e.,  first  we  choose a,  then a,  then a,  and  so  on,
                                                  111221
                                                        5
moving in the way shown in the following table:













It is clear that this procedure associates a unique number to each element in

each of the sets A, A, . . ., thereby establishing a one-to-one correspondence
                  12

between  the  union  of  the  sets A, A,  .  .  .  and  the  set Z of all positive
                                      12+

integers. 


  THEOREM 3. Every infinite set has a countable subset.


  Proof. Let M be an infinite set and a any element of M. Being infinite, M
                                              1

contains an element a distinct from a, an element a distinct from both a
                          2131

and a, and so on. Continuing this process (which can never terminate due to
    2

a “shortage” of elements, since M is infinite), we get a countable subset


                                A = {a a, ..., a, ...}
                                        12n


of the set M.   Remark. Theorem 3 shows that countable sets are the “smallest” infinite

sets. The question of whether there exist uncountable (infinite) sets will be

considered below.


    2.3. Equivalence of sets. We arrived at the notion of a countable set M

by considering one-to-one correspondences between M and the set Z of all
                                                                                  +

positive  integers.  More  generally,  we  can  consider  one-to-one

correspondences between any two sets M and N:


    DEFINITION. Two sets M and N are said to be equivalent (written M ∼ N) if

there is a one-to-one correspondence between the elements of M and the

elements of N.


                                    6
  The concept of equivalence is applicable to both finite and infinite sets.

Two finite sets are equivalent if and only if they have the same number of

elements. We can now define a countable set as a set equivalent to the set Z
                                                                                          +

of all positive integers. It is clear that two sets which are equivalent to a third

set are equivalent to each other, and in particular that any two countable sets

are equivalent.


    Example 1. The sets of points in any two closed intervals [a, b] and [c,

d]  are  equivalent,  and Figure  5  shows  how  to  set  up  a  one-to-one

correspondence between them. Here two points p and q correspond to each

other if and only if they lie on the same ray emanating from the point O in

which the extensions of the line segments ac and bd intersect.


  Example 2. The set of all points z in the complex plane is equivalent to the

set of all                                        FIGURE 5










                                        FIGURE 6

points α on a sphere. In fact, a one-to-one correspondence z ↔ α between the

points of the two sets can be established by using stereographic projection, as

shown in Figure 6 (O is the north pole of the sphere).


  Example 3.  The  set  of  all  points x  in  the  open  unit  interval  (0,  1)  is

equivalent to the set of all points y on the whole real line. For example, the

formula





establishes a one-to-one correspondence between these two sets.


    The last example and the examples in Sec. 2.2 show that an infinite set is

sometimes equivalent to one of its proper subsets. For example, there are “as

many” positive integers as integers of arbitrary sign, there are “as many”

points in the interval (0, 1) as on the whole real line, and so on. This fact is

characteristic of all infinite sets (and can be used to define such sets), as

shown by


  THEOREM 4. Every infinite set is equivalent to one of its proper subsets.


  Proof. According to Theorem 3, any infinite set M contains a countable

subset. Let this subset be


                              A = {a, a, . . .,a,. . .},
                                      121


and partition A into two countable subsetsObviously,  we  can  establish  a  one-to-one  correspondence  between  the

countable sets A and A (merely let a ↔ a). This correspondence can be
                          1n2n−1

extended to a one-to-one correspondence between the sets A ∪ (M − A) = M

and A ∪ (M − A) = M − A2 by simply assigning x itself to each element x
    1

∈ M − A. But M − A is a proper subset of M. 
                        2


    2.4.  Uncountability  of  the  real  numbers.  Several  examples  of

countable sets were given in Sec. 2.2, and many more examples of such sets

could be given. In fact, according to Theorem 2, the union of a finite or

countable number of countable sets is itself countable. It is now natural to ask

whether there exist infinite sets which are uncountable. The existence of such

sets is shown by


  THEOREM 5. The set of real numbers in the closed unit interval [0, 1] is

uncountable.


  Proof. Suppose we have somehow managed to count some or all of the

real numbers in [0, 1], arranging them in a list









where a is the kth digit in the decimal expansion of the number a. Consider
        iki

the decimal




constructed as follows: For b choose any digit (from 0 to 9) different from
                                  1

a, for b any digit different from a, and so on, and in general for b any
11222n

digit  different  from a.  Then  the  decimal  (4)  cannot  coincide  with  any
                          nn

decimal in the list (3). In fact, β differs from a in at least the first digit, from
                                                      1

α in at least the second digit, and so on, since in general b ≠ a for all n.
2nnnThus no list of real numbers in the interval [0, 1] can include all the real

numbers in [0, 1].

  The  above  argument  must  be  refined  slightly  since  certain  numbers,

                                    q
namely those of the form p/10, can be written as decimals in two ways,

either with an infinite run of zeros or an infinite run of nines. For example,




so that the fact that two decimals are distinct does not necessarily mean that

they represent distinct real numbers. However, this difficulty disappears if in

constructing β, we require that β contain neither zeros nor nines, for example

by setting b = 2 if a = 1 and b = 1 if a ≠ 1. 
            nnnnnn


    Thus the set [0, 1] is uncountable. Other examples of uncountable sets

equivalent to [0, 1] are

    1)The set of points in any closed interval [a, b];

    2)The set of points on the real line;

    3)The set of points in any open interval (a, b);

    4)The set of all points in the plane or in space;

    5)The set of all points on a sphere or inside a sphere;

    6)The set of all lines in the plane;

    7)The set of all continuous real functions of one or several variables.

The  fact  that  the  sets  1)  and  2)  are  equivalent  to  [0,  1]  is  proved  as  in

Examples 1 and 3,  pp.  13  and  14,  while  the  fact  that  the  sets  3)–7)  are

equivalent to [0, 1] is best proved indirectly (cf. Problems 7 and 9).


    2.5. The power of a set. Given any two sets M and N, suppose M and N

are equivalent. Then M and N are said to have the same power. Roughly

speaking, “power” is something shared by equivalent sets. If M and N are

finite, then M and N have the same number of elements, and the concept of

the power of a set reduces to the usual notion of the number of elements in a

set. The power of the set Z of all positive integers, and hence the power of
                              +

any countable set, is denoted by the symbol , read “aleph null.” A set
                                                          0

equivalent to the set of real numbers in the interval [0, 1], and hence to the set

of all real numbers, is said to have the power of the continuum, denoted by c

(or often by ).    For the powers of finite sets, i.e., for the positive integers, we have the

notions of “greater than” and “less than,” as well as the notion of equality.

We now show how these concepts are extended to the case of infinite sets.

  Let A and B be any two sets, with powers m(A) and m(B), respectively. If

A is equivalent to B, then m(A) = m(B) by definition. If A is equivalent to a

subset of B and if no subset of A is equivalent to B, then, by analogy with the

finite case, it is natural to regard m(A) as less than m(B) or m(B) as greater

than m(A). Logically, however, there are two further possibilities:

  a)B has a subset equivalent to A, and A has a subset equivalent to B;

  b)A and B are not equivalent, and neither has a subset equivalent to the

        other.

In case a), A and B are equivalent and hence have the same power, as shown

by  the  Cantor-Bernstein  theorem  (Theorem  7  below).  Case  b)  would

obviously  show  the  existence  of  powers  that  cannot  be  compared,  but  it

follows  from  the  well-ordering  theorem  (see Sec.  3.7)  that  this  case  is

actually impossible. Therefore, taking both of these theorems on faith, we see

that any two sets A and B either have the same power or else satisfy one of

the relations m(A) < m(B) or m(A) > m(B). For example, it is clear that  < c
                                                                                      0

(why?).


  Remark. The very deep problem of the existence of powers between 
                                                                                          0

and c  is  touched  upon  in Sec. 3.9.  As  a  rule,  however,  the  infinite  sets

encountered in analysis are either countable or else have the power of the

continuum.


  We have already noted that countable sets are the “smallest” infinite sets.

It has also been shown that there are infinite sets of power greater than that of

a countable set, namely sets with the power of the continuum. It is natural to

ask whether there are infinite sets of power greater than that of the continuum

or, more generally, whether there is a “largest” power. These questions are

answered by


  THEOREM 6. Given any set M, let  be the set whose elements are all

possible subsets of M. Then the power of  is greater than the power of the

original set M.  Proof. Clearly, the power μ of the set  cannot be less than the power m

of the original set M, since the “single-element subsets” (or “singletons”) of

M form a subset of  equivalent to M. Thus we need only show that m and μ

do not coincide. Suppose a one-to-one correspondence




has been established between the elements a, b, . . . of M and certain elements

A, B, . . . of  (i.e., certain subsets of M). Then A, B, . . . do not exhaust all

the elements of , i.e., all the subsets of M. To see this, let X be the set of

elements  of M  which  do  not  belong  to  their  “associated  subsets.”  More

exactly, if a ↔ A we assign a to X if a ∉ A, but not if a ∈ A. Clearly, X is a

subset of M and hence an element of . Suppose there is an element x ∈ M

such that x ↔ X, and consider whether or not x belongs to X. Suppose x ∉ X.

Then x ∈ X, since, by definition, X contains every element not contained in

its associated subset. On the other hand, suppose x ∉ X. Then x ∈ X, since X

consists precisely of those elements which do not belong to their associated

subsets.  In  any  event,  the  element x  corresponding  to  the  subset X  must

simultaneously belong to X and not belong to X. But this is impossible! It

follows  that  there  is  no  such  element x.  Therefore  no  one-to-one

correspondence can be established between the sets M and , i.e., m ≠ μ. 


  Thus, given any set M, there is a set  of larger power, a set * of still

larger power, and so on indefinitely. In particular, there is no set of “largest”

power.


    2.6.  The  Cantor-Bernstein  theorem.  Next  we  prove  an  important

theorem already used in the preceding section:


  THEOREM 7 (Cantor-Bernstein). Given any two sets A and B, suppose A

contains a subset A equivalent to B, while B contains a subset B equivalent
                      11

to A. Then A and B are equivalent.


  Proof. By hypothesis, there is a one-to-one function f mapping A into B
                                                                                          1

and a one-to-one function g mapping B into A:
                                                    1


                          f(A) = B ⊂ B, g(B) = A ⊂ A.
                                    11Therefore


                            A = gf(A) = g(f(A)) = g(B)
                              21


is a subset of A equivalent to all of A. Similarly,
                1


                            B = fg(B) = f(g(B)) = f(A)
                              21


is a subset of B equivalent to B. Let A be the subset of A into which the
                  13

mapping gf carries the set A, and let A be the subset of A into which gf
                                  14

carries A. More generally, let A be the set into which A (k = 1, 2, . . .) is
        2k+2k

carried by gf. Then clearly


                    A ⊃ A ⊃ A ⊃ . . . ⊃ A ⊃ A ⊃ . . .
                            12kk+1


Setting





we can represent A as the following union of pairwise disjoint sets:






Similarly, we can write A in the form
                            1




Clearly, (5) and (6) can be rewritten as






whereBut A − A is equivalent to A − A (the former is carried into the latter by the
          123

one-to-one  function gf), A  − A  is  equivalent  to A  − A,  and  so  on.
                                2345

Therefore N is equivalent to N. It follows from the representations (5′) and
                                    1

(6′) that a one-to-one correspondence can be set up between the sets A and

A. But A is equivalent to B, by hypothesis. Therefore A is equivalent to B. 
11


    Remark. Here we can even “afford the unnecessary luxury” of explicitly

writing down a one-to-one function carrying A into B, i.e.,






(see Figure 7).















                                        FIGURE 7


  Problem  1.  Prove  that  a  set  with  an  uncountable  subset  is  itself

uncountable.


  Problem 2. Let M be any infinite set and A any countable set. Prove that M

 M ∪ A.


  Problem 3. Prove that each of the following sets is countable:

    a)The set of all numbers with two distinct decimal expansions (like

        0.5000 . . . and 0.4999 . . .);    b)The set of all rational points in the plane (i.e., points with rational

          coordinates);

    c)The  set  of  all  rational  intervals  (i.e.,  intervals  with  rational  end

        points);

    d)The set of all polynomials with rational coefficients.


  Problem 4. A number α is called algebraic if it is a root of a polynomial

equation with rational coefficients. Prove that the set of all algebraic numbers

is countable.


  Problem  5.  Prove  the  existence  of  uncountably  many transcendental

numbers, i.e., numbers which are not algebraic.


  Hint. Use Theorems 2 and 5.


  Problem  6.  Prove  that  the  set  of  all  real  functions  (more  generally,

functions taking values in a set containing at least two elements) defined on a

set M is of power greater than the power of M. In particular, prove that the

power of the set of all real functions (continuous and discontinuous) defined

in the interval [0, 1] is greater than c.


  Hint. Use the fact that the set of all characteristic functions (i.e., functions

taking only the values 0 and 1) on M is equivalent to the set of all subsets of

M.


  Problem 7. Give an indirect proof of the equivalence of the closed interval

[a, b], the open interval (a, b) and the half-open interval [a, b) or (a, b].


  Hint. Use Theorem 7.


  Problem 8. Prove that the union of a finite or countable number of sets

each of power c is itself of power c.


  Problem 9. Prove that each of the following sets has the power of the

continuum:

    a)The set of all infinite sequences of positive integers;

    b)The set of all ordered n-tuples of real numbers;

    c)The set of all infinite sequences of real numbers.  Problem 10. Develop a contradiction inherent in the notion of the “set of

all sets which are not members of themselves.”


  Hint. Is this set a member of itself?


  Comment. Thus we will be careful to avoid sets which are “too big,” like

the “set of all sets.”



3.Ordered Sets and Ordinal Numbers


    3.1. Partially ordered sets. A binary relation R on a set M is said to be a

partial ordering (and the set M itself is said to be partially ordered) if

  1)R is reflexive (aRa for every a ∈M);

  2)R is transitive (aRb and bRc together imply aRc);

  3)R is antisymmetric in the sense that aRb and bRa together imply a =

        b.

For example, if M is the set of all real numbers and aRb means a  b, then R

is a partial ordering. This suggests writing a  b (or equivalently b  a)

instead of aRb whenever R is a partial ordering, and we will do so from now

on. Similarly, we write a < b if a  b, a ≠ b and b > a if b  a, b ≠ a.

  The following examples give some idea of the generality of the concept

of a partial ordering:


    Example 1. Any set M can be partially ordered in a trivial way by setting

a  b if and only if a = b.


  Example 2. Let M be the set of all continuous functions f, g, . . . defined in

a closed interval [α, β]. Then we get a partial ordering by setting f  g if and

only if f(t)  g(t) for every t ∈ [α, β].


  Example 3. The set of all subsets M, M, . . . is partially ordered if M 
                                              121

M means that M ⊂ M.
212


  Example 4. The set of all integers greater than 1 is partially ordered if a 

b means that “b is divisible by a.”

  An element a of a partially ordered set is said to be maximal if a  bimplies b = a and minimal if b  a implies b = a. Thus in Example 4 every

prime number (greater than 1) is a minimal element.


    3.2. Order-preserving mappings. Isomorphisms. Let M and M′ be any

two partially ordered sets, and let f be a one-to-one mapping of M onto M′.

Then f is said to be order-preserving if a  b (where a, b ∈ M) implies f(a) 

f(b) (in M′). An order-preserving mapping f such that f(a)  f(b) implies a  b

is  called  an isomorphism.  In  other  words,  an  isomorphism  between  two

partially ordered sets M and M′ is a one-to-one mapping of M onto M′ such

that f(a)  f(b) if and only if a  b. Two partially ordered sets M and M′ are

said to be isomorphic (to each other) if there exists an isomorphism between

them.


    Example. Let M be the set of positive integers greater than 1 partially

ordered as in Example 4, Sec. 3.1, and let M′ be the same set partially ordered

in the natural way, i.e., in such a way that a  b if and only if b − a is

nonnegative. Then the mapping of M onto M′ carrying every integer n into

itself is order-preserving, but not an isomorphism.


    Isomorphism between partially ordered sets is an equivalence relation as

defined  in Sec.  1.4,  being  obviously  reflexive,  symmetric  and  transitive.

Hence  any  given  family  of  partially  ordered  sets  can  be  partitioned  into

                                        7
disjoint classes of isomorphic sets. Clearly, two isomorphic partially ordered

sets can be regarded as identical in cases where it is the structure of the

partial ordering rather than the specific nature of the elements of the sets that

is of interest.


    3.3.  Ordered  sets.  Order  types.  Given  two  elements a  and b  of  a

partially ordered set M, it may turn out that neither of the relations a  b or b 

 a holds. In this case, a and b  are  said  to  be noncomparable. Thus, in

general, the relation  is defined only for certain pairs of elements, which is

why M  is  said  to  be partially  ordered.  However,  suppose M  has  no

noncomparable  elements.  Then M  is  said  to  be ordered  (synonymously,

simply or linearly ordered). In other words, a set M is ordered if it is partially

ordered and if, given any two distinct elements a, b ∈ M, either a < b or b <

a. Obviously, any subset of an ordered set is itself ordered.

  Each of the sets figuring in Examples 1-4, Sec. 3.1 is partially ordered,but not ordered. Simple examples of ordered sets are the set of all positive

integers, the set of all rational numbers, the set of all real numbers in the

interval [0, 1], and so on (with the usual relations of “greater than” and “less

than”).

  Since  an  ordered  set  is  a  special  kind  of  partially  ordered  set,  the

concepts of order-preserving mapping and isomorphism apply equally well to

ordered sets. Two isomorphic ordered sets are said to have the same (order)

type. Thus “type” is something shared by all isomorphic ordered sets, just as

“power” is something shared by all equivalent sets (considered as “plain”

sets, without regard for possible orderings).

  The simplest example of an ordered set is the set of all positive integers

1,  2,  3,  .  .  .  arranged  in  increasing  order,  with  the  usual  meaning  of  the

symbol  <.  The  order  type  of  this  set  is  denoted  by  the  symbol  ω.  Two

isomorphic ordered sets obviously have the same power (an isomorphism is a

one-to-one correspondence). Thus it makes sense to talk about the power

corresponding to a given order type. For example, the power  corresponds
                                                                          0

to the order type ω. The converse is not true, since a set of a given power can

in general be ordered in many different ways. It is only in the finite case that

the number of elements in a set uniquely determines its type, designated by

the same symbol n as the number of elements in the set. For example, besides

the “natural” order type ω of the set of positive integers, there is another

order type corresponding to the sequence


                              1, 3, 5, . . ., 2, 4, 6, . . . ,


where odd and even numbers are separately arranged in increasing order, but

any odd number precedes any even number. It can be shown that the number

of distinct order types of a set of power  is infinite and in fact uncountable.
                                                0


    3.4. Ordered sums and products of ordered sets. Let M and M be
                                                                            12

two ordered sets of types θ and θ, respectively. Then we can introduce an
                                12

ordering in the union M ∪ M of the two sets by assuming that
                          12

  1)a and b have the same ordering as in M if a, b ∈ M;
                                                      11

  2)a and b have the same ordering as in M if a, b ∈ M;
                                                      22

  3)a < b if a ∈ M, b ∈ M
                          12(verify that this is actually an ordering of M ∪ M). The set M ∪ M
                                                      1212

ordered in this way is called the ordered sum of M and M, denoted by M +
                                                          121

M. Note that the order of terms matters here, i.e., in general M + M is not
221

isomorphic to M + M. More generally, we can define the ordered sum of
                  12

any finite number of ordered sets by writing (cf. Problem 6)






and so on. By the ordered sum of the types θ and θ, denoted by θ + θ, we
                                                    1212

mean the order type of the set M + M.
                                    12


  Example. Consider the order types ω and n. It is easy to see that n + ω =

ω. In fact, if finitely many terms are written to the left of the sequence 1, 2, . .

., k, . . ., we again get a set of the same type (why?). On the other hand, the

                                                    8
order type ω + n, i.e., the order type of the set


                          {1, 2,. . . ,k, . . . ,a, a, . . ., a}
                                                12n


is obviously not equal to ω.


  Again let M and M be two ordered sets of types θ and θ, respectively.
                1212

Suppose we replace each element of M by a “replica” of the set M. Then the
                                            21

resulting set, denoted by M · M, is called the ordered product of M and
                                121

M. More exactly, M · M is the set of all pairs (a, b) where a ∈ M, ordered
2121

in such a way that

  1)(a, b) < (a, b) if b < b (for arbitrary a, a);
            11221212

  2)(a, b) < (a, b) if a < a.
          1212

Note that the order of factors matters here, i.e., in general M · M is not
                                                                          21

isomorphic to M · M. The ordered product of any finite number of ordered
                  12

sets can be defined by writing (cf. Problem 6)and so on. By the ordered product of the types θ and θ, denoted by θ · θ,
                                                          1212

we mean the order type of the set M · M.
                                        12


    3.5. Well-ordered sets. Ordinal numbers. A key concept in the theory

of ordered sets is given by

    DEFINITION  1. An  ordered  set  M  is  said  to  be well-ordered if  every

nonempty subset A of M has a smallest (or “first”) element, i.e., an element μ

such that μ < a for every a ∈ A.


  Example 1. Every finite ordered set is obviously well-ordered.


  Example 2. Every nonempty subset of a well-ordered set is itself well-

ordered.


  Example 3. The set M or rational numbers in the interval [0, 1] is ordered

but not well-ordered. It is true that M has a smallest element, namely the

number 0, but the subset of M consisting of all positive rational numbers has

no smallest element.


    DEFINITION 2. The order type of a well-ordered set is called an ordinal

                                  9
number or simply an ordinal. If the set is infinite, the ordinal is said to be

transfinite.


  Example 4. The set of positive integers 1, 2, . . ., k, . . . arranged in

increasing order is well-ordered, and hence its order type ω is a (transfinite)

ordinal. The order type ω + n of the set


                          {1, 2, . . ., k, . . . a, a, . . ., a}
                                                12n


is also an ordinal.


  Example 5. The set




is ordered but not well-ordered. It is true that any nonempty subset A of (1)

has a largest element (i.e., an element ν such that a < ν for every a ∈ A), but

in general A will not have a smallest element. In fact, the set (1) itself has nosmallest  element.  Hence  the  order  type  of  (1),  denoted  by  ω*,  is  not  an

ordinal number.

    THEOREM 1. The ordered sum of a finite number of well-ordered sets M,
                                                                                          1

M, . . ., M is itself a well-ordered set.
2n


  Proof. Let M be an arbitrary subset of the ordered sum M + M + · · · +
                                                                        12

M, and let M be the first of the sets M, M, . . ., M (namely the set with
nk12n

smallest index) containing elements of M. Then M ∩ M is a subset of the
                                                                    k

well-ordered set M, and as such has a smallest element μ. Clearly μ is the
                    k

smallest element of M itself. 

    COROLLARY. The ordered sum of a finite number of ordinal numbers is

itself an ordinal number.


  Thus  new  ordinal  numbers  can  be  constructed  from  any  given  set  of

ordinal numbers. For example, starting from the positive integers (i.e., the

finite ordinal numbers) and the ordinal number ω, we can construct the new

ordinal numbers


                      ω + n,ω + ω,ω + ω + n,ω + ω + ω,


and so on.

    THEOREM 2. The ordered product of two well-ordered sets M and M is
                                                                              12

itself a well-ordered set.


  Proof. Let M be an arbitrary subset of M · M, so that M is a set of
                                                      12

ordered pairs (a, b) with a ∈ M, b ∈ M·. The set of all second elements b
                                    12

of pairs in M is a subset of M, and as such has a smallest element since M is
                                22

well-ordered. Let b denote this smallest element, and consider all pairs of the
                    1

form (a, b) contained in M. The set of all first elements a of these pairs is a
          1

subset of M, and as such has a smallest element since M is well-ordered.
            11

Let a  denote  this  smallest  element.  Then  the  pair  (a, b)  is  clearly  the
    111

smallest element of M. 


  COROLLARY 1. The ordered product of a finite number of well-ordered sets

is itself a well-ordered set.  COROLLARY 2. The ordered product of a finite number of ordinal numbers

is itself an ordinal number.

    Thus it makes sense to talk about the ordinal numbers

                                          223
                                ω · n, ω, ω · n, ω,

                                                                              10
  and so on. It is also possible to define such ordinal numbers as

                                              ω
                                      ωω
                                    ω, ω, . . .


    3.6. Comparison of ordinal numbers. If n and n are two finite ordinal
                                                        12

numbers, then they either coincide or else one is larger than the other. As we

now  show,  the  same  is  true  of  transfinite  ordinal  numbers.  We  begin  by

observing that every element a of a well-ordered set M determines an (initial)

section P, the set of all x ∈ M such that x < a, and a remainder Q, the set of

all x ∈ M such that x  a. Given any two ordinal numbers α and β, let M and

N be well-ordered sets of order type α and β, respectively. Then we say that

  1)α = β if M and N are isomorphic;

  2)α < β if M is isomorphic to some section of N;

  3)α > β if N is isomorphic to some section of M

(note that this definition makes sense for finite α and β).


  LEMMA. Let f be an isomorphism of a well-ordered set A onto some subset

B ⊂ A. Then f(a)  a for all a ∈ A.


  Proof. If there are elements a ∈ A such that f(a) < a, then there is a least

such element since A is well-ordered. Let a be this element, and let b =
                                                    00

f(a). Then b < a, and hence f(b) < f(a) = b since f is an isomorphism.
  000000

But then a is not the smallest element such that f(a) < a. Contradiction! 
          0

    It  follows  from  the  lemma  that  a  well-ordered  set A  cannot  be

isomorphic to any of its sections, since if A were isomorphic to the section

determined by a, then clearly f(a) < a. In other words, the two relations


                                    α = β,α < β


are incompatible, and so are                                    α = β,α > β


Moreover, the two relations


                                    α < β,α > β


are incompatible, since otherwise we could use the transitivity to deduce α <

α, which is impossible by the lemma. Therefore, if one of the three relations




holds, the other two are automatically excluded. We must still show that one

of  the  relations  (2)  always  holds,  thereby  proving  that  any  two  ordinal

numbers are comparable.


  THEOREM 3. Two given ordinal numbers α and β satisfy one and only one

of the relations


                                  α < β,α = β,α > β


  Proof. Let W(α) be the set of all ordinals <α. Any two numbers γ and γ′ in

                        11
W(α) are comparable and the corresponding ordering of W(α) makes it a

well-ordered set of type α. In fact, if a set


                              A = { . . ., a, . . ., b, ...}


is of type α, then by definition, the ordinals less than α are the types of well-

ordered sets isomorphic to sections of A. Hence the ordinals themselves are in

one-to-one  correspondence  with  the  elements  of A.  In  other  words,  the

elements of a set of type α can be numbered by using the ordinals less than α:


                              A = {a, a, . . ., a, . . .}.
                                      12n


  Now  let  α  and  β  be  any  two  ordinals.  Then W(α) and W(β)  are  well-

ordered sets of types α and β, respectively. Moreover, let C = A ∩ D be the

intersection of the sets A and B, i.e., the set of all ordinals less than both α and

β. Then C is well-ordered, of type γ, say. We now show that γ  α. If C = A,

then obviously γ = α. On the other hand, if C ≠ A, then C is a section of A and

hence γ < α. In fact, let ξ ∈ C, η ∈ A − C. Then ξ and η are comparable, i.e.,

either ξ < η or ξ > η. But η < ξ < α is impossible, since then η ∈ C. Thereforeξ < η and hence C is a section of A, which implies γ < α. Moreover, γ is the

first element of the set A − C. Thus γ  α, as asserted, and similarly γ  β.

The case γ < α, γ < β is impossible, since then γ ∈ A − C, γ ∈ B − C. But

then γ ∉ C on the one hand and γ ∈ A ∩ B = C on the other hand. It follows

that there are only three possibilities






i.e., α and β are comparable. 


  THEOREM 4. Let A and B be well-ordered sets. Then either A is equivalent

to B or one of the sets is of greater power than the other, i.e., the powers of A

and B are comparable.


  Proof. There is a definite power corresponding to each ordinal. But we

have just seen that ordinals are comparable, and so are the corresponding

powers (recall the definition of inequality of powers given in Sec. 2.5). 


    3.7. The well-ordering theorem, the axiom of choice and equivalent

assertions. Theorem 4 shows that the powers of two well-ordered sets are

always comparable. In 1904, Zermelo succeeded in proving the


  WELL-ORDERING THEOREM. Every set can be well-ordered.

It follows from the well-ordering theorem and Theorem 5 that the powers of

two arbitrary sets are always comparable, a fact already used in Sec. 2.5.

                                                      12
Zermelo’s proof, which will not be given here, rests on the following basic

    AXIOM OF CHOICE. Given any set M, there is a “choice function” f such

that f(A) is an element of A for every nonempty subset A ⊂ M.


  We will assume the validity of the axiom of choice without further ado. In

fact, without the axiom of choice we would be severely hampered in making

set-theoretic  constructions.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  from  the

standpoint  of  the  foundations  of  set  theory,  there  are  still  deep  and

controversial problems associated with the use of the axiom of choice.

    There are a number of assertions equivalent to the axiom of choice, i.e.,assertions each of which both implies and is implied by the axiom of choice.

One  of  these  is  the  well-ordering  theorem,  which  obviously  implies  the

axiom of choice. In fact, if an arbitrary set M can be well-ordered, then, by

merely  choosing  the  “first”  element  in  each  subset A ⊂  M,  we  get  the

function f(A) figuring in the statement of the axiom of choice. On the other

hand,  the  axiom  of  choice  implies  the  well-ordering  theorem,  as  already

noted without proof.

  To state further assertions equivalent to the axiom of choice, we need

some more terminology:


  DEFINITION 3. Let M be a partially ordered set, and let A be any subset of

M such that a and b are comparable for every a, b ∈A. Then A is called a

chain (in M). A chain C is said to be maximal if there is no other chain C′ in

M containing C as a proper subset.


  DEFINITION 4. An element a of a partially ordered set M is called an upper

bound of a subset M′ ⊂ M if a′  a for every a′ ∈ M′.


  We  now  have  the  vocabulary  needed  to  state  two  other  assertions

equivalent to the axiom of choice:


    HAUSDORFF’S MAXIMAL PRINCIPLE. Every chain in a partially ordered set M

is contained in a maximal chain in M.


  ZORN’S LEMMA. If every chain in a partially ordered set M has an upper

bound, then M contains a maximal element.


    For  the  proof  of  the  equivalence  of  the  axiom  of  choice,  the  well-

ordering theorem, Hausdorff’s maximal principle and Zorn’s lemma, we refer

                        13
the reader elsewhere. Of these various equivalent assertions, Zorn’s lemma

is perhaps the most useful.


    3.8.  Transfinite  induction.  Mathematical  propositions  are  very  often

proved by using the following familiar


  THEOREM  4  (Mathematical  induction). Given  a  proposition  P(n)

formulated for every positive integer n, suppose that

    1)P(1) is true;    2)The validity of P(k) for all k  n implies the validity of P(n + 1).

Then P(n) is true for all n = 1, 2, . . .


  Proof. Suppose P(n) fails to be true for all n = 1, 2, . . ., and let n be the
                                                                                  1

smallest integer for which P(n) is false (the existence of n follows from the
                                                                    1

well-ordering of the positive integers). Clearly n > 1, so that n − 1 is a
                                                          11

positive integer. Therefore P(n) is valid for all k  n − 1 but not for n.
                                                                11

Contradiction! 


  Replacing the set of all positive integers by an arbitrary well-ordered set,

we get

                                                                                    14
    THEOREM 4′. (Transfinite induction). Given a well ordered set A, let

P(a) be a proposition formulated for every element a ∈ A. Suppose that

    1)P(a) is true for the smallest element of A;

    2)The validity of P(a) for all a < a* implies the validity of P(a*).

Then P(a) is true for all a ∈ A.


  Proof. Suppose P(a) fails to be true for all a ∈A. Then P(a) is false for all

a in some nonempty subset A * ⊂ A. By the well-ordering, A* has a smallest

element a*.  Therefore P(a)  is  valid  for  all a  <  a*  but  not  for a*.

Contradiction! 


  Remark. Since any set can be well-ordered, by the well-ordering theorem,

transfinite induction can in principle be applied to any set M whatsoever. In

practice, however, Zorn’s lemma is a more useful tool, requiring only that M

be partially ordered.


    3.9. Historical remarks. Set theory as a branch of mathematics in its

own  right  stems  from  the  pioneer  work  of  Georg  Cantor  (1845–1918).

Originally  met  with  disbelief,  Cantor’s  ideas  subsequently  became

widespread. By now, the set-theoretic point of view has become standard in

the most diverse fields of mathematics. Basic concepts, like groups, rings,

fields,  linear  spaces,  etc.  are  habitually  defined  as  sets  of  elements  of  an

arbitrary kind obeying appropriate axioms.

    Further development of set theory led to a number of logical difficulties,which naturally gave rise to attempts to replace “naive” set theory by a more

rigorous, axiomatic set theory. It turns out that certain set-theoretic questions,

which would at first seem to have “yes” or “no” answers, are in fact of a

different kind. Thus it was shown by Gödel in 1940 that a negative answer to

the  question  “Is  there  an  uncountable  set  of  power  less  than  that  of  the

continuum” is consistent with set theory (axiomatized in a way we will not

discuss here), but it was recently shown by Cohen that an affirmative answer

to the question is also consistent in the same sense!


  Problem 1. Exhibit both a partial ordering and a simple ordering of the set

of all complex numbers.


  Problem 2. What is the minimal element of the set of all subsets of a given

set X, partially ordered by set inclusion. What is the maximal element?


  Problem 3. A partially ordered set M is said to be a directed set if, given

any two elements a, b ∈ M,, there is an element c ∈ M such that a  c, b 

c. Are the partially ordered sets in Examples 1-4, Sec. 3.1 all directed sets?


  Problem 4. By the greatest lower bound of two elements a and b of a

partially ordered set M, we mean an element c ∈ M such that c  a, c  b

and there is no element d ∈ M such that c < d  a, d  b. Similarly, by the

least upper bound of a and b, we mean an element c ∈ M such that a  c, b 

 c and there is no element d ∈ M such that a  d < c, b  d. By a lattice is

meant a partially ordered set any two element of which have both a greatest

lower bound and a least upper bound. Prove that the set of all subsets of a

given set X, partially ordered by set inclusion, is a lattice. What is the set-

theoretic meaning of the greatest lower bound and least upper bound of two

elements of this set?


  Problem 5. Prove that an order-preserving mapping of one ordered set

onto another is automatically an isomorphism.


  Problem 6.  Prove  that  ordered  sums  and  products  of  ordered  sets  are

associative, i.e., prove that if M, M and M are ordered sets, then
                                    123


    (M + M) + M = M + (M + M),(M · M) ·M = M · (M · M),
          123123123123where the operations + and · are the same as in Sec. 3.4.


  Comment. This allows us to drop parentheses in writing ordered sums and

products.


  Problem 7. Construct well-ordered sets with ordinals


                ω + n,   ω + ω,   ω + ω + n,   ω + ω + ω, . . .


Show that the sets are all countable.


  Problem 8. Construct well-ordered sets with ordinals

                                        223
                              ω · n, ω, ω · n, ω, . . .


Show that the sets are all countable.


  Problem 9. Show that


                      ω + ω = ω · 2, ω + ω + ω = ω · 3, ...


  Problem 10.  Prove  that  the  set W(α)  of  all  ordinals  less  than  a  given

ordinal α is well-ordered.


  Problem 11. Prove that any nonempty set of ordinals is well-ordered.


  Problem  12.  Prove  that  the  set M  of  all  ordinals  corresponding  to  a

countable set is itself uncountable.


  Problem 13. Let  be the power of the set M in the preceding problem.
                        1

Prove that there is no power m such that  < m < .
                                                01


                          15
4.Systems of Sets


    4.1. Rings of sets. By a system of sets we mean any set whose elements

are themselves sets. Unless the contrary is explicitly stated, the elements of a

given system of sets will be assumed to be certain subsets of some fixed set

X. Systems of sets will usually be denoted by capital script letters like , ,

etc. Our chief interest will be systems of sets which have certain closureproperties under the operations introduced in Sec. 1.1.

    DEFINITION 1. A nonempty system of sets  is called a ring (of sets) if A Δ

B ∈  and A ∩ B ∈  whenever A ∈ , B ∈ .

  Since






we also have A ∪ B ∈  and A − B ∈  whenever A ∈ , B ∈  Thus a

ring of sets is a system of sets closed under the operations of taking unions,

intersections, differences, and symmetric differences. Clearly, a ring of sets is

also closed under the operations of taking finite unions and intersections:





A ring of sets must contain the empty set ∅, since A − A = ∅.

  A set E is called the unit of a system of sets  if E ∈  and


                                      A ∩ E = A


for every A ∈ . Clearly E is unique (why?). Thus the unit of  is just the

maximal set of , i.e., the set containing all other sets of . A ring of sets

with a unit is called an algebra (of sets).


  Example 1. Given a set A, the system (A) of all subsets of A is an

algebra of sets, with unit E = A.


  Example 2. The system {∅, A} consisting of the empty set ∅ and any

nonempty set A is an algebra of sets, with E = A.


  Example 3. The system of all finite subsets of a given set A is a ring of

sets. This ring is an algebra if and only if A itself is finite.


  Example 4. The system of all bounded subsets of the real line is a ring of

sets, which does not contain a unit.

    THEOREM 1. The intersectionof any set of rings is itself a ring.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of Definition 1. 


  THEOREM 2. Given any nonempty system of sets , there is a unique ring 

 containing  and contained in every ring containing .


  Proof.  If   exists,  then  clearly   is  unique  (why?).  To  prove  the

existence of , consider the union





of all sets A belonging to  and the ring (X) of all subsets of X. Let Σ be

the set of all rings of sets contained in (X) and containing . Then the

intersection





of all these rings clearly has the desired properties. In fact,  obviously

contains . Moreover, if * is any ring containing , then the intersection 

= * ∩  (X) is a ring in Σ and hence  ⊂  ⊂ *, as required. The ring 

 is called the minimal ring generated by the system , and will henceforth

be denoted by (). 


  Remark. The set (X) containing ()  has  been  introduced  to  avoid

talking about the “set of all rings containing .” Such concepts as “the set of

all sets,” “the set of all rings,” etc. are inherently contradictory and should be

avoided (recall Problem 10, p. 20).


    4.2. Semirings of sets. The following notion is more general than that of

a  ring  of  sets  and  plays  an  important  role  in  a  number  of  problems

(particularly in measure theory):

    DEFINITION 2. A system of sets  is called a semiring (of sets) if

  1) contains the empty set ∅;  2)A ∩ B ∈  whenever A ∈ , B ∈ ;

  3)If  contains the sets A and A ⊂ A, then A can be represented as a
                                            1

        finite union





  of pairwise disjoint sets of , with the given set A as its first term.
                                                              1


  Remark.  The  representation  (1)  is  called  a finite expansion  of A,  with

respect to the sets A, A, . . ., A.
                      12n


  Example 1. Every ring of sets  is a semiring, since if  contains A and A
                                                                                          1

⊂ A, then A = A ∪ A where A = A − A ∈ .
                  1221


  Example 2. The set  of all open intervals (a, b), closed intervals [a, b]

and half-open intervals [a, b), (a, b], including the “empty interval” (a, a) = ∅

and the single-element sets [a, a] = {a}, is a semiring but not a ring.


  LEMMA 1. Suppose the sets A, A, . . ., A, where A, . . ., A are pairwise
                                        1n1n

disjoint  subsets  of  A, all  belong  to  a  semiring . Then  there  is  a  finite

expansion





with A, . . ., A as its first n terms, where A ∈ , A ∩ A = ∅ for all k, l =
      1nkk1

1, . . ., n.


  Proof. The lemma holds for n = 1, by the definition of a semiring. Suppose

the lemma holds for n = m, and consider m + 1 sets A, . . ., A, A
                                                                      1mm+1

satisfying the conditions of the lemma. By hypothesis,


                    A = A ∪ ... ∪ A ∪ B ∪ . . . ∪ B,
                            1m1p


where the sets A, . . ., A, B, . . ., B are pairwise disjoint subsets of A, all
                  1m1p

belonging to . Let                                  B = A ∩ B,
                                    q1m+1q


By the definition of a semiring,


                              B = B ∪ . . . ∪ B,
                                qq1qr
                                                          q

where the sets B (j = 1, . . ., r) are pairwise disjoint subsets of B, all
                  qjqq

belonging to . But then it is easy to see that





i.e., the lemma is true for n = m + 1. The proof now follows by mathematical

induction. 


  LEMMA 2. Given  any  finite  system  of  sets  A,  .  .  ., A belonging  to  a
                                                          1n

semiring , there  is  a  finite  system  of  pairwise  disjoint  sets  B, . . ., B
                                                                              1t

belonging to  such that every A has a finite expansion
                                      k




                                          16
with respect to certain of the sets B.
                                        s


  Proof. The lemma is trivial for n = 1, since we need only set t = 1, B = A
                                                                                    11

Suppose the lemma is true for n = m, and consider a system of sets A, . . .,
                                                                                    1

A, A in . Let B, . . ., B be sets of  satisfying the conditions of the
mm+11t

lemma with respect to A, . . ., A, and let
                          1m


                                  B = A ∩ B.
                                    s1m+1s·


Then, by Lemma 1, there is an expansion





while, by the very definition of a semiring, there is an expansion                  B = B ∪ B ∪ . . . ∪ B(B ∈ ).
                      ss1s2srs
                                                    sj

It is easy to see that





for some suitable M. Moreover, the sets B, B′ are pairwise disjoint. Hence
                      ksjp

the sets B, B′ satisfy the conditions of the lemma with respect to A, . . .,
          sjp1

A, A. The proof now follows by mathematical induction. 
mm+1


    4.3. The ring generated by a semiring. According to Theorem 1, there

is a unique minimal ring () generated by a given system of sets . The

actual construction of () is quite complicated for arbitrary . However,

the construction is completely straightforward if  is a semiring, as shown

by


  THEOREM 3. If  is a semiring, then () coincides with the system  of

all sets A which have finite expansions





with respect to the sets A ∈ .
                            k


  Proof. First we prove that  is a ring. Let A and B be any two sets in .

Then there are expansions








Since  is a semiring, the sets


                                    C = A ∩ B
                                        ijij


also belong to . By Lemma 1, there are expansionsIt follows from (2) that A ∩ B and A  B have the expansions








and hence belong to . Therefore  is a ring. The fact that  is the minimal

ring generated by  is obvious. 


    4.4. Borel algebras. There are many problems (particularly in measure

theory) involving unions and intersections not only of a finite number of sets,

but  also  of  a countable  number  of  sets.  This  motivates  the  following

concepts:


  DEFINITION 3. A ring of sets is called a σ-ring if it contains the union





whenever it contains the sets A, A, . . ., A, . . . . A σ-ring with a unit E is
                                    12n

called a σ-algebra.


  DEFINITION 4. A ring of sets is called a δ-ring if it contains the intersection





whenever it contains the sets A, A, . . ., A, . . . . A δ-ring with a unit E is
                                    12n

called a δ-algebra.


  THEOREM 4. Every σ-algebra is a δ-algebra and conversely.  Proof. An immediate consequence of the “dual” formulas







  The term Borel algebra (or briefly, B-algebra) is often used to denote a σ-

algebra (equivalently, a δ-algebra). The simplest example of a B-algebra is

the set of all subsets of a given set A.

    Given any system of sets , there always exists at least one B-algebra

containing . In fact, let





Then the system  of all subsets of X is clearly a B-algebra containing .

  If  is any B-algebra containing  and if E is its unit, then every A ∈ 

. is contained in E and hence





A B-algebra  is called irreducible (with respect to the system ) if X = E,

i.e., an irreducible B-algebra is a B-algebra containing no points that do not

belong to one of the sets A ∈ . In every case, it will be enough to consider

only irreducible B-algebras.


  Theorem 2 has the following analogue for irreducible B-algebras:


  THEOREM  5. Given  any  nonempty  system  of  sets , there  is  a  unique

            17
irreducible B-algebra () containing  and  contained  in  every  B-

algebra containing .


  Proof. The proof is virtually identical with that of Theorem 2. The B-

algebra () is called the minimal B-algebra generated by the system  or

the Borel closure of . 


  Remark. An important role is played in analysis by Borel sets or B-sets.

These are the subsets of the real line belonging to the minimal B-algebragenerated by the set of all closed intervals [a, b].


  Problem 1. Let X be an uncountable set, and let  be the ring consisting of

all finite subsets of X and their complements. Is  a σ-ring?


  Problem 2. Are open intervals Borel sets?


  Problem 3. Let y = f(x) be a function defined on a set M and taking values

in a set N. Let  be a system of subsets of M, and let f() denote the

system of all images f(A) of sets A ∈ . Moreover, let  be a system of

                        −1−1
subsets of N, and let f() denote the system of all preimages f(B) of sets B

∈ N. Prove that

                              −1
  a)If  is a ring, so is f();

                                    −1
  b)If  is an algebra, so is f();

                                      −1
  c)If  is a B-algebra, so is f();

            −1−1
    d)(f()) = f(());

            −1−1
    e)(f()) = f(()).


                                                                            −1
Which of these assertions remain true if  is replaced by  and f by f?





  1
 As in the case of real functions, the set f(M) is called the range of f.

  2
 The symbol  stands for Q.E.D. and indicates the end of a proof.

  32
 Put somewhat differently, let M be the set of all ordered pairs (a, b) with a, b ∈ M, and let 
                2
be the subset of M consisting of all labelled pairs. Then aRb if and only if (a, b) ∈ , i.e., a binary
                                    2
relation is essentially just a subset of M. As an exercise, state the three conditions for R to be an
equivalence relation in terms of ordered pairs and the set .

  4
 The largest integer x is called the integral part of x, denoted by [x], and the quantity x − [x] is
called the fractional part of x.

  5
 Discuss the obvious modifications of (1) and (2) in the case of only a finite number of sets A,
                                                                                          1A, . . . .
2

  6
 Not to be confused with our previous use of the word in the phrase “equivalence relation.”
However, note that set equivalence is an equivalence relation in the sense of Sec. 1.4, being obviously
reflexive,  symmetric  and  transitive.  Hence  any  family  of  sets  can  be  partitioned  into  classes  of
equivalent sets.

  7
 Note that we avoid talking about the “family of all partially ordered sets” (recall Problem 10, p.
20).

  8
 Here we use the same curly bracket notation as in Sec. 1.1, but the order of terms is now crucial.

  9
 This is a good place to point out that the terms “cardinal number” and “power” (of a set) are
synonymous.

  10
 See e.g., A. A. Fraenkel, Abstract Set Theory, third edition, North-Holland Publishing Co.,
Amsterdam (1966), pp. 202–208.

  11
 Recall the meaning of γ < α, γ′ < α, and use the fact that a section of a section of a well-ordered
set is itself a section of a well-ordered set.

  12
 A. A. Fraenkel, op. cit., pp. 222–227.

  13
  See  e.g.,  G.  Birkhoff, Lattice  Theory,  third  edition,  American  Mathematical  Society,
Providence, R.I. (1967), pp. 205–206.

  14
 For example, the set of all transfinite ordinals less than a given ordinal.

  15
 The material in this section need not be read now, since it will not be needed until Chapter 7.

  16
 Here M denotes some subset of the set {1, 2, . . ., t}, depending on the choice of k.
            k

  17
 More exactly, irreducible with respect to .                                          2



                            METRIC SPACES









5. Basic Concepts


  5.1. Definitions and examples. One of the most important operations in

mathematical analysis is the taking of limits. Here what matters is not so

                                                          1
much  the  algebraic  nature  of  the  real  numbers,  but  rather  the  fact  that

distance  from  one  point  to  another  on  the  real  line  (or  in  two  or  three-

dimensional  space)  is  well-defined  and  has  certain  properties.  Roughly

speaking, a metric space is a set equipped with a distance (or “metric”) which

has these same properties. More exactly, we have


  DEFINITION 1. By a metric space is meant a pair (X, ρ) consisting of a set X

and a distance ρ, i.e., a single-valued, nonnegative, real  function  ρ(x, y)

defined for all x, y ∈ X which has the following three properties:

    1)ρ(x, y) = 0 if and only if x = y;

    2)Symmetry: ρ(x, y) = ρ(y, x);

    3)Triangle inequality: ρ(x, z)  ρ(x, y) + ρ(y, z).


  We will often refer to the set X as a “space” and its elements x, y, . . . as

“points.” Metric spaces are usually denoted by a single letter, like


                                      R = (X, ρ),


or even by the same letter X as used for the underlying space, in cases wherethere is no possibility of confusion.


  Example 1. Setting






where x and y are elements of an arbitrary set X, we obviously get a metric

space,  which  might  be  called  a  “discrete  space”  or  a  “space  of  isolated

points.”


  Example 2. The set of all real numbers with distance


                                    ρ(x, y) = |x - y|

                                              1
is a metric space, which we denote by R.


  Example 3. The set of all ordered n-tuples


                                  x = (x, x, ..., x)
                                          12n


of real numbers x, x, . . ., x, with distance
                  12n





                                  n
is a metric space denoted by R and called n-dimensional Euclidean space (or

simply Euclidean n-space). The distance (1) obviously has properties 1) and

2) in Definition 1. Moreover, it is easy to see that (1) satisfies the triangle

inequality. In fact, let


      x = (x, x, . . ., x),y = (Y, y, ..., Y),z = (z, z, .. ., z)
              12n12n12n

                    n
be three points in R, and let


                  a = x − Yb = y − z(k = 1, ..., n).
                    kkkkkk


Then the triangle inequality takes the formor equivalently






It follows from the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality





(see Problem 2) that








Taking square roots, we get (2′) and hence (2).


  Example 4. Take the same set of ordered n-tuples x = (x, . . ., x) as in the
                                                                    1n

preceding example, but this time define the distance by the function





It is clear that (4) has all three properties of a distance figuring in Definition

                                                                  n
1. The corresponding metric space will be denoted by R.
                                                                1


  Example 5. Take the same set as in Examples 3 and 4, but this time define

distance between two points x = (x, . . ., x) and y = (y, . . ., y) by the
                                          1n1n

formulaThen we again get a metric space (verify all three properties of the distance).

                                                                                  n
This space, denoted by , is often as useful as the Euclidean space R.


    Remark. The last three examples show that it is sometimes important to

use  a  different  notation  for  a  metric  space  than  for  the  underlying  set  of

points in the space, since the latter can be “metrized” in a variety of different

ways.


  Example 6. The set C of all continuous functions defined on the closed
                            [a,b]

interval [a, b], with distance




is  a  metric  space  of  great  importance  in  analysis  (again  verify  the  three

properties of distance). This metric space and the underlying set of “points”

will both be denoted by the symbol C. Instead of C, we will often
                                              [a,b][0, 1]

write  just C.  A  space  like C  is  often  called  a  “function  space,”  to
                                    [a,b]

emphasize that its elements are functions.


                                                                2
  Example 7. Let l be the set of all infinite sequences
                      2


                              x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .)
                                      12k


  of real numbers x, x, . . ., x, . . . satisfying the convergence condition
                        12k





where distance between points is defined by






Clearly (7) makes sense for all x, y ∈ l, since it follows from the elementary
                                            2

inequalitythat convergence of the two series





implies that of the series





At the same time, we find that if the points (x, x, . . ., x, . . .) and (y, y, . .
                                                      12k12

., y, . . .) both belong to l, then so does the point
  k2


                          (x + y, x + y, ..., x + y ...).
                              1122kk


The function (7) obviously has the first two defining properties of a distance.

To verify the triangle inequality, which takes the form






for the metric (7), we first note that all three series converge, for the reason

just given. Moreover, the inequality






holds for all n, as shown in Example 3. Taking the limit as n → ∞ in (9), we

get (8), thereby verifying the triangle inequality in l. Therefore l is a metric
                                                            22

space.


  Example 8. As in Example 6, consider the set of all functions continuous

on the interval [a, b], but this time define distance by the formula





                                                                          2
instead of (6). The resulting metric space will be denoted by C. The first
                                                                          [a, b]two properties of the metric are obvious, and the fact that (10) satisfies the

triangle inequality is an immediate consequence of Schwarz’s inequality





(see Problem  3),  by  the  continuous  analogue  of  the  argument  given  in

Example 3.


  Example 9. Next consider the set of all bounded infinite sequences of real

                                              3
numbers x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .), and let
                12k




This gives a metric space which we denote by m. The fact that (12) has the

three properties of a metric is almost obvious.


  Example 10. As in Example 3, consider the set of all ordered n-tuples x =

(x, . . ., x) of real numbers, but this time define the distance by the more
1n

general formula





where p is a fixed number  1 (Examples 3 and 4 correspond to the cases p =

                                                                                        n
2 and p = 1, respectively). This gives a metric space, which we denote by R.
                                                                                          p

It is obvious that ρ(x, y) = 0 if and only if x = y and that ρ(x, y) = ρ(y, x),
                    ppp

but verification of the triangle inequality for the metric (13) requires a little

work. Let


            x = (x, . . ., x)·y = (Y, . . ., Y),Z = (Z, . . ., z)
                    1n1n1n

                      n
be three points in R, and let
                    p


                  a = x − Y,b = y − z(k = 1, ..., n),
                    kkkkkk


just as in Example 3. Then the triangle inequality                            ρ(x, z) <: ρ(x, z) + ρ(y, z)
                              ρρρ


takes the form of Minkowski’s inequality





The inequality is obvious for p = 1, and hence we can confine ourselves to

the case p > 1.

  The proof of (14) for p > 1 is in turn based on Hölder’s inequality





where the numbers p > 1 and q > 1 satisfy the condition





We begin by observing that the inequality (15) is homogeneous, i.e., if it

holds for two points (a, . . ., a) and (b, . . ., b), then it holds for any two
                          1n1n

points (λa, . . ., λa) and (μb, . . ., μb) where λ and μ are arbitrary real
          1n1n

numbers. Therefore we need only prove (15) for the case
















                                        FIGURE 8  Thus, assuming that (17) holds, we now prove that





Consider the two areas S and S shown in Figure 8, associated with the curve
                            12

in the ξη-plane defined by the equation

                                              ρ−1
                                      η = ξ,


or equivalently by the equation

                                              ρ−1
                                      ξ = η,


Then clearly





Moreover, it is apparent from the figure that


                                    S + S > ab
                                      12


for arbitrary positive a and b. It follows that





Setting a = |a|, b = |b|, summing over k from 1 to n, and taking account of
              kk

(16)  and  (17),  we  get  the  desired  inequality  (18).  This  proves  Hölder’s

inequality (15). Note that (15) reduces to Schwarz’s inequality if p = 2.

  It is now an easy matter to prove Minkowski’s inequality (14), starting

from the identity




In fact, setting a = a, b = b and summing over k from 1 to n, we obtain
                      kkNext we apply Holder’s inequality (15) to both sums on the right, bearing

in mind that (p − 1)q = p:





Dividing both sides of this inequality by





we get






which immediately implies (14), thereby proving the triangle inequality in

n
R.
p


  Example 11. Finally let l be the set of all infinite sequences
                                p


                              x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .)
                                      12k


of real numbers satisfying the convergence condition





for some fixed number p  1, where distance between points is defined by





(the case p = 2 has already been considered in Example 7). It follows from

Minkowski’s inequality (14) thatfor any n. Since the series





converge, by hypothesis, we can take the limit as n → ∞ in (21), obtaining






This shows that (20) actually makes sense for arbitrary x, y ∈ l. At the same
                                                                          n

time, we have verified that the triangle inequality holds in l (the other two
                                                                        p

properties of a metric are obviously satisfied). Therefore l is a metric space.
                                                                  p


    Remark. If R = (X, ρ) is a metric space and M is any subset of X, then

obviously R* = (M,  ρ)  is  again  a  metric  space,  called  a subspace of the

original metric space R. This device gives us infinitely more examples of

metric spaces.


    5.2. Continuous mappings and homeomorphisms. Isometric spaces.

Let f be a mapping of one metric space X into another metric space Y, so that f

associates an element y = f(x) ∈ Y with each element x ∈ X. Then f is said to

be continuous at the point X ∈ X if, given any ε > 0, there exists a δ > 0
                                0

such that


                                    ρ′(f(x), f(x)) < ε
                                              0


whenever


                                      ρ(x, x) < δ
                                            0


(here ρ is the metric in X and ρ′ the metric in Y). The mapping f is said to be

continuous on X if it is continuous at every point x ∈ X.


  Remark.  This  definition  reduces  to  the  usual  definition  of  continuity

familiar from calculus if X and Y are both numerical sets, i.e., if f is a real

function defined on some subset of the real line.  Given two metric spaces X and Y, let f be one-to-one mapping of X onto Y,

                      −1
and suppose f and f are both continuous. Then f is called a homeomorphic

mapping, or simply a homeomorphism (between X and Y). Two spaces X and

Y are said to be homeomorphic if there exists a homeomorphism between

them.


  Example. The function





establishes a homeomorphism between the whole real line (−∞, ∞) and the

open interval (−1, 1).


  DEFINITION 2. A one-to-one mapping f of one metric space R = (X, ρ) onto

another metric space R′ = (Y, ρ′) is said to be an isometric mapping (or

simply an isometry) if


                              ρ(x x) = ρ′(f(x), f(x))
                                  1212


for all x, x ∈ R. Correspondingly, the spaces R and R′ are said to be
        12

isometric (to each other).


  Thus if R and R′ are isometric, the “metric relations” between the elements

of R are the same as those between the elements of R′, i.e., R and R′ differ

only in the explicit nature of their elements (this distinction is unimportant

from  the  standpoint  of  metric  space  theory).  From  now  on,  we  will  not

distinguish between isometric spaces, regarding them simply as identical.


  Remark. We will discuss continuity and homeomorphisms from a more

general point of view in Sec. 9.6.


  Problem 1. Given a metric space (X, ρ), prove that





  Problem 2. Verify thatDeduce the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality (3) from this identity.


  Problem 3. Verify that





Deduce Schwarz’s inequality (11) from this identity.


  Problem 4. What goes wrong in Example 10, p. 41 if p < 1?


  Hint. Show that Minkowski’s inequality fails for p < 1.


  Problem 5. Prove that the metric (5) is the limiting case of the metric (13)

in the sense that





    Problem 6. Starting from the inequality (19), deduce Hölder’s integral

inequality





valid for any functions x(t) and y(t) such that the integrals on the right exist.


  Problem 7. Use Hölder’s integral inequality to prove Minkowski’s integral

inequality





  Problem 8. Exhibit an isometry between the spaces C and C.
                                                                  [0, 1][1, 2]6. Convergence. Open and Closed Sets


  6.1. Closure of a set. Limit points. By the open sphere (or open ball)

S(x, r) in a metric space R we mean the set of points x ∈ R satisfying the
  0

inequality


                                      ρ(x, x) < r
                                          0

                        4
(ρ is the metric of R). The fixed point x is called the center of the sphere,
                                                0

and the number r is called its radius. By the closed sphere (or closed ball)

S[x, r] with center x and radius r we mean the set of points x ∈ R satisfying
  00

the inequality


                                      ρ(x, x) < r
                                          0


An  open  sphere  of  radius  ε  with  center x  will  also  be  called  an  ε-
                                                      0

neighborhood of x, denoted by O(x).
                    0ε0

  A  point x ∈  R  is  called  a contact  point  of  a  set M ⊂  R  if  every

neighborhood of x contains at least one point of M. The set of all contact

points of a set M is denoted by [M] and is called the closure of M. Obviously

M ⊂ [M], since every point of M is a contact point of M. By the closure

operator in a metric space R, we mean the mapping of R into R carrying each

set M ⊂ R into its closure [M].


  THEOREM 1. The closure operator has the following properties:

  1)If M ⊂ N, then [M] ⊂ [N];

    2)[[M]] = [M];

  3)[M ∪ N] = [M] ∪ [N];

  4)[∅] = ∅.


  Proof. Property 1) is obvious. To prove property 2), let x ∈ [[M]]. Then

any  given  neighborhood O(x)  contains  a  point x ∈  [M].  Consider  the
                                ε1

sphere O(x) of radius
        ε1
          1

                                  ε = ε ∈ ρ(ε, ε)
                                    11Clearly O(x) is contained in O(x). In fact, if z ∈ O, then ρ(z, x) < ε and
          ε1ε11
          1

hence, since ρ(x, x) = ε − ε, it follows from the triangle inequality that
                    11


                              ρ(z, x) < ε + ε − ε) = ε,
                                          11


i.e., z ∈ O(x). Since x ∈ [M], there is a point x ∈ M in O(x). But then x
            ε12ξ12

∈ O(x) and hence x ∈ [M], since O(x) is an arbitrary neighborhood of x.
    ξε

Therefore [[M]] ⊂ [M]. But obviously [M] ⊂ [[M]] and hence [[M]] = [M],

as required.

  To prove property 3), let x ∈ [M ∪ N] and suppose x ∉ [M] ∪ [N]. Then

x ∉ [M] and x ∉ [N]. But then there exist neighborhoods O(x) and O(x)
                                                                        εε
                                                                          12

such that O(x) contains no points of M while O(x) contains no points of N.
            εε
            12

It follows that the neighborhood O(x), where ε = min {ε, ε}, contains no
                                        ε12

points of either M or N, and hence no points of M ∪ N, contrary to the

assumption that x ∈ [M ∪ N]. Therefore x ∈ [M] ∪ [N], and hence




since x is an arbitrary point of [M ∪N]. On the other hand, since M ⊂ M ∪

N and N ⊂ M ∪ N, it follows from property 1) that [M] ⊂ [M ∪ N] and [N]

⊂ [M ∪ N]. But then


                              [M] ∪ [N] ⊂ [M ∪ N],


which together with (1) implies [M ∪ N] = [M] ∪ [N].

    Finally, to prove property 4), we observe that given any M ⊂ R,


                            [M] = [M ∪ ∅] = [M] ∪ [∅],


by property 3). It follows that [∅] ⊂ [M]. But this is possible for arbitrary M

only if [∅] = ∅. (Alternatively, the set with no elements can have no contact

points!) 


  A point x ∈ R is called a limit point of a set M ⊂ R if every neighborhood

of x contains infinitely many points of M. The limit point may or may not

belong to M. For example, if M is the set of rational numbers in the interval

[0, 1], then every point of [0, 1], rational or not, is a limit point of M.

  A point x belonging to a set M is called an isolated point of M if there is a(“sufficiently small”) neighborhood of x containing no points of M other than

x itself.


    6.2. Convergence and limits. A sequence of points {x} = x, x, . . ., x,
                                                                      n12n

.  .  .  in  a  metric  space R  is  said  to converge  to  a  point x ∈  R  if  every

neighborhood O(x) of x contains all points x starting from a certain index
                  εn

(more exactly, if, given any ε > 0, there is an integer N such that O(x)
                                                                      εε

contains all points x with n > N). The point x is called the limit of the
                        nε

sequence {x}, and we write x → x (as n → ∞). Clearly, {x} converges to x
            nnn

if and only if




It is an immediate consequence of the definition of a limit that

    1)No sequence can have two distinct limits;

  2)If  a  sequence  {x}  converges  to  a  point x,  then  so  does  every
                              n

          subsequence of {x}
                              n

(give the details).


  THEOREM 2. A necessary and sufficient condition for a point x to be a

contact point of a set M is that there exist a sequence {x} of points of M
                                                                      n

converging to x.


  Proof. The condition is necessary, since if x is a contact point of M, then

every neighborhood O(x) contains at least one point x ∈ M, and these
                          1/nn

points form a sequence {x} converging to M. The sufficiency is obvious. 
                            n


  THEOREM 2′. A necessary and sufficient condition for a point x to be a limit

point of a set M is that there exist a sequence {x} of distinct points of M
                                                            n

converging to x.


  Proof. Clearly, if x is a limit point of M, then the points x ∈ O(x) ∩ M
                                                                      n1/n

figuring in the proof of Theorem 2 can be chosen to be distinct. This proves

the necessity, and the sufficiency is again obvious.     6.3. Dense subsets. Separable spaces. Let A and B be two subsets of a

metric space R. Then A is said to be dense in B if [A] ⊃ B. In particular, A is

said to be everywhere dense (in R) if [A] = R. A set A is said to be nowhere

dense if it is dense in no (open) sphere at all.


                                                                                1
  Example 1. The set of all rational points is dense in the real line R.


  Example  2.  The  set  of  all  points x  =  (x, x,  .  .  ., x)  with  rational
                                                      12n

coordinates is dense in each of the spaces  and  introduced in Examples

3–5, pp. 38–39.


  Example 3. The set of all points x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .) with only finitely
                                                12k

many nonzero coordinates, each a rational number, is dense in the space l
                                                                                          2

introduced in Example 7, p. 39.


  Example 4. The set of all polynomials with rational coefficients is dense

in both spaces C and  introduced in Examples 6 and 8, pp. 39 and 40.
                  [a,b]


    DEFINITION. A metric space is said to be separable if it has a countable

everywhere dense subset.


  Example 5. The spaces  and  are all separable,

since the sets in Examples 1–4 above are all countable.


  Example  6.  The  “discrete  space” M  described  in Example  1,  p.  38

contains a countable everywhere dense subset and hence is separable if and

only if it is itself a countable set, since clearly [M] = M in this case.


  Example 7. There is no countable everywhere dense set in the space m of

all bounded sequences, introduced in Example 9, p. 41. In fact, consider the

set E of all sequences consisting exclusively of zeros and ones. Clearly, E has

the power of the continuum (recall Theorem 6, Sec. 2.5), since there is a one-

to-one correspondence between E and the set of all subsets of the set Z = {1,
                                                                                  +

2, . . ., n, . . .} (describe the correspondence). According to formula (12), p.

41, the distance between any two points of E equals 1. Suppose we surround

each  point  of E  by  an  open  sphere  of  radius ,  thereby  obtaining  an

uncountably infinite family of pairwise disjoint spheres. Then if some set Mis everywhere dense in m, there must be at least one point of M in each of the

spheres. It follows that M cannot be countable and hence that m cannot be

separable.


    6.4. Closed sets. We say that a subset M of a metric space R is closed if

it coincides with its own closure, i.e., if [M] = M. In other words, a set is

called closed if it contains all its limit points (see Problem 2).


  Example 1. The empty set ∅ and the whole space R are closed sets.


  Example 2. Every closed interval [a, b] on the real line is a closed set.


  Example 3.  Every  closed  sphere  in  a  metric  space  is  a  closed  set.  In

particular, the set of all functions f in the space C such that |f(t)|  K
                                                              [a,b]

(where K is a constant) is closed.


  Example 4. The set of all functions f in C such that |f(t)| < K (an open
                                                    [a,b]

sphere)  is  not  closed.  The  closure  of  this  set  is  the  closed  sphere  in  the

preceding example.


  Example 5. Any set consisting of a finite number of points is closed.


  THEOREM  3. The  intersection  of  an  arbitrary  number  of  closed  sets  is

closed. The union of a finite number of closed sets is closed.


  Proof. Given arbitrary sets F indexed by a parameter α, let x be a limit
                                    α

point of the intersection





Then any neighborhood O(x) contains infinitely many points of F, and hence
                              ε

infinitely many points of each F. Therefore x is a limit point of each F and
                                    αα

hence belongs to each F, since the sets F are all closed. It follows that x ∈
                            αα

F, and hence that F itself is closed.

    Next letbe the union of a finite number of closed sets F, and suppose x does not
                                                          k

belong to F. Then x does not belong to any of the sets F, and hence cannot
                                                                    k

be a limit point of any of them. But then, for every k, there is a neighborhood

O(x) containing no more than a finite number of points of F. Choosing
εkk


                                ε = min {ε, . . ., ε},
                                            1n


we get a neighborhood O(x) containing no more than a finite number of
                              ε

points of F, so that x cannot be a limit point of F. This proves that a point x ∉

F cannot be a limit point of F. Therefore F is closed. 


    6.5. Open sets. A point x is called an interior point of a set M if x has a

neighborhood O(x) ⊂ M, i.e., a neighborhood consisting entirely of points of
                  ε

M. A set is said to be open if its points are all interior points.


  Example 1. Every open interval (a, b) on the real line is an open set. In

fact, if a < x < b, choose ε = min {x − a, b − x}. Then clearly O(x) ⊂ (a, b).
                                                                          ε


  Example 2. Every open sphere S(a, r) in a metric space is an open set. In

fact, x ∈ S(a, r) implies ρ(a, x) < r. Hence, choosing ε = r − ρ(a, x), we have

O(x) = S(x, ε) ⊂ S(a, r).
ε


  Example 3. Let M be the set of all functions f in C such that f(t) < g(t),
                                                              [a,b]

where g is a fixed function in C. Then M is an open subset of C.
                                    [a,b][a,b]


  THEOREM 4. A subset M of a metric space R is open if and only if its

complement R − M is closed.


  Proof. If M is open, then every point x ∈ M has a neighborhood (entirely)

contained in M. Therefore no point x ∈ M can be a contact point of R − M.

In other words, if x is a contact point of R − M, then x ∈ R − M, i.e., R − M

is closed.

    Conversely, if R − M is closed, then any point x ∈ M must have a

neighborhood  contained  in M,  since  otherwise  every  neighborhood  of xwould contain points of R − M, i.e., x would be a contact point of R − M not

in R − M. Therefore M is open. 


    COROLLARY. The empty set ∅ and the whole space R are open sets.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of Theorem 4 and Example 1, Sec. 6.4. 



  THEOREM 5. The union of an arbitrary number of open sets is open. The

intersection of a finite number of open sets is open.


  Proof.  This  is  the  “dual”  of Theorem  3.  The  proof  is  an  immediate

consequence of Theorem 4 and formulas (3)–(4), p. 4. 


    6.6. Open and closed sets on the real line. The structure of open and

closed sets in a given metric space can be quite complicated. This is true even

                                                                                          n
for open and closed sets in a Euclidean space of two or more dimensions (R,

n  2). In the one-dimensional case, however, it is an easy matter to give a

complete description of all open sets (and hence of all closed sets):


  THEOREM 6. Every open set G on the real line is the union of a finite or

                                                            5
countable system of pairwise disjoint open intervals.


  Proof. Let x be an arbitrary point of G. By the definition of an open set,

there is at least one open interval containing x and contained in G. Let I be
                                                                                      x

the union of all such open intervals. Then, as we now show, I is itself an
                                                                            x
                            6
open interval. In fact, let


                              a = inf I,b =sup I
                                        xx


(where we allow the cases a = −∞ and b = +∞). Then obviously




Moreover, suppose y is an arbitrary point of (a, b) distinct from x, where, to

be explicit, we assume that a < y < x. Then there is a point y′ ∈ I such that a
                                                                            x

< y′ < y (why?). Hence G contains an open interval containing the points y′

and x. But then this interval also contains y, i.e., y ∈ I. (The case y > x is
                                                                  xtreated  similarly.)  Moreover,  the  point x  belongs  to I,  by  hypothesis.  It
                                                                  x

follows that I ⊃ (a, b), and hence by (2) that I = (a, b). Thus I is itself an
              xxx

open interval, as asserted, in fact the open interval (a, b).

  By its very construction, the interval (a, b) is contained in G and is not a

subset  of  a  larger  interval  contained  in G.  Moreover,  it  is  clear  that  two

intervals I and I corresponding to distinct points x and x′ either coincide or
          xx′

else are disjoint (otherwise I and I would both be contained in a larger
                                  xx′

interval I ∪ I = I ∈ G. There are no more than countably many such
          xx·

pairwise disjoint intervals I. In fact, choosing an arbitrary rational point in
                                x

each I, we establish a one-to-one correspondence between the intervals I
      xx

and a subset of the rational numbers. Finally, it is obvious that





    COROLLARY. Every closed set on the real line can be obtained by deleting

a finite or countable system of pairwise disjoint intervals from the line.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of Theorems 4 and 6. 


  Example 1. Every closed interval [a, b] is a closed set (here a and b are

necessarily finite).


  Example 2. Every single-element set {x} is closed.
                                                  0


  Example 3. The union of a finite number of closed intervals and single-

element sets is a closed set.


  Example 4 (The Cantor set). A more interesting example of a closed set

on the line can be constructed as follows: Delete the open interval (, ) from

the closed interval F = [0, 1], and let F denote the remaining closed set,
                        01

consisting of two closed intervals. Then delete the open intervals (, ) and ,

) from F, and let F denote the remaining closed set, consisting of four
          12

closed  intervals.  Then  delete  the  “middle  third”  from  each  of  these  four

intervals, getting a new closed set F, and so on (see Figure 9). Continuing
                                          3

this process indefinitely, we get a sequence of closed sets F such that
                                                                    n                        F ⊃ F ⊃ F ⊃ . . . ⊃ F ⊃ . . .
                          012n


(such a sequence is said to be decreasing). The intersection





of all these sets is called the Cantor set. Clearly F is closed, by Theorem 3,

and is obtained from the unit interval [0, 1] by deleting a countable number of

                                                                                        n−1
open intervals. In fact, at the nth stage of the construction, we delete 2

                              n
intervals, each of length 1/3.

  To describe the structure of the set F, we first note that F contains the

points




i.e., the end points of the deleted intervals (together with the points 0 and 1).
















                                        FIGURE 9

However F contains many other points. In fact, given any x ∈ [0, 1], suppose

we write x in ternary notation, representing x as a series





where each of the numbers a, a, . . ., a, . . . can only take one of the three
                                  12n

values 0, 1, 2. Then it is easy to see that x belongs to F if and only if x has arepresentation (4) such that none of the numbers a, a, . . ., a, . . . equals 1
                                                            12n
                        7
(think things through).

    Remarkably enough, the set F has the power of the continuum, i.e., there

are as many points in F as in the whole interval [0, 1], despite the fact that the

sum of the lengths of the deleted intervals equals




To see this, we associate a new point





                              8
with each point (4), where






In this way, we set up a one-to-one correspondence between F and the whole

interval [0, 1]. It follows that F has the power of the continuum, as asserted.

Let A be the set of points (3). Then F = A ∪ A, where the set A = F − A
    11221

is uncountable, since A is countable and F itself is not. The points of A are
                          11

often called “points (of F) of the first kind,” while those of A are called
                                                                            2

“points of the second kind.”


  Problem 1. Give an example of a metric space R and two open spheres

S(x, r) and S(y, r) in R such that S(x, r) ⊂ S(y, r) although r > r.
    121212


  Problem 2. Prove that every contact point of a set M is either a limit point

of M or an isolated point of M.


  Comment. In particular, [M] can only contain points of the following three

types:

    a)Limit points of M belonging to M;

    b)Limit points of M which do not belong to M;

    c)Isolated points of M.Thus [M] is the union of M and the set of all its limit points.


  Problem 3. Prove that if x → x, y → y as n → ∞, then ρ(x, y) → ρ(x,
                                  nnnn

y).


  Hint. Use Problem 1a, p. 45.


  Problem 4. Let f be a mapping of one metric space X into another metric

space Y. Prove that f is continuous at a point x if and only if the sequence
                                                        0

{y} = {f(x)} converges to y = f(x) whenever the sequence {x} converges
nn0n

to x.
  0


  Problem 5. Prove that

    a)The closure of any set M is a closed set;

    b)[M] is the smallest closed set containing M.


  Problem 6. Is the union of infinitely many closed sets necessarily closed?

How about the intersection of infinitely many open sets? Give examples.


  Problem 7. Prove directly that the point  belongs to the Cantor set F,

although  it  is  not  an  end  point  of  any  of  the  open  intervals  deleted  in

constructing F.


  Hint. The point  divides the interval [0, 1] in the ratio 1:3. It also divides

the interval [0, ] left after deleting [, ] in the ratio 3:1, and so on.


  Problem 8. Let F be the Cantor set. Prove that

    a)The points of the first kind, i.e., the points (3) form an everywhere

        dense subset of F;

    b)The numbers of the form t + t, where t, t ∈ F, fill the whole
                                          1212

        interval [0, 2].


  Problem 9. Given a metric space R, let A be a subset of R and x a point of

R. Then the numberis called the distance between A and x. Prove that

  a)x ∈ A implies ρ(A, x) = 0, but not conversely;

    b)ρ(A, x) is a continuous function of x (for fixed A);

    c)ρ(A, x) = 0 if and only if x is a contact point of A;

  d)[A] = A ∪ M, where M is the set of all points x such that ρ(A, x) = 0.


  Problem 10. Let A and B be two subsets of a metric space R. Then the

number





is called the distance between A and B. Show that ρ(A, B) = 0 if A ∩ B ≠ ∅,

but not conversely.


  Problem 11. Let M be the set of all functions f in C satisfying a
                          K[a,b]

Lipschitz condition, i.e., the set of all f such that


                              |f(t) - f(t)|  K |t − t|
                                  1212


for all t, t ∈ [a, b], where K is a fixed positive number. Prove that
      12

  a)M is closed and in fact is the closure of the set of all differentiable
          K

        functions on [a,b] such that |f′(t)|  K;

    b)The set





        of all functions satisfying a Lipschitz condition for some K is not

        closed;

        c)The closure of M is the whole space C.
                                                          [a,b]


                                                                              n
  Problem 12. An open set G in n-dimensional Euclidean space R is said to

                                                                                  9
be connected if any points x, y ∈ G can be joined by a polygonal line lying

                                                    22
entirely in G. For example, the (open) disk x + y < 1 is connected, but not

the union of the two disks                          2222
                          x + y < 1,(x − 2)+ y < 1


(even though they share a contact point). An open subset of an open set G is

called a component of G if it is connected and is not contained in a larger

connected subset of G. Use Zorn’s lemma to prove that every open set G in

n
R  is  the  union  of  no  more  than  countably  many  pairwise  disjoint

components.


  Comment. In the case n = 1 (i.e., on the real line) every connected open set

is an open interval, possibility one of the infinite intervals (− ∞, ∞), (a, ∞),

(−∞, b).  Thus Theorem  6  on  the  structure  of  open  sets  on  the  line  is

tantamount to two assertions:

    1)Every  open  set  on  the  line  is  the  union  of  a  finite  or  countable

        number of components;

    2)Every open connected set on the line is an open interval.

                                                    n
The first assertion holds for open sets in R (and in fact is susceptible to

further generalizations), while the second assertion pertains specifically to the

real line.



7. Complete Metric Spaces


  7.1. Definitions and examples. The reader is presumably already familiar

with the notion of the completeness of the real line. The real line is, of course,

a particularly simple example of a metric space. We now make the natural

generalization of the notion of completeness to the case of an arbitrary metric

space.


  DEFINITION 1. A sequence {x} of points in a metric space R with metric ρ
                                    n

is said to satisfy the Cauchy criterion if, given any ε > 0, there is an integer

N such that ρ(x, x) < ε for all n, n′ > N.
εnn′ε


  DEFINITION 2. A subsequence {x} of points in a metric space R is called a
                                        n

Cauchy sequence (or a fundamental sequence) if  it  satisfies  the  Cauchy

criterion.  THEOREM 1. Every convergent sequence {x} is fundamental.
                                                    n


  Proof. If {x} converges to a limit x, then, given any ε > 0, there is an
                n

integer N such that
        ε





for all n > N. But then
            ε




for all n, n′ > N. 
                ε


  DEFINITION 3. A metric space R is said to be complete if every Cauchy

sequence  in  R  converges  to  an  element  of  R.  Otherwise  R  is  said  to  be

incomplete.


  Example 1. Let R be the “space of isolated points” considered in Example

1, p. 38. Then the Cauchy sequences in R are just the “stationary sequences,”

i.e., the sequences {x} all of whose terms are the same starting from some
                        n

index n. Every such sequence is obviously convergent to an element of R.

Hence R is complete.


                                                                    1
  Example  2.  The  completeness  of  the  real  line R  is  familiar  from

elementary analysis.


                                                                    n
  Example 3. The completeness of Euclidean n-space R follows from that

  1
of R. In fact, let




                                                n
be a fundamental sequence of points of R. Then, given any ε > 0, there exists

an N such that
    εfor all p, q > N. It follows that
                ε




                                                                          1
for all p, q > N, i.e., each  is a fundamental sequence in R. Let
                ε


                                    x = (x . . ., x),
                                          1n


where





Then obviously




                                        nn
This proves the completeness of R. The completeness of the spaces R and
                                                                                    0
n
R introduced in Examples 4 and 5, p. 39 is proved in almost the same way
1

(give the details).


  Example 4. Let {x(t)} be a Cauchy sequence in the function space C
                        n[a, b]

considered in Example 6, p. 39. Then, given any ε > 0, there is an N such
                                                                                    ε

that




for all n, n′ > N and all t ∈ [a, b]. It follows that the sequence {x(t)} is
                  εn

uniformly convergent. But the limit of a uniformly convergent sequence of

continuous functions is itself a continuous function (see Problem 1). Taking

the limit as n′ → ∞ in (1), we find that


                                    |x(t) - x(t)|  ε
                                      n


for all n > N and all t ∈ [a, b], i.e., {x(t)} converges in the metric of C
              εn[a,b]

to a function x(t) ∈ C. Hence C is a complete metric space.
                        [a, b)[a,b]                              (n)
  Example 5.  Next  let x  be  a  sequence  in  the  space l  considered  in
                                                                        2

Example 7, p. 39, so that







                          (n)
Suppose further that {x} is a Cauchy sequence. Then, given any ε > 0, there

is a N such that
    ε





if n, n′ > N. It follows that
          ε




i.e., for every k the sequence  is fundamental and hence convergent. Let






                                                                          (n)
Then, as we now show, x is itself a point of l and moreover {x} converges
                                                    2

to x in the l metric, so that l is a complete metric space.
            22

  In fact, (2) implies





for any fixed M. Holding n fixed in (3) and taking the limit as n′ → ∞, we get





Since (4) holds for arbitrary M, we can in turn take the limit of (4) as M → ∞,

obtainingJust as on p. 40, the convergence of the two series





implies that of the series





This proves that x ∈ I. Moreover, since ε is arbitrarily small, (5) implies
                        2





      (n)
i.e., {x} converges to x in the l metric, as asserted.
                                    2


  Example 6. It is easy to show that the space  of Example 8, p. 40 is

incomplete. If












then {φ(t)} is a fundamental sequence in , since
      n





However, {φ(t)} cannot converge to a function in . In fact, consider
              n

the discontinuous functionThen, given any function f ∈ , it follows from Schwarz’s inequality

(obviously still valid for piecewise continuous functions) that





But the integral on the left is nonzero, by the continuity of f, and moreover it

is clear that





Therefore





cannot converge to zero as n → ∞.


  7.2. The nested sphere theorem. A sequence of closed spheres


                        S[x, r], S[x, r], .. ., S[x, r], ...
                            1122nn


in a metric space R is said to be nested (or decreasing) if


                S[x, r] ⊃ S[x r] ⊃ . . . ⊃ S[x, r] ⊃ . . ..
                      1122nn


Using this concept, we can prove a simple criterion for the completeness of

R:

    THEOREM 2 (Nested sphere theorem). A metric space R is complete if and

only if every nested sequence {S} = {S[x, r]} of closed spheres in R such
                                      nnn

that r → 0 as n → ∞ has a nonempty intersection
    n    Proof. If R is complete and if {S} = {S[x, r]} is any nested sequence of
                                          nnn

closed spheres in R such that r → 0 as n → ∞, then the sequence {x} of
                                    nn

centers of the spheres is fundamental, since ρ(x, x) < r for n′ > n and r →
                                                      nn′nn

0 as n → ∞. Therefore {x} has a limit. Let
                            n




Then





In fact, S  contains  every  point  of  the  sequence  {x} except possibly the
          nn

points x, x, . . ., x, and hence x is a limit point of every sphere S. But S
        12n−1nn

is closed, and hence x ∈ S for all n.
                              n

    Conversely, suppose every nested sequence of closed spheres in R with

radii converging to zero has a nonempty intersection, and let {x} be any
                                                                              n

fundamental sequence in R. Then x has a limit in R. To see this, use the fact

that {x} is fundamental to choose a term x of the sequence {x} such that
      nnn
                                                  1





for all n  n, and let S be the closed sphere of radius 1 with center x. Then
            11n
                                                                                  1

choose a term x of {x} such that n > n and
                nn21
                  2





for all n  n, and let S be the closed sphere of radius  with center x.
              22n2

Continue this construction indefinitely, i.e., once having chosen terms x,
                                                                                        n
                                                                                          1

x, . . ., x (n < n < ... < n), choose a term x such that n > n and
nn12knk+1k+1k
1k                                                                    k
for all n  n, let S be the closed sphere of radius 1/2 with center x,
              k+1k+1k+1

and so on. This gives a nested sequence {S} of closed spheres with radii
                                                    n

converging  to  zero.  By  hypothesis,  these  spheres  have  a  nonempty

intersection, i.e., there is a point x in all the spheres. This point is obviously

the limit of the sequence {x}. But if a fundamental sequence contains a
                                  n
                                  k

subsequence converging to x, then the sequence itself must converge to x

(why?), i.e.,





    7.3. Baire’s theorem. It will be recalled from Sec. 6.3 that a subset A of

a metric space R is said to be nowhere dense in R if it is dense in no (open)

sphere at all, or equivalently, if every sphere S ⊂ R contains another sphere S

′  such  that S′  ∩ A  = ∅  (check  the  equivalence).  This  concept  plays  an

important role in


  THEOREM 3 (Baire). A complete metric space R cannot be represented as

the union of a countable number of nowhere dense sets.


  Proof. Suppose to the contrary that





where every set A is nowhere dense in R. Let S ⊂ R be a closed sphere of
                    n0

radius 1. Since A is nowhere dense in S, being nowhere dense in R, there is
                  10

a closed sphere S of radius less than  such that S ⊂ S and S ∩ A = ∅.
                    11011

Since A is nowhere dense in S, being nowhere dense in S, there is a closed
        210

sphere S of radius less than  such that S ⊂ S and S ∩ A = ∅, and so on.
        22122

In  this  way,  we  get  a  nested  sequence  of  closed  spheres  {S}  with  radii
                                                                          n

converging to zero such that


                          S A = ∅(n = 1, 2, . . .).
                            nn


By the nested sphere theorem, the intersectioncontains a point x. By construction, x cannot belong to any of the sets A, i.e.,
                                                                                    n





It follows that





contrary to (6). Hence the representation (6) is impossible. 


    COROLLARY. A  complete  metric  space  R  without  isolated  points  is

uncountable.


  Proof. Every single-element set {x} is nowhere dense in R. 


    7.4. Completion of a metric space. As we now show, an incomplete

metric space can always be enlarged (in an essentially unique way) to give a

complete metric space.


  DEFINITION 4. Given a metric space R with closure [R], a complete metric

space R* is called a completion of R if R ⊂ R* and [R] = R*, i.e., if R is a

subset of R* everywhere dense in R*.


  Example 1. Clearly R* = R if R is already complete (see Problem 7).


  Example 2. The space of all real numbers is the completion of the space of

all rational numbers.


    THEOREM 4. Every metric space R has a completion. This completion is

unique to within an isometric mapping carrying every point x ∈ R into itself.


  Proof. The proof is somewhat lengthy, but completely straight-forward.

First  we  prove  the uniqueness,  showing  that  if R*  and R**  are  two

completions of R, then there is a one-to-one mapping x** = φ(x*) of R* ontoR** such that φ(x) = x for all x ∈ R and




(y** = φ(y*)), where ρ is the distance in R* and ρ the distance in R**. The
                          12

required mapping φ is constructed as follows: Let x* be an arbitrary point of

R*. Then, by the definition of a completion, there is a sequence {x} of points
                                                                              n

of R converging to x*. The points of the sequence {x} also belong to R**,
                                                                n

where they form a fundamental sequence (why?). Therefore {x} converges
                                                                            n

to  a  point x** ∈  R**,  since R**  is  complete.  It  is  clear  that x**  is

independent of the choice of the sequence {x} converging to the point x*
                                                      n

(why?). If we set φ(x*) = x**, then φ is the required mapping. In fact, φ(x) =

x for all x ∈ R, since if x → x ∈ R, then obviously x = x* ∈ R*, x** = x.
                            n

Moreover, suppose x → x*, y → y* in R*, while x → x**, y → y** in
                        nnnn

R**. Then, if ρ is the distance in R,





(see Problem 3, p. 54), while at the same time





But (8) and (8′) together imply (7).

  We  must  now  prove  the existence  of  a  completion  of R.  Given  an

arbitrary metric space R, we say that two Cauchy sequences {x} and {} in
                                                                          nn

R are equivalent and write {x} ∼ {} if
                                nn




As anticipated by the notation and terminology, ∼ is reflexive, symmetric and

transitive, i.e., ∼ is an equivalence relation in the sense of Sec. 1.4. Therefore

the set of all Cauchy sequences of points in the space R can be partitioned

into classes of equivalent sequences. Let these classes be the points of a new

space R*. Then we define the distance between two arbitrary points x *, y *

∈ R* by the formulawhere {x} is any “representative” of x* (namely, any Cauchy sequence in
        n

the class x*) and {y} is any representative of y*.
                      n

  The next step is to verify that (9) is in fact a distance, i.e., that (9) exists,

is independent of the choice of the sequences {x} ∈ x*, {y} ∈ y*, and
                                                          nn

satisfies the three properties of a distance figuring in Definition 1, p. 37.

Given any ε > 0, it follows from the triangle inequality in R (recall Problem

1b, p. 45) that










for all sufficiently large n and n′. Therefore the sequence of real numbers {s}
                                                                                        n

= {ρ(x, y)} is fundamental and hence has a limit. This limit is independent
      nn

of the choice {x} ∈ x*, {Y} ∈ y*. In fact, suppose
                nn




Then




by a calculation analogous to (10). But





since {x} ∼ {}, {y} ∼ {}, and hence
        nnnn




As for the three properties of a metric, it is obvious that ρ(x*, y*) = ρ(y*,
                                                                      11x*), and the fact that ρ(x*, y*) = 0 if and only if x* = y* is an immediate
                          1

consequence of the definition of equivalent Cauchy sequences. To verify the

triangle inequality in R*, we start from the triangle inequality


                          ρ(x, z)  ρ(x, Y) + ρ(Y, z)
                              nnnnnn


in the original space R and then take the limit as n → ∞, obtaining





i.e.,


                        ρ(x*, z*) < ρ(x*, y*) + ρ(y*, z*).
                          111


  We now come to the crucial step of showing that R* is a completion of R.

Suppose that with every point x ∈ R, we associate the class x* ∈ R* of all

Cauchy sequences converging to x. Let





Then clearly





(recall Problem 3, p. 54), while on the other hand





by definition. Therefore


                                ρ(x, y) = ρ(x* , y*),
                                            1


and  hence  the  mapping  of R  into R*  carrying x  into x*  is isometric.

Accordingly, we need no longer distinguish between the original space R and

its image in R*, in particular between the two metrics ρ and ρ (recall the
                                                                            1

relevant comments on p. 44). In other words, R can be regarded as a subset of

R*. The theorem will be proved once we succeed in showing that  1)R is everywhere dense in R*, i.e., [R] = R;

  2)R* is complete.

To this end, given any point x* ∈ R* and any ε > 0, choose a representative

of x*, namely a Cauchy sequence {x} in the class x*. Let N be such that
                                            n

ρ(x, x) < ε for all n, n′ > N. Then
  nn′





if n > N, i.e., every neighborhood of the point x* contains a point of R. It

follows that [R] = R.

    Finally,  to  show  that R*  is  complete,  we  first  note  that  by  the  very

definition  of R*,  any  Cauchy  sequence  {x}  consisting  of  points  in R
                                                      n

converges to some point in R*, namely to the point x* ∈ R* defined by {x}.
                                                                                        n

Moreover,  since R  is  dense  in R*,  given  any  Cauchy  sequence {x*}
                                                                                        1

consisting  of  points  in R*,  we  can  find  an  equivalent  sequence  {x}
                                                                                        n

consisting of points in R. In fact, we need only choose x to be any point of R
                                                                  n

such that ρ(x, x*) < l/n. The resulting sequence {x} is fundamental, and, as
              nnn

just shown, converges to a point x * ∈ R*. But then the sequence {x*} also
                                                                                    n

converges to x*. 


    Example. If R is the space of all rational numbers, then R* is the space of

all real numbers, both equipped with the distance ρ(x, y) = |x − y|. In this way,

we can “construct the real number system.” However, there still remains the

problem  of  suitably  defining  sums  and  products  of  real  numbers  and

verifying that the usual axioms of arithmetic are satisfied.


  Problem 1. Prove that the limit f(t) of a uniformly convergent sequence of

functions {f(t)} continuous on [a, b] is itself a function continuous on [a, b].
            n


  Hint. Clearly




where t, t ∈ [a, b]. Use the uniform convergence to make the sum of the
          0

first and third terms on the right small for sufficiently large n. Then use thecontinuity of f(t) to make the second term small for t sufficiently close to t.
              n0


  Problem 2. Prove that the space m in Example 9, p. 41 is complete.


  Problem  3.  Prove  that  if R  is  complete,  then  the  intersection 

figuring in Theorem 2 consists of a single point.


  Problem 4. By the diameter of a subset A of a metric space R is meant the

number





Suppose R is complete, and let {A} be a sequence of closed subsets of R
                                        n

nested in the sense that


                          A ⊃ A ⊃ . . . ⊃ A ⊃ . . .,
                            12n


Suppose further that





Prove that the intersection  is nonempty.


    Problem 5. A subset A of a metric space R is said to be bounded if its

diameter d(A) is finite. Prove that the union of a finite number of bounded

sets is bounded.


  Problem 6. Give an example of a complete metric space R and a nested

sequence {A} of closed subsets of R such that
            n





Reconcile this example with Problem 4.


  Problem  7.  Prove  that  a  subspace  of  a  complete  metric  space R  iscomplete if and only if it is closed.


  Problem 8. Prove that the real line equipped with the distance


                          ρ(x, y) = [arc tan x − arc tan y|


is an incomplete metric space.


  Problem 9. Give an example of a complete metric space homeomorphic to

an incomplete metric space.


  Hint. Consider the example on p. 44.


  Comment. Thus homeomorphic metric spaces can have different “metric

properties.”


  Problem 10. Carry out the program discussed in the last sentence of the

example on p. 65.


  Hint. If {x} and {y} are Cauchy sequences of rational numbers serving
              nn

as “representatives” of real numbers x* and y*, respectively, define x* + y* as

the real number with representative {x + y}.
                                            nn



8. Contraction Mappings


  8.1. Definition of a contraction mapping. The fixed point theorem. Let

A be a mapping of a metric space R into itself. Then x is called a fixed point

of A if Ax = x, i.e., if A carries x into itself. Suppose there exists a number α <

1 such that




for every pair of points x, y ∈ R.. Then A is said to be a contraction mapping.

Every contraction mapping is automatically continuous, since it follows from

the “contraction condition” (1) that Ax → Ax whenever x → x.
                                            nn


                                              10
  THEOREM  1  (Fixed  point  theorem). Every  contraction  mapping  A

defined on a complete metric space R has a unique fixed point.                                                11
  Proof. Given an arbitrary point x R, let
                                        0




Then the sequence {x} is fundamental. In fact, assuming to be explicit that n
                        n

 n′, we have









But the expression on the right can be made arbitrarily small for sufficiently

large n,  since  α  <  1.  Since R  is  complete,  the  sequence  {x},  being
                                                                                n

fundamental, has a limit




Then, by the continuity of A,





This proves the existence of a fixed point x. To prove the uniqueness of x, we

note that if


                                A x = x,A y = y,


(1) becomes


                                  ρ(x, y)  αρ(x, y).


But then ρ(x, y) = 0 since α < 1, and hence x = y. 


  Remark.  The  fixed  point  theorem  can  be  used  to  prove  existence  and

uniqueness  theorems  for  solutions  of  equations  of  various  types.  Besides

showing that an equation of the form Ax = x has a unique solution, the fixed

point  theorem  also  gives  a  practical  method  for  finding  the  solution,  i.e.,calculation of the “successive approximations” (2). In fact, as shown in the

proof,  the  approximations  (2)  actually  converge  to  the  solution  of  the

equation Ax = x. For this reason, the fixed point theorem is often called the

method of successive approximations.


  Example 1. Let f be a function defined on the closed interval [a, b] which

which maps [a, b] into itself and satisfies a Lipschitz condition




with constant K < 1. Then f is a contraction mapping, and hence, by
















                                        FIGURE 10

Theorem 1, the sequence




converges  to  the  unique  root  of  the  equation f(x)  = x.  In  particular,  the

“contraction condition” (3) holds if f has a continuous derivative f′ on [a, b]

such that


                                    |f′(x)  k < 1.


The behavior of the successive approximations (4) in the cases 0 < f′(x) < 1

and −1 < f′(x) < 0 is shown in Figures 10 and 11.


  Example 2. Consider the mapping A of n-dimensional space into itselfgiven by the system of linear equations



















                                        FIGURE 11


If A  is  a  contraction  mapping,  we  can  use  the  method  of  successive

approximations to solve the equation Ax = x. The conditions under which A is

a contraction mapping depend on the choice of metric. We now examine

three cases:

                      n
    1)The space R with metric
                        0




        In this case,











        and the contraction condition                      n
    2)The space R with metric
                        1





        Here








        and the contraction condition is now





                                          n
    3)Ordinary Euclidean space R with metric






        Using the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have





        and the contraction condition becomes





  Thus, if at least one of the conditions (6)–(8) holds, there exists a unique

point x = (x, x, . . ., x) such that
            12nThe sequence of successive approximations to this solution of the equation x

= Ax are of the form










where





                                  (0)
and we can choose any point x as the “zeroth approximation.”

  Each of the conditions (6)–(8) is sufficient for applicability of the method

of  successive  approximations,  but  none  of  them  is necessary.  In  fact,

examples  can  be  constructed  in  which  each  of  the  conditions  (6)–(8)  is

satisfied, but not the other two.


  Theorem 1 has the following useful generalization, which will be needed

later (see Example 2, p. 75):


  THEOREM 1′. Given a continuous mapping of a complete metric space R

                        n
into itself, suppose A is a contraction mapping (n an integer > 1). Then A

has a unique fixed point.


  Proof. Choosing any point x ∈ R, let
                                    0





Then, by the continuity of A,    n
But A is a contraction mapping, and hence




where α < 1. It follows that





i.e., Ax = x so that x is a fixed point of A. To prove the uniqueness of x, we

                                                                              n
merely note that if A has more than one fixed point, then so does A, which is

                                        n
impossible, by Theorem 1, since A is a contraction mapping. 


    8.2.  Contraction  mappings  and  differential  equations.  The  most

interesting applications of Theorems 1 and 1′ arise when the space R is a

function  space.  We  can  then  use  these  theorems  to  prove  a  number  of

existence and uniqueness theorems for differential and integral equations, as

shown in this section and the next.


  THEOREM 2 (Picard). Given a function f(x, y) defined and continuous on a

                                                    12
plane domain G containing the point (x, y), suppose f satisfies a Lipschitz
                                              00

condition of the form




in  the  variable  y.  Then  there  is  an  interval  |x  −  x|   δ in  which  the
                                                                0

differential equation





has a unique solution


                                        y = φ(x)


satisfying the initial condition    Proof. Together the differential equation (10) and the initial condition

(11) are equivalent to the integral equation





By the continuity of f, we have




                                                                13
in some domain G′ ⊂ G containing the point (x, y). Choose δ > 0 such
                                                          00

that

  1)(x , y) ∈ G′ if |x − x|  δ, |y − Y|  Kδ
                                00

    2)Mδ < 1,


  and let C* be the space of continuous functions φ defined on the interval |x

− x|  δ and such that |φ(x) − Y|  Kδ, equipped with the metric
  10




The space C* is complete, since it is a closed subspace of the space of all

continuous  functions  on  [x  −  δ, x  +  δ].  Consider  the  mapping   = Aφ
                                00

defined by the integral equation





Clearly A is a contraction mapping carrying C* into itself. In fact, if φ ∈ C*,

|x − x|  δ
    0





by (13), and hence  = Aφ also belongs to C*. Moreover,and hence




after maximizing with respect to x. But Mδ < 1, so that A is a contraction

mapping.  It  follows  from Theorem 1  that  the  equation  φ  = Aφ,  i.e.,  the

integral equation (12), has a unique solution in the space C*. 

    Theorem 2 can easily be generalized to the case of systems of differential

equations:

    THEOREM 2′. Given n functions f(x, y, . . ., y) defined and continuous on
                                          i1n

an (n + 1)-dimensional domain G containing the point


                                  (x, y, . . ., y),
                                      0010n


suppose each f satisfies a Lipschitz condition of the form
                i





in the variables y, . . ., y. Then there is an interval |x − x|  δ in which the
                    1n0

system of differential equations





has a unique solution


                              y = φ(x), . . ., y = φ(x)
                                11nn


satisfying the initial conditions




    Proof. Together the differential equations (14) and the initial conditions

(15) are equivalent to the system of integral equationsBy the continuity of the functions f, we have
                                        i




in some domain G′ ⊂ G containing the point (x, y, . . ., y). Choose δ > 0
                                                        0010n

such that

    1)(x, y, . . ., y) ∈ G′ if |x − x|  δ, |y − y|  Kδ for all i = 1, . . ., n;
              1n0i0i

    2)Mδ < 1.

This time let C* be the space of ordered n-tuples


                                  φ = (φ, . . ., φ)
                                          1n


of continuous functions φ, . . ., φ defined on the interval |x − x|  δ such
                              1n0

that |φ(x) − y|  Kδ for all i = 1, . . ., n, equipped with the metric
      i0i





Clearly C* is complete. Moreover, the mapping  = Aφ defined by the system

of integral equations







is a contraction mapping carrying C* into itself. In fact, if


                      φ = (φ, . . ., φ) ∈ C*,|x − x|  δ,
                              1n0


then





by (17), so that  = (, . . ., ) = Aφ also belongs to C*. Moreover,
                        1nand hence





after  maximizing  with  respect  to x  and i.  But Mδ  <  1,  so  that A  is  a

contraction mapping. It follows from Theorem 1 that the equation φ − Aφ,

i.e., the system of integral equations (16), has a unique solution in the space

C*. 


    8.3. Contraction mappings and integral equations. We now show how

the method of successive approximations can be used to prove the existence

and uniqueness of solutions of integral equations.


  Example 1. By a Fredholm equation (of the second kind) is meant an

integral equation of the form





involving  two  given  functions K  and  φ,  an  unknown  function f  and  an

arbitrary parameter λ. The function K is called the kernel of the equation, and

the  equation  is  said  to  be homogeneous  if  φ  ≡  0  (but  otherwise non-

homogeneous).

    Suppose K(x, y) and φ(x) are continuous on the square a  x  b, a  y 

b, so that in particular




Consider the mapping g = Af of the complete metric space C into itself
                                                                          [a, b]

given byClearly, if g = Af, g = Af, then
            1122






so that A is a contraction mapping if





It  follows  from Theorem  1  that  the  integral equation  (18)  has  a  unique

solution for any value of λ satisfying (19). The successive approximations f,
                                                                                          0

f, . . ., f, . . . to this solution are given by
1n





where any function continuous on [a, b] can be chosen as f. Note that the
                                                                        0

method of successive approximations can be applied to the equation (18) only

for sufficiently small |λ|.


  Example 2. Next consider the Volterra equation





which differs from the Fredholm equation (18) by having the variable x rather

                                                                    14
than the fixed number b as the upper limit of integration. It is easy to see

that the method of successive approximations can be applied to the Volterra

equation (20) for arbitrary λ, not just for sufficiently small |λ| as in the case

of the Fredholm equation (18). In fact, let A be the mapping of C into
                                                                                [a, b]

itself defined by





and let f, f ∈ C. Then
        12[a, b]where




It follows that








and in general,








which implies





But, given any λ, we can always choose n large enough to make





      n
i.e., A  is  a  contraction  mapping  for  sufficiently  large n.  It  follows  from

Theorem 1′ that the integral equation (20) has a unique solution for arbitrary

λ.


  Problem 1. Let A be a mapping of a metric space R into itself. Prove that

the condition                            ρ(A, A)  ρ(x, y)(x ≠ y)
                                xy


is insufficient for the existence of a fixed point of A.


  Problem 2. Let F(x) be a continuously differentiable function defined on

the interval [a, b] such that F(a) < 0, F(b) > 0 and


                        0 < K  F′(x)  K(a  x  b).
                              12


Use Theorem 1 to find the unique root of the equation F(x) = 0.


  Hint. Introduce the auxiliary function f(x) = x − λF(x), and choose λ such

that the theorem works for the equivalent equation f(x) = x.


  Problem 3. Devise a proof of the implicit function theorem based on the

                                  15
use of the fixed point theorem.


  Problem 4. Prove that the method of successive approximations can be

used to solve the system (9) if |a| < 1/n (for all i and j), but not if |a| = 1/n.
                                    ijij


  Problem 5. Prove that the condition (6) is necessary for the mapping (5) to

be a contraction mapping in the space .


  Problem 6. Prove that any of the conditions (6)–(8) implies










    Comment. Hence the fact that the system (5) has a unique solution (under

suitable conditions) follows from Cramer’s rule as well as from the fixed

point theorem.


  Problem 7. Consider the nonlinear integral equationwith continuous K and φ, where K satisfies a Lipschitz condition of the form




in its “functional” argument. Prove that (21) has a unique solution for all





Write the successive approximations to this solution.




  1
 I.e., the fact that the real numbers form a field.

  2
 The infinite sequence with general term x can be written as {x} or simply as x, x, . . ., x, . . .
                                          kk12k
(this notation is familiar from calculus). It can also be written in “point notation” as x = (x, x, . . ., x,
                                                                                12k
. . .), i.e., as an “ordered ∞-tuple” generalizing the notion of an ordered n-tuple. (In writing {x} we
                                                                                      k
have another use of curly brackets, but the context will always prevent any confusion between the
sequence {x} and the set whose only element is x.)
          kk

  3
 The least upper bound or supremum of a sequence of real numbers a, a, . . ., a, . . . is denoted
                                                                  12k

by 

  4
 Any confusion between “sphere” meant in the sense of spherical surface and “sphere” meant in
the sense of a solid sphere (or ball) will always be avoided by judicious use of the adjectives “open” or
“closed.”

  5
 The infinite intervals (− ∞, ∞), (a, ∞), and (−∞, b) are regarded as open.

  6
 Given a set of real numbers E, inf E denotes the greatest lower bound or infimum of E, while sup
E denotes the least upper bound or supremum of E.

  7
 Just as in the case of ordinary decimals, certain numbers can be written in two distinct ways. For
example,




  Since none of the numerators in the second representation equals 1 the point  belongs to F (this is

already obvious from the construction of F).

  8
 If x has two representations of the form (4), then one and only one of them has no numerators a,
                                                                                          1
a, . . ., a, . . . equal to 1. These are the numbers used to define b.
2nn

  9
 By a polygonal line  we  mean  a  curve  obtained  by  joining  a  finite  number  of  straight  line
segments end to end.  10
 Often called the method of successive approximations (see the remark following Theorem 1) or
the principle of contraction mappings.

  112322
 Ax means A(Ax), Ax means A(Ax) = A(Ax), and so on.

  12n
  By  an n-dimensional domain  we  mean  an  open  connected  set  in  Euclidean n-space R
(connectedness is defined in Problem 12, p. 55).

  13
 In fact, f is bounded on [G′] if [G′] ⊂ G (cf. Theorem 2, p. 110).

  14
 Equation (20) can be regarded formally as a special case of (18) by extending the definition of
the kernel, i.e., by setting

                                    K(x, y) = 0if y > x.

  15
 See e.g., I. G. Petrovski, Ordinary Differential Equations (translated by R. A. Silverman),
Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J. (1966), p. 47.                                          3



                      TOPOLOGICAL SPACES









9. Basic Concepts


    9.1. Definitions and examples. In our study of metric spaces, we defined

a number of key ideas like contact point, limit point, closure of a set, etc. In

each  case,  the  definition  rests  on  the  notion  of  a  neighborhood,  or,  what

amounts  to  the  same  thing,  the  notion  of  an  open  set.  These  notions

(neighborhood and open set) were in turn defined by using the metric (or

distance) in the given space. However, instead of introducing a metric in a

given set X, we can go about things differently, by specifying a system of

open sets in X with suitable properties. This approach leads to the notion of a

topological space. Metric spaces are topological spaces of a rather special

(although very important) kind.

    DEFINITION 1. Given a set X, by a topology in X is meant a system τ of

subsets G ⊂ X, called open  sets  (relative  to  τ), with  the  following  two

properties:

    1)The set X itself and the empty set  belong to τ;

    2)Arbitrary (finite or infinite) unions  G and finite intersections 
                                                        α

        G of open sets belong to τ.
          k

    DEFINITION 2. By a topological space is meant a pair (X, τ), consisting of

a set X and a topology τ defined in X.

  Just as a metric space is a pair consisting of a set X and a metric defined

in X, so a topological space is a pair consisting of a set X and a topologydefined in X. Thus, to specify a topological space, we must specify both a set

X and a topology in X, i.e., we must indicate which subsets of X are to be

regarded as “open (in X).” Clearly, we can equip one and the same set with

various different topologies, thereby defining various different topological

spaces. Nevertheless, we will usually denote a topological space, namely a

pair (X, τ), by a single letter like T. Just as in the case of a metric space R, the

elements of a topological space T will be called the points of T.

  By the closed sets of a topological space T, we mean the complements T

− G of the open sets G of T. It follows from Definition 1 and the “duality

principle” (see p. 4) that

  1′)The space T itself and the empty set  are closed;

    2′)Arbitrary (finite or infinite) intersections  F and finite unions 
                                                                α

        F of closed sets of T are closed.
          k


  The  natural  way  of  introducing  the  concepts  of  neighborhood,  contact

point, limit point and closure of a set is now apparent:

  a)By a neighborhood of a point x in a topological space T is meant any

        open set G ⊂ T containing x;

  b)A point x ∈ T is called a contact point of a set M ⊂ T if every

        neighborhood of x contains at least one point of M;

  c)A  point x ∈ T  is  called  a limit point  of  a  set M ⊂ T  if  every

        neighborhood of x contains infinitely many points of M;

    d)The set of all contact points of a set M ⊂ T is called the closure of

        M, denoted by [M].


  Example 1. According to Theorem 5, p. 50, the open sets in any metric

space satisfy the two properties in Definition 1. Hence every metric space is a

topological space as well.


  Example 2. Given any set T, suppose we regard every subset of T as open.

Then T is a topological space (the properties in Definition 1 are obviously

satisfied). In particular, every set M ⊂ T is both open and closed, and every

set M ⊂ T coincides with its own closure. Note that the “discrete metric

space” of Example 1, p. 38 has this trivial topology.


  Example 3. As another extreme case, consider an arbitrary set T equippedwith a topology consisting of just two sets, the whole set T and the empty set 

.  Then T  is  a  topological  space,  a  kind  of  “space  of  coalesced  points”

(mainly of academic interest). Note that the closure of every nonempty set is

the whole space T.


  Example 4. Let T be the set {a, b}, consisting of just two points a and b,

and let the open sets in T be T itself, the empty set and the single-element set

{b}.  Then  the  two  properties  in Definition  1  are  satisfied,  and T  is  a

topological space. The closed sets in this space are T itself, the empty set and

the set {a}. Note that the closure of {b} is the whole space T.


  9.2. Comparison of topologies. Let τ and τ be two topologies defined in
                                              12
                  1
the  same  set X.  Then  we  say  that  the  topology  τ  is stronger  than  the
                                                              1

topology τ (or equivalently that τ is weaker than τ) if τ ⊂ τ, i.e., if every
            22121

set of the system τ is a set of the system τ.
                    21


  THEOREM 1. The intersection  of any set of topologies in X is

itself a topology in X.


  Proof. Clearly  contains X and . Moreover, since every τ is closed
                                                                              α

(algebraically)  under  the  operations  of  taking  arbitrary  unions  and  finite

intersections, the same is true of . 


    COROLLARY. Let  be any system of subsets of a set X. Then there exists a

minimal topology in X containing , i.e., a topology τ() containing  and

contained in every topology containing .


  Proof. A topology containing  always exists, e.g., the topology in which

every subset of X is open. The intersection of all topologies containing  is

the desired minimal topology τ(), often called the topology generated by

the system . 


  Let  be a system of subsets of X and A a fixed subset of X. Then by the

trace of the system  on the set A we mean the system  consisting of all
                                                                      A

subsets of X of the form A ∩ B, B ∈ . It is easy to see that the trace (on A)

of a topology τ (defined in X) is a topology τ in A. (Such a topology is often
                                                    Acalled  a relative  topology.)  In  this  sense,  every  subset A  of  a  given

topological space (X, τ) generates a new topological space (A, τ), called a
                                                                              A

subspace of the original topological space (X, τ).


  9.3. Bases. Axioms of countability. As we have seen, defining a topology

in a space T means specifying a system of open sets in T. However, in many

concrete problems, it is more convenient to specify, instead of all the open

sets, some system of subsets which uniquely determines all the open sets. For

example, in the case of a metric space we first introduced the notion of an

open sphere (ε-neighborhood) and then defined an open set G as a set such

that every point x ∈ G has a neighborhood O(x) ⊂ G. In other words, the
                                                      ε

open sets in a metric space are precisely those which can be represented as

finite or infinite unions of open spheres. In particular, the open sets on the

real line are precisely those which can be represented as finite or countable

unions  of  open  intervals  (recall Theorem 6,  p.  51).  These  considerations

suggest

    DEFINITION 3. A family  of open subsets of a topological space T is

called a base for T if every open set in T can be represented as a union of sets

in .

    Example 1. The set of all open spheres (of all possible radii and with all

possible centers) in a metric space R is a base for R. In particular, the set of

all open intervals is a base on the real line. The set of all open intervals with

rational end points is also a base on the line, since any open interval (and

hence  any  open  set  on  the  line)  can  be  represented  as  a  union  of  such

intervals.


  It is clear from the foregoing that a topology τ can be defined in a set T by

specifying a base  in T. This topology τ is just the system of sets which can

be represented as unions of sets in . If this way of specifying a topology is

to be of practical value, we must find requirements which, when imposed on

a system  of subsets of a given set T, guarantee that the system τ of all

possible unions of sets in  be a topology in T, i.e., that τ have the two

properties figuring in Definition 1:


  THEOREM 2. Given a set T, let  be a system of subsets G ⊂ T with the
                                                                        α

following two properties:    1)Every point x ∈ T belongs to at least one G ∈ ;
                                                            α

  2)If x ∈ G ∩ G, then there is a G ∈  such that x ∈ G ⊂ G ∩
                    αβγγα

        G.
          β

Suppose the empty set  and all sets representable as unions of sets G are
                                                                                    α

designated as open. Then T is a topological space, and  is a base for T.


  Proof. It follows at once from the conditions of the theorem that the whole

set T and the empty set  are open sets, and that the union of any number of

open sets is open. We must still show that the intersection of a finite number

of open sets is open. It is enough to prove this for just two sets. Thus let





Then





By hypothesis, given any point x ∈ G ∩ G, there is a G ∈  such that x
                                            αβγ

∈ G ⊂ G ∩ G. Hence the set G ∩ G is open, being the union of all G
    γαβαβγ

contained in G ∩ G. But then (1) is also open. Therefore T is a topological
                αβ

space. The fact that  is a base for T is clear from the way open sets in T are

defined. 


  The following theorem is a useful tool for deciding whether or not a given

system of open sets is a base:


  THEOREM 3. A system  of open sets G in a topological space T is a base
                                                α

for T if and only if, given any open set G ⊂ T and any point x ∈ G, there is a

set G ∈  such that G ⊂ G.
    αα


  Proof. If  is a base for T, then every open set G ⊂ T is a union




of sets G ∈ . Therefore every point x ∈ G is contained in some set G ⊂
        ααG. Conversely, given any open set G ⊂ T, suppose that for every point x ∈

G there is a set G(x) ∈  such that x ∈ G(x) ⊂ G. Then
                  αα




i.e., G is a union of sets in . 


  Example 2. It follows from Theorem 3 that the set of all open spheres with

rational radii (and all possible centers) in a metric space R is a base for R (this

is obvious anyway). In particular, as already noted in Example 1, the set of all

open intervals with rational end points is a base for the real line.


  An  important  class  of  topological  spaces  consists  of spaces  with  a

countable base, i.e., spaces in which there is at least one base containing no

more than countably many sets. Such a space is also said to satisfy the second

axiom of countability.


  THEOREM 4. If a topological space T has a countable base, then T contains

a countable everywhere dense subset, i.e., a countable set M ⊂ T such that

[M] = T.


  Proof. Let  = {G, G, . . ., G, . . .} be a countable base for T, and
                          12n

choose a point x in each G. Then the set
                  nn


                              M = {x, x, . . ., x, . . .}
                                      12n


is countable. Moreover, M is everywhere dense in T,  since  otherwise  the

nonempty open set G = T − [M] would contain no points of M. But this is

impossible, since G is a union of some of the sets G in  and G contains
                                                              nn

the point x ∈ M. 
          n

For metric spaces, we can say even more:


  THEOREM 5. If a metric space R has a countable everywhere dense subset,

then R has a countable base.


  Proof. Suppose R has a countable everywhere dense subset {x, x, . . ., x,
                                                                            12n

. . .}. Then, given any open set G ⊂ R and any x ∈ G, there is an opensphere S(x, 1/n) such that x ∈ S(x, 1/n) ⊂ G for suitable positive integers
          mm

m and n (why?). Hence the open spheres S(x, 1/n), where m and n range
                                                      m

over all positive integers, form a countable base for R. 


  Combining Theorems  4  and 5,  we  see  that a  metric  space  R  has  a

countable base if and only if it has a countable everywhere dense subset.


  Example 3. Every separable metric space, i.e., every metric space with a

countable everywhere dense subset, is a metric space satisfying the second

axiom of countability.


  Example 4. The space m of all bounded sequences is not separable (recall

Example 7, p. 48) and hence has no countable base.


  Remark. In general, Theorem 5 does not hold for arbitrary (nonmetric)

topological  spaces.  In  fact,  examples  can  be  given  of  topological  spaces

which have a countable everywhere dense subset but no countable base. Let

us see how this might come about. Given any point x of a metric space R,

there is a countable neighborhood base (or local base) at x, i.e., a countable

system  of neighborhoods of x with the following property: Given any open

set G containing x, there is a neighborhood O ∈  such that O ⊂ G (cf.

            2
Theorem 3). Suppose every point x of a topological space T has a countable

neighborhood base. Then T is said to satisfy the first axiom of countability.

However, this axiom need not be satisfied in an arbitrary topological space.

Hence the argument used in the case of metric spaces to deduce the existence

of a countable base from that of a countable everywhere dense subset does

not carry over to the case of an arbitrary topological space.


  A system  of sets M is called a cover (or covering) of a topological
                              α

space T, and  is said to cover T, if




A cover consisting of open (or closed) sets only is called an open (or closed)

cover. If  is a cover of a topological space T, then by a subcover of  we

mean any subset of  which also covers T.  THEOREM 6. If T is a topological space with a countable base , then

every open cover  has a finite or countable subcover.


  Proof. Since  covers T, each point x ∈ T belongs to some open set O ∈
                                                                                      α

. Moreover, since  is a countable base for T, for each x ∈ T there is a set

G(x) ∈  such that x ∈ G(x) ⊂ O (recall Theorem 3).
nnα

The collection of all sets G(x) selected in this way is finite or countable and
                              n

covers T. For each G(x) we now choose one of the sets O containing G(x),
                      nαn

thereby obtaining a finite or countable subcover of . 


  Given any topological space T, the empty set  and the space T itself are

both  open  and  closed,  by  definition.  A  topological  space T  is  said  to  be

connected if it has no subsets other than  and T which are both open and

                                          11
closed. For example, the real line R is connected, but not the set R − {x}

                  1
obtained from R by deleting any point x.


  9.4.  Convergent  sequences  in  a  topological  space.  The  concept  of  a

convergent sequence, introduced in Sec. 6.2 for the case of a metric space,

generalizes in the natural way to the case of a topological space. Thus a

sequence of points {x} = x, x, . . ., x, . . . in a topological space T is said to
                        n12n

converge  to  a  point x ∈ T  (called  the limit  of  the  sequence)  if  every

                                                                                          3
neighborhood G(x) of x contains all points x starting from a certain index.
                                                    n

However, the concept of a convergent sequence does not play the same basic

role for topological spaces as for metric spaces. In fact, in the case of a metric

space R, a point x is a contact point of a set M ⊂ R if and only if M contains

a sequence converging to x. On the other hand, in the case of a topological

space T, this is in general not true, as shown by Problem 11. In other words, a

point x can be a contact point of a set M ⊂ T (i.e., x can belong to [M])

without M  containing  a  sequence  converging  to x.  However,  convergent

sequences  “are  given  their  rights  back”  if T  satisfies  the  first  axiom  of

countability, i.e., if there is a countable neighborhood base at every point x ∈

T:


  THEOREM  7. If  a  topological  space  T  satisfies  the  first  axiom  of

countability, then every contact point x of a set M ⊂ T is the limit of aconvergent sequence of points in M.


  Proof. Let  be a countable neighborhood base at x, consisting of sets O.
                                                                                          n

It can be assumed that O ⊂ O (n = 1, 2, . . .), since otherwise we need
                            n+1n

only replace O by . Let x be any point of M contained in O. Such a
                nnn

point x  can  always  be  found,  since x  is  a  contact  point  of M. Then the
      n

sequence {x} obviously converges to x. 
            n


  Remark. As already noted, every metric space satisfies the first axiom of

countability. This, together with Theorem 7, shows why in the case of metric

spaces we were able to formulate concepts like contact point, limit point, etc.

in terms of convergent sequences (recall Theorems 2 and 2′, p. 48).


  9.5. Axioms of separation. Although many basic concepts of the theory

of  metric  spaces  carry  over  easily  to  the  case  of  topological  spaces,  an

arbitrary topological space is still too general an object for most problems of

analysis. In fact, things can happen in an arbitrary topological space which

differ in an essential way from what happens in a metric space. Thus, for

example, a finite set of points need not be closed in an arbitrary topological

space, as shown in Example 4, p. 79. Hence it is desirable to specialize the

notion of a topological space somewhat by considering topological spaces

more  closely  resembling  metric  spaces.  This  is  done  by  imposing  extra

conditions on a topological space T, in addition to the two defining properties

figuring in Definition 1, p. 78. For example, as we have already seen, the

axioms  of  countability  allow  us  to  study  topological  spaces  from  the

standpoint of the concept of convergence. We now introduce supplementary

conditions, called axioms of separation, of quite a different type:


  DEFINITION 4. Suppose that for each pair of distinct points x and y in a

topological space T, there is a neighborhood O of x and a neighborhood O
                                                        xy

of y such that x ∈ O, y ∈ O. Then T is said to satisfy the first axiom of
                        yx

separation, and is called a T-space.
                                1


  Example 1. The space in Example 2, p. 79 is a T-space, but not the space
                                                            1

in Example 4.  THEOREM 8. Every finite subset of a T-space is closed.
                                              1


  Proof. Given any single-element set {x}, suppose y ≠ x. Then y has a

neighborhood O which does not contain x, i.e., y ∉ [{x}]. Therefore [{x}] =
                  y

{x}, i.e., every “singleton” {x} is closed. But every finite union of closed sets

is itself closed. Hence every finite subset of the given space is closed. 


The next axiom of separation is stronger than the first axiom:


  DEFINITION 5. Suppose that for each pair of distinct points x and y in a

topological space T, there is a neighborhood O of x and a neighborhood O
                                                        xy

of  y  such  that O  ∩ O  = . Then  T  is  said  to  satisfy  the second  (or
                    xy

Hausdorff) axiom  of  separation, and  is  called  a T-space or Hausdorff
                                                                2

space.


  Thus, roughly speaking, each pair of disjoint points in a Hausdorff space

has a pair of disjoint neighborhoods.


  Example 2. Every Hausdorff space is a T-space, but not conversely (see
                                                    1

Problem 10).


  Topological spaces more general than Hausdorff spaces are rarely used in

analysis. In fact, most of the topological spaces of interest in analysis satisfy

a separation condition even stronger than the second axiom of separation:


  DEFINITION 6. A T-space T is said to be normal if for each pair of disjoint
                      1

closed sets F and F in T, there is an open set O containing F and an open
              1211

set O containing F such that O ∩ O = .
    2212


  In other words, each pair of disjoint closed sets in a normal space has a

pair of disjoint “neighborhoods.”


  Example 3. Obviously, every normal space is a Hausdorff space.


  Example 4. Consider the closed unit interval [0, 1], where neighborhoods

of any point x ≠ 0 are defined in the usual way (i.e., as open sets containing

x), but neighborhoods of the point x = 0 are all half-open intervals [0, α) withthe points





deleted (and arbitrary unions and finite intersections of these neighborhoods

with  neighborhoods  of  nonzero  points).  This  space  is  Hausdorff,  but  not

normal since the set {0} and the set of points (2) are disjoint closed sets

without disjoint neighborhoods.


  THEOREM 9. Every metric space is normal.


  Proof. Let X and Y be any two disjoint closed subsets of R. Every point x

∈ X  has  a  neighborhood O  disjoint  from Y,  and  hence  is  at  a  positive
                                  x

distance ρ from Y (recall Problem 9, p. 54). Similarly, every point y ∈ Y is
          x

at a positive distance ρ from X. Consider the open sets
                        y





where, as usual, S(x, r) is the open sphere with center x and radius r. It is

clear that X ⊂ U, Y ⊂ V. Moreover, U and V are disjoint. In fact, suppose to

the contrary that there is a point z ∈ U ∩ V. Then there are points x ∈ X, y
                                                                                00

∈ Y such that




Assume, to be explicit, that ρ  ρ. Then
                                xy
                                  00




i.e., x ∈ S(y, ρ). This contradicts the definition of ρ, and shows that
      00yy
                    00

there is no point z ∈ U ∩ V. 


  Remark. Every subspace of a metric space is itself a metric space and

hence normal. This is not true for normal spaces in general, i.e., a subspace of

                                            4
a normal space need not be normal. A property of a topological space T

shared by every subspace of T is said to be hereditary. Thus normality of aspace is not a hereditary property. These ideas are pursued in Problems 13

and 14.


  9.6.  Continuous  mappings.  Homeomorphisms.  The  concept  of  a

continuous mapping, introduced for metric spaces in Sec. 5.2, generalizes at

once to the case of arbitrary topological spaces. Thus, let f be a mapping of

one topological space X into another topological space Y, so that f associates

an element y = f(x) ∈ Y with each element x ∈ X. Then f is said to be

continuous at the point x ∈ X if, given any neighborhood V of the point y
                            0y0
                                                                        0

= f(x), there is a neighborhood U of the point x such that f(U) ⊂ V.
    0x0xy
                                          000

The mapping f is said to be continuous on X if it is continuous at every point

of X. In particular, a continuous mapping of a topological space X into the

real line is called a continuous real function on X.


  Remark. These definitions clearly reduce to the corresponding definitions

for metric spaces in Sec. 5.2 if X and Y are both metric spaces.


  The notion of continuity of a mapping f of one topological space into

      5
another is easily stated in terms of open sets, i.e., in terms of the topologies

of the two spaces:

    THEOREM 10. A mapping f of a topological space X into a topological

                                                                −1
space Y is continuous if and only if the preimage Γ = f(G) of every open set

G ⊂ Y is open (in X).


  Proof. Suppose f is continuous on X, and let G be any open subset of Y.

                                −1
Choose any point x ∈ Γ = f (G), and let y = f(x). Then G is a neighborhood

of the point y. Hence, by the continuity of f, there is a neighborhood U of x
                                                                                    x

such that f(U) ⊂ G, i.e., U ⊂ Γ. In other words, every point x ∈ Γ has a
              xx

neighborhood contained in Γ. But then Γ is open (see Problem 1).

                                  −1
    Conversely, suppose Γ = f(G) is open whenever G ⊂ Y is open. Given

any point x ∈ X, let V be any neighborhood of the point y = f(x). Then
                          y
              −1−1
clearly x ∈ f (V), and moreover f(V) is open, by hypothesis. Therefore
                    yy
      −1
U = f (V) is a neighborhood of x such that f(U) ⊂ V. In other words, f is
xyxy

continuous at x and hence on X, since x is an arbitrary point of X.   Naturally, Theorem 10 has the following “dual”:


  THEOREM 10′. A mapping f of a topological space X into a topological

                                                                  −1
space Y is continuous if and only if the preimage Γ = f(F) of every closed

set F ⊂ Y is closed (in X).


  Proof. Use the fact that the preimage of a complement is the complement

of the preimage. 

    Remark. Let X and Y be two arbitrary sets, and let f be a mapping of X

into Y. Suppose that in Y there is specified a topology τ, i.e., a system of sets

containing Y  and ,  and  closed  under  the  operations  of  taking  arbitrary

unions  and  finite  intersections.  Then  since  the  preimage  of  a  union  (or

intersection) of sets equals the union (or intersection) of the preimages of the

sets, by Theorems 1 and 2, p. 5, the preimage of the topology τ, i.e., the

                    −1
system of all sets f(G) where G ∈ τ, is a topology in X which we denote by

−1
f(τ).

    Suppose now that X and Y are topological spaces, with topologies τ and
                                                                                    X

τ,  respectively.  Then Theorem  10,  giving  a  necessary  and  sufficient
Y

condition for a mapping f of X into Y to be continuous can be paraphrased as

follows: A mapping f of X into Y is continuous if and only if the topology τ
                                                                                          X
                                  −1
is stronger than the topology f(τ).
                                      Y


  Example. It is easy to see that the image (as opposed to the preimage) of

an open set under a continuous mapping need not be open. Similarly, the

image of a closed set under a continuous mapping need not be closed. For

example, consider the mapping of the half-open interval X = [0, 1) onto the

circle of unit circumference corresponding to “winding” the interval onto the

circle. Then the set [, 1), which is closed in [0, 1), goes into a set which is

not closed on the circle (see Figure 12).                                        FIGURE 12


  The  theorem  on  continuity  of  composite  functions,  familiar  from

elementary calculus, has the following analogue for topological spaces:


  THEOREM  11. Given  topological  spaces  X, Y  and  Z, suppose  f  is  a

continuous mapping of X into Y and φ a continuous mapping of Y into Z.

Then the mapping φf, i.e., the mapping carrying x into φ(f(x)), is continuous.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of Theorem 10. 


  Given two topological spaces X and Y, let f be a one-to-one mapping of X

                                    −1
onto Y,  and  suppose f  and f  are  both  continuous.  Then f  is  called  a

homeomorphic mapping  or  simply  a homeomorphism (between X  and Y).

Two  spaces X  and Y  are  said  to  be homeomorphic  if  there  exists  a

homeomorphism  between  them.  Homeomorphic  spaces  have  the  same

topological properties, and from the topological point of view are merely two

“representatives”  of  one  and  the  same  space.  In  fact,  if X  and Y  have

topologies τ and τ, respectively, and if f is a homeomorphic mapping of X
            XY
                    −1
onto Y, then τ = f(τ) and τ = f(τ). The relation of being homeomorphic
              XYYX

is obviously reflexive, symmetric and transitive, and hence is an equivalence

relation. Therefore any given family of topological spaces can be partitioned

into disjoint classes of homeomorphic spaces.


  Remark. Again these are the natural generalizations of the same notions

for  metric  spaces,  introduced  in Sec.  2.2.  It  should  be  noted  that  two

homeomorphic  metric  spaces  need  not  have  the  same  “metric  properties”

(recall Problem 9, p. 66). Note also that the topology of a metric space is

uniquely determined by its metric, but not conversely (illustrate this by an

example).


  9.7.  Various  ways  of  specifying  topologies.  Metrizability.  The  most

direct and in principle the simplest way of specifying a topology in a space T

is to indicate which subsets of T are regarded as open. The system of all such

subsets must then satisfy properties 1) and 2) of Definition 1. By duality, we

could just as well indicate which subsets of X are regarded as closed. The

system of all such subsets must then satisfy properties 1′) and 2′) on p. 79.However, this method is of limited practical value. For example, in the case

of the plane it is hardly possible to give a direct description of all open sets

(as was done in Theorem 6, p. 51 for the case of the line).

  A topology is often specified in a space T by giving a base for T. In fact,

this is precisely what is done in Sec. 6 for the case of a metric space R, where

the base for R consists of all open spheres (or even all open spheres with

rational radii).

    Another way of specifying a topology in a space T is to introduce the

notion of convergence in T. As noted in Sec. 9.4,  this  is  not  a  universal

method.  It  does  work,  however,  in  the  case  of  spaces  satisfying  the  first

                        6
axiom of countability.

    Still another way of introducing a topology in a space T is to specify a

closure operator in T, i.e., a mapping which assigns to each subset M ∈ T a

subset [M] ⊂ T and satisfies the four properties listed in Theorem 1, p. 46. It

can be shown that the system of complements of all sets M ⊂ T such that [M]

                              7
= M is then a topology in T.

    Specifying a metric in a space T is one of the most important ways of

introducing a topology in T, but it is again far from being a universal method.

As already noted, every metric space is normal and satisfies the first axiom of

countability. Hence no metric can be used to introduce a topology in a space

which fails to have these two properties. A topological space T is said to be

metrizable if its topology can be specified by means of some metric (more

exactly, if it is homeomorphic to some metric space). As just pointed out, a

necessary condition for a topological space T to be metrizable is that it be

normal and satisfy the first axiom of countability. However, it can be shown

that these conditions are not sufficient for T to be metrizable. On the other

hand, in the case of a space with a countable base (i.e., satisfying the second

axiom of countability), we have


  URYSOHN’s METRIZATION THEOREM. A necessary and sufficient condition for

a  topological  space  with  a  countable  base  to  be  metrizable  is  that  it  be

normal.


  The necessity follows from Theorem 9. For the sufficiency we refer to the

          8
literature.


  Problem 1. Given a topological space T, prove that a set G ⊂ T is open ifand only if every point x ∈ G has a neighborhood contained in G.


  Problem 2. Given a topological space T, prove that

    a)[M] = M if and only if M is a closed set, i.e., the complement T − G

        of an open set G ⊂ T;

    b)[M] is the smallest closed set containing M;

    c)The closure operator, i.e., the mapping of T into T carrying M into

        [M] satisfies Theorem 1, p. 46.


  Problem 3. Consider the set  of all possible topologies defined in a set

X, where τ  τ means that τ is weaker than τ. Verify that  is a partial
            2121

ordering of . Does  have maximal and minimal elements? If so, what

are they?


  Problem 4. Can two distinct topologies τ and τ in X generate the same
                                                    12

relative topology in a subset A ⊂ X


  Problem 5. Let


                    X = {a, b, c},A = {a, b},B = {b, c},


and let  = {, X, A, B}. Is  a base for a topology in X?


  Problem 6. Prove that if M is an uncountable subset of a topological space

with a countable base, then some point of M is a limit point of M.


  Problem 7. Prove that the topological space T in Example 4,  p.  79  is

connected.


  Comment. T might be called a “connected doubleton.”


  Problem 8. Prove that a topological space satisfying the second axiom of

countability automatically satisfies the first axiom of countability.


  Problem 9. Give an example of a topological space satisfying the first

axiom of countability but not the second axiom of countability.


  Problem 10. Let τ be the system of sets consisting of the empty set andevery subset of the closed unit interval [0, 1] obtained by deleting a finite or

countable number of points from X. Verify that T = (X, τ) is a topological

space.  Prove  that T  satisfies  neither  the  second  nor  the  first  axiom  of

countability. Prove that T is a T-space, but not a Hausdorff space.
                                    1


  Problem 11. Let T be the topological space of the preceding problem.

Prove that the only convergent sequences in T are the “stationary sequences,”

i.e., the sequences all of whose terms are the same starting from some index

n. Prove that the set M = (0, 1] has the point 0 as a contact point, but contains

no sequence of points converging to 0.


  Problem 12. Prove the converse of Theorem 8.


  Comment. Hence a topological space T is a T-space if and only if every
                                                          1

finite subset of T is closed.


  Problem 13. Prove the following theorem, known as Urysohn’s lemma:

Given a normal space T and two disjoint closed subsets F, F ∈ T, there
                                                                      12

exists a continuous real function f such that 0  f(x)  1 and






  Problem 14. A T-space T is said to be completely regular if, given any
                      1

closed set F ⊂ T and any point x ∈ T − F, there exists a continuous real
                                        0

function f such that 0  f(x)  1 and






(Completely  regular  spaces  are  also  called Tychonoff  spaces.)  Prove  that

every  normal  space  is  completely  regular,  but  not  conversely.  Prove  that

every  subspace  of  a  completely  regular  space  (in  particular,  of  a  normal

space) is completely regular.


  Comment.  Thus,  unlike  normality,  complete  regularity  is  a  hereditary

property. It can be shown that a space is completely regular if and only if it is                                    9
a subspace of a normal space. Completely regular spaces are particularly

important  in  analysis,  since  they  “are  able  to  support  sufficiently  many

continuous functions,” i.e., for any two distinct points x and y of a completely

regular space T, there is a continuous real function on T taking distinct values

at x and y.



10. Compactness


    10.1. Compact topological spaces. The reader has presumably already

encountered the familiar


  HEINE-BOREL THEOREM. Any cover of a closed interval [a, b] by a system of

open intervals (or, more generally, open sets) has a finite subcover.


  Generalizing this property of closed intervals, we are led to a key concept

of real analysis:


  DEFINITION 1. A topological space T is said to be compact if every open

cover  of  T  has  a  finite  subcover.  A  compact  Hausdorff  space  is  called  a

compactum.


  Example.  As  we  will  see  in Sec. 11.2,  any  closed  bounded  subset  of

                      nn
Euclidean n-space R is compact, for arbitrary n. On the other hand, R itself

(e.g., the real line or three-dimensional space) is not compact.


  DEFINITION 2. A system of subsets {A} of a set T is said to be centered if
                                              α

                                                  10
every finite intersection  A is nonempty.
                                k


  THEOREM 1. A topological space T is compact if and only if it has the

following property:

    Δ)Every  centered  system  of  closed  subsets  of  T  has  a  nonempty

        intersection.


  Proof. Suppose T is compact, and let {F} be any centered system of
                                                      α

closed subsets of T. Then the sets G = T − F are open. Hence the fact that
                                          ααno finite intersection  F is empty implies that no finite system of sets G =
                              kk

T − F covers T. But then the whole system of sets {G} cannot cover T, by
      kα

the compactness, and hence . In other words, T has property ) if T

is compact.

    Conversely, suppose T has property Δ), and let {G} be any open cover
                                                                α

of T. Setting F = T − G, we find that , which, by property Δ),
                αα

implies that the system F is not centered, i.e., that there are sets F, . . ., F
                            α1n

such that . But then the corresponding open sets G = T − F form
                                                                        kk

a finite subcover of the cover {G}. In other words, T is compact if T has
                                        α

property Δ). 


  THEOREM 2. Every closed subset F of a compact topological space T is

itself compact.

    Proof. Let {F} be any centered system of closed subsets of the subspace
                    α

F ⊂ T. Then every F is closed in T as well, i.e., {F} is a centered system of
                        αα

closed subsets of T. Therefore , by Theorem 1.


But then F is compact, by Theorem 1 again. 


    COROLLARY. Every closed subset of a compactum is itself a compactum.


  Proof. Use Theorem 2 and the fact that every subset of a Hausdorff space

is itself a Hausdorff space. 


  THEOREM 3. Let K be a compactum and T any Hausdorff space containing

K. Then K is closed in T.


  Proof. Suppose y ∉ K, so that y ∈ T − K. Then, given any point x ∈ K,

there is a neighborhood U of x and a neighborhood V of y such that
                            xx


                                      U ∩ V = 
                                        xx


The neighborhoods {U}(x ∈ K) form an open cover of K. Hence, by the
                          x

compactness of K, {U} has a finite subcover consisting of sets U, . . ., U.
                        xxx
                                                                              1nLet




Then V is a neighborhood of the point y which does not intersect the set U
                                                                                          x
                                                                                          1

∪ . . . ∪ U ⊃ K, and hence y ∉ [K]. It follows that K is closed (in T). 
            x
            n


  Remark. It is a consequence of Theorems 2 and 3 that compactness is an

“intrinsic property,” in the sense that a compactum remains a compactum

after being “embedded” in any larger Hausdorff space.


  THEOREM 4. Every compactum K is a normal space.


  Proof. Let X and Y be any two disjoint closed subsets of K. Repeating the

argument given in the proof of Theorem 3, we easily see that, given any point

y ⊂ Y, there exists a neighborhood U containing y and an open set O ⊃ X
                                            yy

such that U ∩ O = . Since Y is compact, by Theorem 2, the cover {U}(y
            yyy

⊂ Y) of the set Y has a finite subcover U, . . ., U. The open sets
                                              yy
                                                1n




then satisfy the normality conditions




  10.2. Continuous mappings of compact spaces. Next we show that the

“continuous image” of a compact space is itself a compact space:


  THEOREM 5. Let X be a compact space and f a continuous mapping of X

onto a topological space Y. Then Y = f(X) is itself compact.


                                                                  −1
  Proof. Let {V} be any open cover of Y, and let U = f(V). Then the sets
                  ααα

U are open (being preimages of open sets under a continuous mapping) and
α

cover the space X. Since X is compact, {U} has a finite subcover U, . . .,
                                                  αx
                                                                                    1

U. Then the sets V, . . ., U, where V = f(U), cover Y. It follows that Y is
xxxkk
  n1n

compact.   THEOREM 6. A one-to-one continuous mapping of a compactum X onto a

compactum Y is necessarily a homeomorphism.


                                                            −1
  Proof. We must show that the inverse mapping f is itself continuous. Let

F be a closed set in X and P = f(F) its image in Y. Then P is a compactum, by

Theorem 5. Hence, by Theorem 3, P is closed in Y. Therefore the preimage

      −1
under f of any closed set F ⊂ X is closed. It follows from Theorem 10′, p.

        −1
88 that f is continuous. 


  10.3.  Countable  compactness.  We  begin  by  proving  an  important

property of compact spaces:


  THEOREM 7. If T is a compact space, then any infinite subset of T has at

least one limit point.


  Proof. Suppose T contains an infinite set X with no limit point. Then T

contains a countable set


                              X = {x, x, . . ., x, . . .}
                                      12n


  with no limit point. But then the sets


                      x = {x, x, . . .}(n = 1, 2, . . .)
                        nnn+1


form a centered system of closed sets in T with an empty intersection, i.e., T

is not compact. 


  These considerations suggest


  DEFINITION 3. A topological space T is said to be countably compact if

every infinite subset of T has at least one limit point (in T).


  Thus Theorem 7 says that every compact set is countably compact. The

converse, however, is not true (see Problem 1). The relation between the

concepts of compactness and countable compactness is made clear by


  THEOREM  8. Each  of  the  following  two  conditions  is  necessary  and

sufficient for a topological space T to be countably compact:    1)Every countable open cover of T has a finite subcover;

    2)Every countable centered system of closed subsets of T has a non-

        empty intersection.


  Proof.  The  equivalence  of  conditions  1)  and  2)  is  an  immediate

consequence  of  the  duality  principle.  Moreover,  if T  is  not  countably

compact, then, repeating the argument given in proving Theorem 7, we find

that there is a countable centered system of closed subsets of T with an empty

intersection. This proves the sufficiency of condition 2). Thus we need only

prove the necessity of condition 2). Let T be countably compact, and let {F}
                                                                                        n

be a countable centered system of closed sets in T. Then, as we now show, 

          . Let





Then none of the Φ is empty, since {F} is centered. Moreover,
                      nn


                          Φ ⊃ Φ ⊃ . . . ⊃ Φ ⊃ . . . ,
                            12n


and





There are now just two possibilities:

  1)Φ = Φ = . . . starting from some index n, in which case it is
          nn+10
          00

        obvious that .

    2)There are infinitely many distinct sets Φ. In this case, there is clearly
                                                        n

        no loss of generality in assuming that all the Φ are distinct. Let x ∈
                                                                nn

        Φ  −  Φ.  Then  the  sequence  {x}  consists  of  infinitely  many
          nn+1n

        distinct points of T, and hence, by the countable compactness of T,

        must have at least one limit point, say x. But then x must be a limit
                                                        00

        point of Φ, since Φ contains all the points x, x, . . . . Moreover
                    nnnn+1

        x ∈ Φ, since Φ is closed. It follows that
          0nn  Thus compact topological spaces are those in which an arbitrary open

cover has a finite subcover, while countably compact spaces are those in

which every countable open cover has a finite subcover. Although in general

countable compactness does not imply compactness, we have the following

important special situation:


  THEOREM  9. The  concepts  of  compactness  and  countable  compactness

coincide for a topological space T with a countable base.


  Proof. By Theorem 6, p. 83, every open cover  of T has a countable

subcover.  Hence,  if T  is  countably  compact,   has  a  finite  subcover,  by

Theorem 8. 


  Remark. The concept of a countably compact topological space, unlike

that of a compact space, has not turned out to be very natural or fruitful. Its

presence in mathematics can be explained in terms of a kind of “historical

inertia.” The point is that, as will be shown in the next section, the concepts

of compactness and countable compactness coincide for metric spaces, as

well as for spaces with a countable base. The notion of compactness was

originally introduced in connection with metric spaces, with a compact metric

space being defined as one in which every infinite subset has at least one

limit point (i.e., in terms of what is now called “countable compactness”).

The  “automatic  transcription”  of  this  definition  from  metric  spaces  to

topological spaces then led to the concept of a countably compact topological

space. Sometimes, especially in the older literature, the word “compact” is

used in the sense of “countably compact,” and a topological space compact in

our sense (i.e., such that every open cover has a finite subcover) is said to be

“bicompact.”  In  this  older  language,  a  compact  Hausdorff  space  (a

“compactum” in our terminology) is called a “bicompactum,” and the term

“compactum” is reserved for a compact metric space. We will adhere to the

terminology introduced in Definitions 1 and 3, often using the term “metric

compactum” to designate a compact metric space.


  10.4. Relatively compact subsets. Among the subsets of a topological

space, those whose closures are compact are of special interest:  DEFINITION 4. A subset M of a topological space T is said to be relatively

compact (in T) if its closure  in T is compact.


  Example  1.  According  to Theorem  2,  every  subset  of  a  compact

topological space is relatively compact.


  Example 2. As we will see in Sec. 11.3, every bounded subset of the real

    1n
line R (or more generally of Euclidean n-space R) is relatively compact.


  A related concept is given by


  DEFINITION 5. A subset M of a topological space T is said to be relatively

countably compact (in T) if every infinite subset A ⊂ M has at least one limit

point in T (which may or may not belong to M).


  Relative compactness (unlike compactness) is not an “intrinsic property,”

i.e., it depends on the space T in which the given set M is “embedded.” For

example, the set of all rational numbers in the interval (0, 1) is relatively

compact if regarded as a subset of the real line, but not if regarded as a subset

of the space of all rational numbers. The concept of relative compactness is

most important in the case of metric spaces (see Sec. 11.3).


  Problem 1. Let X  be  the  set  of  all  ordinal  numbers  less  than  the  first

uncountable ordinal. Let (α, β) ⊂ X denote the set of all ordinal numbers γ

such that α < γ < β, and let the open sets in X be all unions of intervals (α, β).

Prove  that  the  resulting  topological  space  is  countably  compact  but  not

compact.


  Problem 2. A topological space T is said to be locally compact if every

point x ⊂ T has at least one relatively compact neighborhood. Show that a

compact space is automatically locally compact, but not conversely. Prove

that every closed subspace of a locally compact subspace is locally compact.


  Problem 3. A point x is said to be a complete limit point of a subset A of a

topological space if, given any neighborhood U of x, the sets A and A ∩ U

have the same power (i.e., cardinal number). Prove that every infinite subset

of a compact topological space has at least one complete limit point.  Comment. Conversely, it can be shown that if every infinite subset of a

                                                                                        11
topological space T has at least one complete limit point, then T is compact.



11. Compactness in Metric Spaces


    11.1. Total boundedness. Since metric spaces are topological spaces of

a special kind, the definitions and results of the preceding section apply to

metric spaces as well. However, in the case of metric spaces, the concept of

compactness is intimately connected with another concept, known as total

boundedness.


  DEFINITION 1. Let R be a metric space and ε any positive number. Then a

set A ⊂ R is said to be an ε-net for a set M ⊂ R if, for every x ⊂ M, there is

at least one point a ⊂ A such that ρ(x, a)  ε.


  Example 1. The set of all points with integral coordinates is a (1/).


  Example 2. Every subset of a totally bounded set is itself totally bounded.


  DEFINITION 2. Given a metric space R and a subset M ⊂ R, suppose M has

a finite ε-net for every ε > 0. Then M is said to be totally bounded.


  If a set M is totally bounded, then obviously so is its closure [M]. Every

totally  bounded  set  is  automatically  bounded,  being  the  union  of  a  finite

number of bounded sets (recall Problem 5, p. 65). The converse is not true, as

shown in Example 4.


                                              n
  Example 3. In Euclidean n-space R, total boundedness is equivalent to

boundedness. In fact, if M ⊂ R is bounded, then M is contained in some

sufficiently large cube Q. Partitioning Q into smaller cubes of side ε, we find

that the vertices of the little cubes form a finite () for Q and hence (a

fortiori) for any set contained in Q.


  Example 4. The unit sphere Σ in l, with equation
                                          2  is bounded but not totally bounded. In fact, consider the points


                  e = (1, 0, 0, . . .),e = (0, 1, 0, . . .), . . . ,
                    12


where the nth coordinate of e is one and the others are all zero. These points
                                n

all lie on Σ, and the distance between any two of them is . Hence Σ cannot

have a finite ε-net with ε < /2.


  Example 5. Let Π be the set of points x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .) in l
                                                            12n2

satisfying the inequalities





                                                                                          12
  The  set  Π,  called  the Hilbert  cube  (or fundamental  parallelepiped)

furnishes an example of an infinite-dimensional totally bounded set. The fact

that Π is totally bounded can be seen as follows: Given any ε > 0, choose n

such that





and with each point


                            x = (x, x, . . ., x, 0, 0, . . .)
                                  12n


in Π associate the point




(x* is also a point in Π). Then






But the set Π* of all points in Π of the form (1) is totally bounded, being a

bounded set in n-space. Let A be a finite (ε/2)-net in Π*. Then A is a finite ε-

net for the whole set Π.  11.2.  Compactness  and  total  boundedness.  We  now  show  the

connection between the concepts of compactness (of both kinds) and total

boundedness:


  THEOREM 1. Every countably compact metric space R is totally bounded.


  Proof. Suppose R is not totally bounded. Then there is an ε > 0 such that
                                                                          0

R has no finite ε-net. Choose any point a ⊂ R. Then R contains at least one
                  01

point, say a, such that
            2


                                    ρ(a, a) > ε,
                                        120


since otherwise a would be an ε-net for R. Moreover, R contains a point a
                  103

such that


                          ρ(a, a)> ε,ρ(a, a)> ε,
                                220230


since otherwise the pair a, a would be an ε-net for R. More generally, once
                            120

having found the points a, a, . . ., a, we choose a ∈ R such that
                            12nn+1


                      ρ(a, a ) > ε(k = 1, 2, . . ., n).
                            kn+10


This construction gives an infinite sequence of distinct points a, a, . . ., a, .
                                                                          12n

. . with no limit points, since ρ(a, a) > ε if j ≠ k. But then R cannot be
                                        jk0

countably compact. 


  COROLLARY 1. Every  countably  compact  metric  space  has  a  countable

everywhere dense subset and a countable base.


  Proof. Since R is totally bounded, by Theorem 1, R has a finite (1/n)-net

for every n = 1, 2, . . . . The union of all these nets is then a countable

everywhere dense subset of R. It follows from Theorem 5, p. 82 that R has a

countable base. 


  COROLLARY 2. Every countably compact metric space is compact.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of Corollary 1 and Theorem 9, p. 96.   According to Theorem 1, total boundedness is a necessary condition for a

metric space to be compact. However, this condition is not sufficient. For

example, the set of rational points in the interval [0, 1] with the ordinary

definition of distance forms a metric space R which is totally bounded but not

compact. In fact, the sequence of points


                      0,0.4,0.41,0.414,0.4142, . . .


in R, i.e., the sequence of decimal approximations to the irrational number 

  −  1,  has  no  limit  point  in R.  Necessary  and  sufficient  conditions  for

compactness of a metric space are given by


  THEOREM 2. A metric space R is compact if and only if it is totally bounded

and complete.


  Proof. To see that compactness of R implies completeness of R, we need

only note that if R has a Cauchy sequence {x} with no limit, then {x} has
                                                      nn

no limit points in R. This, together with Theorem 1, shows that R is totally

bounded and complete if R is compact.

    Conversely, suppose R is totally bounded and complete, and let {x} be
                                                                                    n

any infinite sequence of distinct points in R. Let N be a finite 1-net for R,
                                                            1

and construct a closed sphere of radius 1 about every point of N. Since these
                                                                          1

spheres cover R and there are infinitely many of them, at least one of the

spheres, say S, contains an infinite subsequence
              1




of the sequence {x}. Let N be a finite -net for R, and construct a closed
                    n2

sphere of radius  for every point of N. Then at least one of these spheres,
                                              2

say S, contains an infinite subsequence
    2




of  the  sequence .  Continue  this  construction  indefinitely,  finding  a

closed sphere S of radius  containing an infinite subsequence
                3                                                                      n−1
of the sequence , and so on, where S has radius 1/2. Let  be the
                                                  n

closed sphere with the same center as S but with a radius r twice as large
                                              nn
                  n
(i.e., equal to 1/2). Then clearly




and moreover r → 0 as n → ∞. Since R is complete, it follows from the
                n

nested sphere theorem (Theorem 2, p. 60) that





In fact, there is a point x ⊂ R such that
                          0





(recall Problem 3, p. 65). Clearly x is a limit point of the original sequence
                                        0

{x}, since every neighborhood of x  contains  some  sphere S and hence
n0k

some infinite subsequence . Therefore every infinite sequence {x} of
                                                                                    n

distinct points of R has a limit point in R. It follows that R is countably

compact and hence compact, by Corollary 2. 


                                                                              n
  Example. As already noted, a subset M of Euclidean n-space R is totally

bounded if and only if it is bounded. Moreover, M is complete if and only if it

is  closed  (recall Problem 7,  p.  66).  Hence,  by Theorem 2,  the  set  of  all

                        n
compact subsets of R coincides with the set of all closed bounded subsets of

n
R.


  11.3.  Relatively  compact  subsets  of  a  metric  space.  The  concept  of

relative  compactness,  introduced  in Sec.  10.4  for  subsets  of  an  arbitrary

topological space, applies in particular to subsets of a metric space. In the

case of a metric space, however, there is no longer any distinction between

relative compactness and relative countable compactness.


  THEOREM 3. A subset M of a complete metric space R is relatively compact

if and only if it is totally bounded.  Proof. An immediate consequence of Theorem 2 and the fact that a closed

subset of a complete metric space is itself complete. 


  Example. Any bounded subset of Euclidean n-space it totally bounded and

hence  relatively  compact  (this  is  our  version  of  the  familiar Bolzano-

Weierstrass theorem).


  Remark. The utility of Theorem 3 stems from the fact it is usually easier to

prove that a set is totally bounded than to give a direct proof of its relative

compactness. On the other hand, compactness is the key property as far as

applications are concerned.


  11.4.  Arzelà’s  theorem.  The  problem  of  proving  the  compactness  of

various subsets of a given metric space is encountered quite frequently in

analysis. However, the direct application of Theorem 2 is not always easy.

This  explains  the  need  for  special  criteria  serving  as  practical  tools  for

proving compactness in particular spaces. For example, as we have seen, the

bounded-ness of a set in Euclidean n-space implies its compactness, but this

implication fails in more general metric spaces.

  One of the most important metric spaces in analysis is the function space

C, introduced in Example 6, p. 39. For subsets of this space, we have an
[a, b]

important  and  frequently  used  criterion  for  relative  compactness,  called

Arzelà’s theorem, which will be stated and proved after first introducing two

new concepts:


  DEFINITION 3. A family Φ of functions φ defined on a closed interval [a, b]

is said to be uniformly bounded if there exists a number K > 0 such that


                                      |φ(x)| < K


for all x ∈ [a, b] and all φ ∈ Φ.


  DEFINITION 4. A family Φ of functions φ defined on a closed interval [a, b]

is said to be equicontinuous if, given any ε > 0, there exists a number δ > 0

such that |x′ − x″| < δ implies


                                  |φ(x′) − φ(x″)| < ε


for all x′, x″ ∈ [a, b] and all φ ∈ Φ.  THEOREM 4 (Arzelà). A necessary and sufficient condition for a family φ of

continuous functions φ defined on a closed interval [a, b] to be relatively

compact in C is that Φ be uniformly bounded and equicontinuous.
              [a,b]


  Proof. We give the proof in two steps:


  Step 1 (Necessity).  Suppose  φ  is  relatively  compact  in C.  Then  by
                                                                          [a,b]

Theorem 3, given any ε > 0, there is a finite (ε/3)-net φ, . . ., φ in φ (see
                                                                    1n

Problem 1). Being a continuous function defined on a closed interval, each φ
                                                                                          i

is bounded:


                              |φ(x)| < k(a < x < b).
                                ii


Let





By the definition of an (ε/3)-net, given any φ ∈ Φ, there is at least one φ
                                                                                          i

such that





Therefore





i.e., Φ is uniformly bounded. Moreover, each function Φ in the (ε/3)-net is
                                                                    i

continuous, and hence uniformly continuous, on [a, b]. Hence, given any ε >

0, there is a δ such that
              i





whenever |x − x| < δ. Let
            12i


                                δ = min{δ, . . ., δ}.
                                            1nThen, given any φ ∈ Φ and choosing φ such that ρ(φ, φ) < ε/3, we have
                                              ii








whenever |x − x| < δ. This proves the equicontinuity of Φ.
            12


  Step 2 (Sufficiency). Suppose φ is uniformly bounded and equi-continuous.

According to Theorem 3, to prove that φ is relatively compact in C, we
                                                                                  [a,b]

need only show that φ is totally bounded, i.e., that given any ε > 0, there

exists a finite ε-net for φ in C. Suppose |φ(x)|  K for all φ ∈ Φ, and let δ
                                  [a,b]

> 0 be such that





for all φ ∈ Φ whenever |x − x| < δ. Divide the interval a  x  b along the
                              12

x-axis  into  subintervals  of  length  less  than  δ,  by  introducing  points  of

subdivision x, x, x, . . ., x such that
              012n


                          a = x < x < x < . . . < x = b,
                                012n


and then draw a vertical line through each of these points. Similarly, divide

the interval −K  y  K along the y-axis into subintervals of length less than

ε/5, by introducing points of subdivision y, y, y, . . ., y such that
                                                012p


                        −K = y < y < y < . . . < y = K,
                                  012γ


and then draw a horizontal line through each of these points. In this way, the

rectangle a  x  b, − M  y  M is divided into np cells of horizontal side

length less than δ and vertical side length less than ε/5.


  We now associate with each function φ ∈ Φ a polygonal line y = (x)

which has vertices at points of the form (x, y) and differs from the function
                                                  kl

φ by less than ε/5 at every point x (the reader should draw a figure and
                                          kconvince himself on the existence of such a function). Since











by construction, we have





Moreover,





since (x) is linear between the points x and x. Let x be any point in [a, b]
                                              kk+1

and x the point of subdivision nearest to x on the left. Then
    k


      |φ(x) − ψ(x)| < |φ(x) − φ(x)| + |φ(x) − ψ(x)| + |ψ(x) − ψ(x) < ε,
                                      kkkk


i.e.,  the  set  of  polygonal  lines  ψ(x)  forms  an  ε-net  for  φ.  But  there  are

obviously only finitely many such lines. Therefore φ is totally bounded. 


  11.5. Peano’s theorem. Arzelà’s theorem has many applications, among

them the following existence theorem for differential equations:


  THEOREM 5 (Peano). Let f(x, y) be defined and continuous on a plane

domain G. Then at least one integral curve of the differential equation





passes through each point (x, y) of G.
                                00  Proof. By the continuity of f, we have


                                      |f(x, y)| < K


in some domain G′ ⊂ G containing the point (x, y). Draw the lines with
                                                          00

slopes K and −K through the point (x, y). Then draw vertical lines x = a and
                                          00

x = b (a < x < b) which together with the first two lines form two isosceles
            0

triangles contained in G′ with common vertex (x, y), as shown in Figure 13.
                                                        00

This gives a closed interval [a, b], which will figure in the rest of the proof.















                                        FIGURE 13


  The next step is to construct a family of polygonal lines, called Euler

lines, associated with the differential equation (2). We begin by drawing the

line with slope f(x, y) through the point (x, y). Next, choosing a point (x,
                    00001

y) on the first line, we draw the line with slope f(x, y) through the point (x,
1221

y). Then, choosing a point (x, y) on the second line, we draw the line with
122

slope f(x, y) through the point (x, y), and so on indefinitely. Suppose we
        2222

construct a whole sequence L, L, . . ., L, . . . of such Euler lines going
                                  12n

through the point (x, y), with the property that the length of the longest line
                      00

segment making up L approaches 0 as n → ∞. Let φ be the function with
                        nn

graph L. Then this gives a family of functions φ, φ, . . ., φ, . . ., all defined
        n12n

on the interval [a, b],  which  is  easily  seen  to  be  uniformly  bounded  and

equicontinuous (why?). It follows from Arzela’s theorem that the sequence

                                                              (1)(2)(n)
{φ} contains a uniformly convergent subsequence φ, φ, . . ., φ, . . . Let
nThen clearly


                                      φ(x) = y,
                                          00


so that the curve y = φ(x) passes through the point (x, y).
                                                              00


  We now show that y = φ(x) satisfies the differential equation (2) in the

open interval (a, b). This means showing that, given any ε > 0 and any points

x′, x″ ∈ (a, b), we have





whenever |x″ − x′| is sufficiently small, or equivalently that






whenever n is sufficiently large and |x″ − x′| is sufficiently small. Let y′ = φ(x

′). Then, by the continuity of f, given any ε > 0, there is a number η > 0 such

that


                          f(x′, y′) − ε < f(x, y) < f(x′, y′) + ε


whenever


                          |x − x′| < 2η,|y − y′| < 4Kη.


The set of points (x, y) satisfying these inequalities is a rectangle, which we

denote by Q. Let N be so large that for all n > N, the length of the longest

segment making up L is less than η and moreover
                        n

                                          (n)
                                |φ(x) − φ(x)| < Kη.


Then all the Euler lines L with n > N lie inside the rectangle Q (why?).
                              n
                                                                          13
Suppose L has vertices (a, b), (a, b), . . ., (a, b), where
            n0011k+1k+1                      a < x′ < a < a < . . . < a < x″ < a.
                        012kk+1


Then








Hence, if |x″ − x′| < η,









Adding these inequalities, we get

                            (n)(n)
[f(x′, y′) − ε](x″ − x′) < φ(x″) − φ(x′) < [f(x′, y′) + ε](x″ - x′)

if |x″ − x′| < η, which is equivalent to (3). 


  Remark.  Different  subsequences  of  a  sequence  of  Euler  lines  may

converge  to  different  solutions  of  the  differential  equation (2). Hence the

solution φ found in the proof of Theorem 5 may not be the unique solution of

(2) passing through the point (x, y).
                                    00


  Problem 1. Let M be a totally bounded subset of a metric space R. Prove

that the ε-nets figuring in the definition of total boundedness of M can always

be chosen to consist of points of M rather than of R.


  Hint. Given an ε-net for M consisting of points a, a, . . ., a ⊂ R, all
                                                                12n

within ε of some point of M, replace each point a by a point b ⊂ M such
                                                            kk

that ρ(a, b)  ε.
      kk


  Problem 2. Prove that every totally bounded metric space is separable.

    Hint. Construct a finite (1/n)-net for every n = 1, 2, . . . Then take the

union of these nets.  Problem 3. Let M be a bounded subset of the space C. Prove that the
                                                                    [a,b]

set of all functions





with f ∈ M compact.


  Problem 4. Given two metric compacta X and Y, let C be the set of all
                                                                    XY

continuous mappings of X into Y.  Let  distance  be  defined  in C  by  the
                                                                                XY

formula





Prove that C is a metric space. Let M be the set of all mappings of X into
            XYXY

Y, with the same metric (4). Prove that C is closed in M.
                                              XYXY


  Hint. Use the method of Problem 1, p. 65 to prove that the limit of a

uniformly convergent sequence of continuous mappings is itself a continuous

mapping.


  Problem 5. Let X, Y and C be the same as in the preceding problem.
                                    XY

Prove  the  following  generalization  of  Arzelà’s  theorem:  A  necessary  and

sufficient condition for a set D ⊂ C to be relatively compact is that D be an
                                        XY

equicontinuous family of functions, in the sense that given any ε > 0, there

exists a number δ > 0 such that ρ(x′, y′) < δ implies ρ(f(x′),f(x″)) < ε for all x′,

x″ ∈ X and all f ∈ D.


  Hint. To prove the sufficiency, show that D is relatively compact in M
                                                                                        XY

(defined in the preceding problem) and hence in C, since C is closed in
                                                            XYXY

M. To prove the relative compactness of D in M, first represent X as a
XYXY

union of finitely many pairwise disjoint sets E such that x′, x″ ∈ E implies
                                                      ii

ρ(x′, x″) < δ. For example, let x, . . ., x be a (δ/2)-net for X, and let
                                    1nThen let y, . . ., y be an ε-net in Y, and let L be the set of all functions taking
          1p

the values y on the sets E. Given any f ∈ D and any x ∈ {x, . . ., x}, let y
            ii11ni

∈ {y, . . ., y} be such that ρ(f(x), y) < ε and let g ∈ L be such that g(x) =
    1niii

y. Show that ρ(f(x), g(x)) < 2ε, thereby proving that L is a finite 2ε-net for D
i

in M.
    XY



12. Real Functions on Metric and Topological Spaces


    12.1.  Continuous  and  uniformly  continuous  functions  and

functionals. Let T be a topological space, in particular a metric space. Then

                                                                              1
by a real function on T we mean a mapping of T into the space R (the real

                                                                      n
line). For example, a real function on Euclidean n-space R is just the usual

“function of n variables.” Suppose T is a function space, i.e., a space whose

elements are functions. Then a real function on T is called a functional.


  Example 1. Let x(t) be a function defined on the interval [0, 1], let φ(s, s,
                                                                                      01

. . ., s) be a function of n + 1 variables defined for all real values of its
      n

arguments, and let ψ(t, u) be a function of two variables defined for all t ∈

[0, 1] and all real u. Then the following are all functionals:


















The functionals F, F, F, F and F  are  defined  on  the  space C  of  all
                    12345

functions continuous on the interval [0, 1]. On the other hand, F is defined
                                                                            6only  for  functions  differentiable  at  the  point t, F  is  defined  only  for
                                                          07

functions such that the expression  is integrable, and F is defined
                                                                              8

only for functions with integrable |x′(t)|.


  Example 2. The functional F is continuous on C, since
                                    1


                ρ(x, y) = sup|x − y|,|sup x − sup y| < sup|x − y|.


  Example 3. The functional F is discontinuous on C at any point x where
                                    60

it is defined. In fact, let x(t) be such that x′(t) = 1 and |x(t)| < ε, and let y = x
                                                  00

+ x.  Then   even  though  ρ(x, y)  <  ε.  However, F  is
                                                          06
                                                    (1)
continuous if it is defined on the space C of all functions continuously

differentiable on the interval [0, 1], with metric





(why?).


  Example 4. The function F is also discontinuous on C. In fact, let
                                  7





Then





but F(x) > 4 for all n while F(x) = 1. Hence F(x) fails to approach F(x)
      7n707n70

even though x → x.
              n0


  The ordinary concept of uniform continuity generalizes at once to the case

of arbitrary metric spaces:


  DEFINITION 1. A real function f(x) defined on a metric space R is said to be

uniformly continuous on R if, given any ε > 0, there is a δ > 0 such that ρ(x,
                                                                                          1

x) < δ implies |f(x) − f(x)| < ε for all x, x ∈ R.
21212  The reader will recall from calculus that a real function continuous on a

closed interval [a, b] is uniformly continuous on [a, b]. This fact is a special

case of


  THEOREM 1. A real function f continuous on a compact metric space R is

uniformly continuous on R.


  Proof. Suppose f is continuous but not uniformly continuous on R. Then

for some positive ε and every n there are points x and x′ in R such that
                                                        nn





but




Since R is compact, the sequence {x} has a subsequence {x} converging to
                                          nn
                                                                        k

a point x ∈ R. Hence  also converges to x, because of (1). But then at

least one of the inequalities





must  hold  for  arbitrary k,  because  of (2).  This  contradicts  the  assumed

continuity of f at x. 


  12.2. Continuous and semicontinuous functions on compact spaces. As

just shown, the theorem on uniform continuity of a function continuous on a

closed  interval  generalizes  to  functions  continuous  on  arbitrary  metric

compacta.  There  are  other  properties  of  functions  continuous  on  a  closed

interval which generalize to arbitrary compact spaces (not necessarily metric

spaces):


  THEOREM 2. A real function f continuous on a compact topological space T

                  14
is bounded on T. Moreover f achieves its least upper bound and greatest

lower bound on T.  Proof. A continuous real function on T is a continuous mapping of T into

                11
the real line R. The image of T in R is compact, by Theorem 5, p. 94. But

                              1
every compact subset of R is bounded and closed (see p. 101). Hence f is

bounded on T. Moreover, f not only has a least upper bound and greatest

lower bound on T, but actually achieves these bounds at points of T. 


  Theorem 2 can be generalized to a larger class of functions, which we now

introduce:


  DEFINITION 2. A (real) function f defined on a topological space T is said

to be upper semicontinuous at a point x ∈ T if, given any ε > 0, there exists
                                              0

a neighborhood of x in which f(x) < f(x) + ε. Similarly, f is said to be lower
                      00

semicontinuous at x if, given any ε > 0, there exists a neighborhood of x in
                      00

which f(x) > f(x) − ε.
                0


  Example 1. Let [x] be the integral part of x, i.e., the largest integer x.

Then f(x) = [x] is upper semicontinuous for all x.


  Example 2. Given a continuous function f, suppose we increase the value

f(x) taken by f at the point x. Then f becomes upper semicontinuous at x.
  000

Similarly, f  becomes  lower  semicontinuous  at x  if  we  decrease f(x).
                                                              00

Moreover, f  is  upper  semicontinuous  if  and  only  if  −f  is  lower

semicontinuous. These facts can be used to construct many more examples of

semicontinuous functions.


  In studying the properties of semicontinuous functions, it is convenient to

allow  them  to  take  infinite  values.  If f(x)  =  +  ∞,  we  regard f  as  upper
                                                  0

semicontinuous at x. The function f is also regarded as lower semicontinuous
                      0

at x if, given any h > 0, there is a neighborhood of x in which f(x) > h.
  00

Similarly, if f(x) = − ∞, we regard f as lower semicontinuous at x, and at the
                00

same  time  upper  semicontinuous  at x  if,  given  any h  >  0,  there  is  a
                                              0

neighborhood of x in which f(x) < −h.
                    0


  We now prove the promised generalization of Theorem 2:


  THEOREM  2′. A  finite  lower  semicontinuous  function  f  defined  on  acompact topological space T is bounded from below.


  Proof. Suppose to the contrary that inf f(x) = − ∞. Then there exists a

sequence {x} such that f(x) < −n. Since T is compact, the infinite set E =
            nn

{x, x, . . ., x, . . .} has at least one limit point x. Since f is finite and lower
12n0

semicontinuous at x, there is a neighborhood U of x in which f(x) > f(x) −
                      000

1. But then U can only contain finitely many points of E, so that x cannot be
                                                                              0

a limit point of E. 


  THEOREM  2″. A  finite  lower  semicontinuous  function  f  defined  on  a

compact topological space T achieves its greatest lower bound on T.


  Proof. By Theorem 2′, inf f(x) is finite. Clearly, there exists a sequence

{x} such that
n





By the compactness of T, the set E = {x, x, . . ., x, . . .} has at least one
                                                12n

limit point x. If f(x) > inf f, then, by the semicontinuity of f at x, there is a
            000

neighborhood U of the point x and a δ > 0 such that f(x) > inf f + δ for all x
                                  0

∈ U. But then U cannot contain an infinite subset of E, i.e., x cannot be a
                                                                          0

limit point of x. It follows that f(x) = inf f. 
                00


  Remark. Theorems 2′ and 2″ remain true if the words “lower,” “below,”

and “greatest” are replaced by “upper,” “above,” and “least.” The details are

left as an exercise.


  We conclude this section with some useful terminology:


  DEFINITION 3. Given a real function f defined on a metric space R, the

(finite or infinite) quantity





is called the upper limit of f at x, while the (finite or infinite) quantity
                                    0is called the lower limit of f at x. The difference
                                    0




                    15
provided it exists, is called the oscillation of f at x.
                                                            0









                                        FIGURE 14


  12.3.  Continuous  curves  in  metric  spaces.  Instead  of  mappings  of  a

metric space into the real line, we now consider mappings of a subset of the

real  line  into  a  metric  space.  More  exactly,  let P  =f(t)  be  a  continuous

mapping of the interval a  t  b into a metric space R. As t “traverses” the

interval from a to b, the point P = f(t) “traverses a continuous curve” in the

space R. Before giving a formal definition corresponding to this rough idea of

a “curve,” we make two key observations:

    1)The  order  in  which  points  are  traversed  will  be  regarded  as  an

        essential property of a curve. For example, the set of points shown in

        Figure 14(a) gives rise to two distinct curves when traversed in the

        two distinct ways shown in Figures 14(b) and 14(c). Similarly, the

        function shown in Figure 15(a), defined in the interval 0  t  1,

        determines a “curve” filling up the segment 0  y  1 of the y-axis,

        but  this  curve  is  traversed  three  times  (twice  upward  and  once

        downward)  and  hence  is  distinct  from  the  segment  0  y   1

        traversed just once from the point y = 0 to the point y = 1.

    2)The  choice  of  the  parameter t  will  be  regarded  as  unimportant,

        provided a change in parameter does not change the order in which

        the points of the curve are traversed. Thus the functions shown in        Figures 15(a) and 15(b)  represent  the  same  curve,  even  though  a

        given point of the curve corresponds to different parameter values in

        the two cases. For example, the point A in Figure 15(a) corresponds

        to two isolated points C and D on the t-axis, while in Figure 15(b) the

        same point A corresponds to an isolated point C and a whole line

        segment DE (note that the point on the curve does not move at all as t

        traverses the segment DE).














                                        FIGURE 15


  We now give a formal definition of a curve, embodying these qualitative

ideas. Two continuous functions


                                P = f(t′),P = g(t″),


defined on intervals


                            a′ < t′ < b′,a″ < t″ < b″


and taking values in a metric space R, are said to be equivalent if there exist

two continuous nondecreasing functions


                                t′ = φ(t),t″ = ψ(t),


defined on the same interval


                                      a < t < b,


such thatand


                        f(φ(t)) =g(ψ(t))for allt ∈ [a, b].


It is easy to see that this relation of equivalence is reflexive (f is equivalent to

f), symmetric (if f is equivalent to g, then g is equivalent to f) and transitive (if

f is equivalent to g and g is equivalent to h, then f is equivalent to h). Hence

the set of all continuous functions of the given type can be partitioned into

classes of equivalent functions (cf. Sec. 1.4), and each such class is said to

define a (continuous) curve in the space R.

    For each function P = f(t′) defined on an interval [a′, b′], there is an

equivalent function defined on the interval [a″, b″] = [0, 1]. In fact, we need

only make the choice


                    t′ = φ(t) = (b′ − a′)t + a′,t″ = ψ(t) = t.


Thus every curve can be regarded as specified parametrically in terms of a

function defined on the unit interval I = [0, 1]. By the same token, it is often

          16
convenient to introduce the space C(I, R) of continuous mappings f of the

interval I into the space R, equipped with the metric





where ρ is the metric in the space R.


  Problem 1. Let the functionals F, F, F, F, F and the space C be the
                                          12345

same as on p. 108. Prove that

  a)F, F and F are continuous on C;
          235

  b)F  is  continuous  on C  if  the  function  φ  is  continuous  in  all  its
          4

        arguments;

  c)F is uniformly continuous on C.
          1

Define F, F, F and F on a space larger than C.
        1234                                                                      (1)
  Problem 2. Let the functionals F, F and the spaces C, C be the same as
                                        78

on p. 108. Prove that

  a)F is discontinuous on C;
          8
                                            (1)
  b)F and F are continuous on C.
          78


  Problem 3. Let M be the space of all bounded real functions defined on

the interval [a, b], with metric ρ(f, g) = sup |f − g|. By the length of the curve


                                y = f(x)(a < x < b)


is meant the functional





where the least upper bound (which may equal +∞) is taken over all possible

partitions of [a, b] obtained by introducing points of subdivision x, x, x, . .
                                                                              012

., x such that
  n


                          a = x < x < x < . . . < x = b.
                                012n


Prove that

  a)For continuous functions






  b)For continuously differentiable functions





    c)The functional L(f) is lower semicontinuous on M.

Problem 4. Let ,  and ω be the same as in Definition 3. Prove that

  a) is upper semicontinuous;

  b) is lower semicontinuous;  c)f is continuous at x if and only if −∞ < (x) = (x) < ∞, i.e., if and
                              000

        only if ωf(x) = 0.
                      0


  Problem 5. Let K be a metric compactum and A a mapping of K into itself

such that ρ(Ax, Ay) < ρ(x, y) if x ≠ y. Prove that A has a unique fixed point in

K. Reconcile this with Problem 1, p. 76.


  Problem  6.  Let K  be  a  metric  compactum  and  {f(x)}  a  sequence  of
                                                                  n

continuous functions on K, increasing in the sense that




Prove  that  if  {f(x)}  converges  to  a  continuous  function  on K,  then  the
                  n

covergence is uniform (Dini’s theorem).


  Problem 7. A sequence of curves {Γ} in a metric space R  is  said  to
                                                n

converge  to  a  curve  Γ  in R  if  the  curves  Γ  and  Γ  have  parametric
                                                          n

representations


                                P = f(t)(0 < t <1)
                                      n


and


                                P = f(t)(0 < t < 1),


respectively, such that





where  is the metric (3) of the space C(I, R) introduced on p. 113. Prove that

if  a  sequence  of  curves  in  a  compact  metric  space R  can  be  represented

parametrically by an equicontinuous family of functions on [0, 1], then the

sequence contains a convergent subsequence.


  Hint. Use Problem 5, p. 107.


  Problem  8.  Let  Γ  be  a  curve  in  a  metric  space R,  with  parametric

representationBy the length of Γ is meant the functional





where ρ is the metric in R and the least upper bound (which may equal +∞) is

taken over all possible partitions of [a, b] obtained by introducing points of

subdivision t, t, t, . . ., t, . . . such that
              012n


                            a = t < t < t < . . . < t = b.
                                  012n


Prove that L(Γ) is independent of the parametric representation of Γ. Suppose

we  choose a  =  0, b  =  1,  thereby  confining  ourselves  to  parametric

representations of the form


                                P = f(t)(0 < t < 1).


Prove that L(f) is then a lower semicontinuous functional on the space C(I, R)

introduced on p. 113. Equivalently, prove that if a sequence of curves {Γ}
                                                                                        n

converges to a curve Γ, in the sense of Problem 7, then L(Γ) does not exceed

the smallest limit point (i.e., the lower limit) of the sequence {L(Γ)}.
                                                                            n


  Problem 9. Given a metric space R with metric ρ, let Γ be a curve in R of

finite length S with parametric representation


                                P = f(t)(a < t < b)


Let s = φ(T) be the length of the arc


                                P = f(t)(a < t < T).


(where T  b), i.e., the arc of Γ going from the “initial point” P = f(a) to the
                                                                          a

“final point” P = f(T). Then Γ has a parametric representation of the form
                T


                              P = g(s)(0 < s < S),

                  −1
where g(s) ≡ f(φ(s)) if φ is one-to-one. Prove that                              ρ(g(s), g(s)) < |s − s|.
                                    1212


  Hint. The length of an arc is no less than the length of the inscribed chord.


  Problem 10. In the preceding problem, let τ = s/S. Then Γ has a parametric

representation


                          P = F(τ) ≡ g(Sτ)(0 < t < 1)


in terms of a function F defined on the unit interval [0, 1]. Prove that F

satisfies a Lipschitz condition of the form


                            ρ(F(τ), F(τ))  S |τ − τ|.
                                    1212


Suppose R is compact and let {Γ} be a sequence of curves, all of length less
                                      n

than  some  finite  number M.  Prove  that  {Γ}  contains  a  convergent
                                                          n

subsequence, where convergence of curves is defined as in Problem 7.


  Problem 11. Given a compact metric space R, suppose two points A and B

in R can be joined by a continuous curve of finite length. Prove that among

all such curves, there is a curve of least length.


  Comment.  Even  in  the  case  where R  is  a  “smooth”  (i.e.,  sufficiently

differentiable) closed surface in Euclidean 3-space, this result is not amenable

to the methods of elementary differential geometry, which ordinarily deals

only with the case of “neighboring” points A and B.


  Problem 12. Let  be the set of all curves in a given metric space R.

Define the distance between two curves Γ, Γ ∈  by the formula
                                                12




where  is the metric (3) in the space C(I, R), and the greatest lower bound is

taken over all possible representations




of Γ and
  1of Γ. Prove that the metric  makes  into a metric space.
  2


  Comment. The fact that (Γ, Γ) = 0 implies the identity of Γ and Γ
                                    1212

follows from the (not very easily proved) fact that the greatest lower bound in

(4) is achieved for a suitable choice of the parametric representations (5) and

(6).




  1
 This gives two topological spaces T = (X, τ) and T = (X, τ).
                                    1122

  2
 For example, the set of open spheres S(x, 1/n) is a countable neighborhood base at any point x of
a metric space R.

  3
 More exactly, if, given any G(x), there is an integer N such that G(x) contains all points x with
                                                    Gn
n > N.
    G

  4
 See e.g., J. L. Kelley, General Topology, D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc., Princeton, N.J. (1955), p.
132.

  5
 If desired, the mapping f can always be regarded as “onto,” since otherwise we need only replace
the space Y by the-subspace f(x) ⊂ Y.

  6
 In fact, by suitably generalizing the notion of convergence (and introducing the concepts of
“nets” and “filters”), this method can be made to work quite generally. See e.g., J. L. Kelley, op. cit., p.
83.

  7
 J. L. Kelley, op. cit., p. 43.

  8
  See  e.g.,  P.  S.  Alexandroff, Einführung  in  die  Mengenlehre  und  die  Theorie  der  Reellen
Funktionen, VEB Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, Berlin (1956), p. 195 ff.

  9
 J. L. Kelley, op. cit., p. 145.

  10
 A system of sets with typical member A will often be denoted by {A} (this is still another use
                                        αα
of curly brackets).

  11
 P. S. Alexandroff, op. cit., pp. 250–251; J. L. Kelley, op. cit., pp. 163–164.

  12
 Another commonly encountered definition of the Hilbert cube is the set of points in l satisfying
                                                                                2
the inequalities




  13
 To be explicit, we assume that x″ > x′. The case x″ < x′ is treated similarly.  14
 A real function (or functional) f is said to be bounded on a set E if f(E) is contained in some
interval [−C, C].

  15
 I.e., provided at least one of the numbers (x), (x) is finite.
                                              00

  16
 Cf. Problems 7–12.                                          4



                            LINEAR SPACES









13. Basic Concepts


    13.1. Definitions and examples. One of the most important concepts in

mathematics is that of a linear space, which will play a key role in the rest of

this book:


  DEFINITION 1. A nonempty set L of elements x, y, z, . . . is said to be a

linear space (or vector space) if it satisfies the following three axioms:

    1)Any two elements x, y ∈ L uniquely determine a third element x + y

        ∈ L, called the sum of x and y, such that

        a)x + y = y + x (commutativity);

        b)(x + y) + z = x + (y + z) (associativity);

        c)There exists an element 0 ∈ L, called the zero element, with the

              property that x + 0 = x for every x ∈ L;

        d)For every x ∈ L there exists an element −x, called the negative

            of x, with the property that x + (−x) = 0;

    2)Any number α and any element x ∈ L uniquely determine an element

        α ∈ L, called the product of α and x, such that

        a)α(βx) = (αβ)x;

        b)1x = x;

    3)The operations of addition and multiplication obey two distributive

        laws:        a)(α + β)x = αa + βx;

        b)α(x + y) = αx + αy.


  Remark. The elements of L are called “points” or “vectors,” while the

numbers α, β, . . . are often called “scalars.” If α is an arbitrary real number, L

is called a real linear space, while if α is an arbitrary complex number, L is

                                    1
called a complex linear space. Unless the contrary is explicitly stated, the

considerations that follow will be valid for both real and complex spaces.

Clearly, any complex linear space reduces to a real linear space if we allow

vectors to be multiplied by real numbers only.


  We now give some examples of linear spaces, leaving it to the reader to

                                                                                        2
verify in detail that the conditions in Definition 1 are satisfied in each case.


  Example 1.  The  real  line  (the  set  of  all  real  numbers)  with  the  usual

arithmetic operations of addition and multiplication is a linear space.


  Example 2. The set of all ordered n-tuples


                                  x = (x, x, . . ., x)
                                        12n


of real or complex numbers x, x, . . ., x, with sums and “scalar multiples”
                                  12n

defined by the formulas






is also a linear space. This space is called n-dimensional (vector) space, or

                                  nn
simply n-space, denoted by R in the real case and C in the complex case.

(Concerning the precise meaning of the term “n-dimensional,” see Sec. 13.2.)


  Example 3. The set of all (real or complex) functions continuous on an

interval  [a, b],  with  the  usual  operations  of  addition  of  functions  and

multiplication of functions by numbers, forms a linear space C, one of the
                                                                          [a,b]

most important spaces in analysis.


  Example 4. The set l of all infinite sequences
                          2of real or complex numbers x, x, . . ., x, . . . satisfying the convergence
                                  12k

condition





equipped with operations







is a linear space. The fact that





implies





is an immediate consequence of the elementary inequality




  Example 5. Let c be the set of all convergent sequences (1), c the set of
                                                                              0

all sequences (1) converging to zero, m the set of all bounded sequences, and

∞∞
R the set of all sequences (1). Then c, c, m and R are all linear spaces,
                                                  0

provided  that  in  each  case  addition  of  sequences  and  multiplication  of

sequences by numbers are defined by (2).


  Since linear spaces are defined in terms of two operations, addition of

elements and multiplication of elements by numbers, it is natural to introduce


  DEFINITION 2. Two linear spaces L and L* are said to be isomorphic ifthere  is  a  one-to-one  correspondence  x  ↔  x* between  L  and  L* which

preserves operations, in the sense that


                                  x ↔ x*,y↔y*


(where x, y ∈ L, x*, y* ∈ L*) implies


                                  x + y ↔ x* + y*


and


                                      αx ↔ αx*


(α an arbitrary number).


  Remark. It is sometimes convenient to regard isomorphic linear spaces as

different “realizations” of one and the same linear space.


  13.2. Linear dependence. We say that the elements x, y, . . ., w of a linear

space L are linearly dependent if there exist numbers α, β, . . ., λ, not all zero,

        3
such that




If no such numbers exist, the elements x, y, . . ., w are said to be linearly

independent.  In  other  words,  the  elements x, y,  .  .  ., w  are  linearly

independent if and only if (3) implies


                                α = β = . . . = λ = 0.


More generally, the elements x, y, . . . belonging to some infinite set E ⊂ L

are said to be linearly independent if the elements belonging to every finite

subset of E are linearly independent.

  A linear space L is said to be n-dimensional (or of dimension n) if n

linearly independent elements can be found in L, but any n + 1 elements of L

are linearly dependent. Suppose n linearly independent elements can be found

in L for every n. Then L is said to be infinite-dimensional, but otherwise L is

said to be finite-dimensional. Any set of n linearly independent elements of

an n-dimensional space L is called a basis in L.  Remark. The typical course on linear algebra deals with finite-dimensional

linear spaces. Here, however, we will be primarily concerned with infinite-

dimensional  spaces,  the  case  of  greater  interest  from  the  standpoint  of

mathematical analysis.


  13.3. Subspaces. Given a nonempty subset L′ of a linear space L, suppose

L  is  itself  a  linear  space  with  respect  to  the  operations  of  addition  and

multiplication defined in L. Then L′ is said to be a subspace (of L). In other

words, we say that L′ ⊂ L is a subspace if x ∈ L′, y ∈ L′ implies αx + βy ∈

L′ for arbitrary α and β. The “trivial space” consisting of the zero element

alone is a subspace of every linear space L. At the opposite extreme, L can

always be regarded as a subset of itself. By a proper subspace of a linear

space L, we mean a subspace which is distinct from L itself and contains at

least one nonzero element.


  Example 1. Let L be any linear space, and x any nonzero element of L.

Then the set {λx} of all scalar multiples of x, where λ ranges over all (real or

complex) numbers is obviously a one-dimensional subspace of L, in fact a

proper subspace if the dimension of L exceeds 1.


  Example 2. The set P of all polynomials on [a, b] is a proper subspace
                            [a,b]

of the set C of all continuous functions on [a, b]. Like C itself, P is
            [a,b][a,b][a,b]

infinite-dimensional. At the same time, C is itself a proper subspace of the
                                                [a,b]

set of all functions on [a, b], both continuous and discontinuous.


                                                                  ∞
  Example 3. Each of the linear spaces l, c, c, m and R (in that order) is a
                                                20

proper subspace of the next one.


  Given a linear space L, let {x} be any nonempty set of elements x ∈ L.
                                    αα
                                                                                4
Then L has a smallest subspace (possibly L itself) containing {x}. In fact,
                                                                            α

there is at least one such subspace, namely L itself. Moreover, it is clear that

the intersection of any system of subspaces {L} is itself a subspace, since if 
                                                      γ

 and x, y ∈ L*, then αx + βy ∈ L* for all α and β (why?). The

smallest subspace of L containing the set {x} is then just the intersection of
                                                    α

all subspaces containing {x}. This minimal subspace, denoted by L({x}), is
                              ααcalled the (linear) subspace generated by {x} or the linear hull of {x}.
                                                  αα


  13.4. Factor spaces. Let L be a linear space and L′ a subspace of L. Then

two  elements x, y ∈ L  are  said  to  belong  to  the  same  (residue) class

generated by L′ if the difference x − y belongs to L′. The set of all such

classes  is  called  the factor space  (or quotient space)  of L  relative  to L′,

denoted by L/L′. The operations of addition of elements and multiplication of

elements by numbers can be introduced in a factor space L/L′ in the following

natural way: Given two elements of L/L′, i.e., two classes ξ and η, we choose

a “representative” from each class, say x from ξ and y from η. We then define

the sum ξ + η of the classes ξ and η to be the class containing the element x +

y, while the product αξ of the number α and the class ξ is defined to be the

class containing the element αx. Here we rely on the fact that the classes ξ + η

and αξ are independent of the choice of the “representatives” x and y (why?).


  THEOREM 1. Every factor space L/L′, with operations defined in the way

just described, is a linear space.


  Proof.  We  need  only  verify  that L/L′  satisfies  the  three  axioms  in

Definition 1. This is almost trivial (give the details). 


  Let L be a linear space and L′ a subspace of L. Then the dimension of the

factor space L/L′ is called the codimension of L′ in L.


  THEOREM 2. Let L′ be a subspace of a linear space L. Then L′ has finite

codimension n if and only if there are linearly independent elements x, . . .,
                                                                                    1

x in L such that every element x ∈ L has a unique representation of the form
n




where α, . . ., α are numbers and y ∈ L′.
        1n

    Proof. Suppose every element x ∈ L has a unique representation of the

form (4). Given any class ξ ∈ L/L′, let x be any element of ξ, and let ξ be the
                                                                                  k

class containing x (k = 1, . . ., n). Then (4) clearly implies
                  k


                              ξ = α ξ + . . . + α ξ.
                                      11nnHence ξ, . . ., ξ is a basis for L/L′ (the linear independence of ξ, . . ., ξ
        1n1n

follows from that of x, . . ., x). In other words, L/L′ has dimension n, or
                          1n

equivalently L′ has codimension n.


  Conversely, suppose L′ has codimension n, so that L/L′ has dimension n.

Then L/L′ has a basis ξ, . . ., ξ. Given any x ∈ L, let ξ be the class in L/L′
                          1n

containing x. Then


                                ξ = α ξ + . . . + α ξ
                                      11nn


for suitable numbers α, . . ., α. But this means that every element in ξ, in
                          1n

particular x, differs only by an element y ∈ L from a linear combination of

elements x, . . ., x where x is any fixed element of ξ (k = 1, . . ., n), i.e.,
          1nkk




(the linear independence of x, . . ., x follows from that of ξ, . . ., ξ).
                                    1n1n

Suppose there is another such representation




Then, subtracting (5′) from (5), we get




and hence




where in the last equation 0 means the class containing the zero element of L,

i.e., the space L′ itself. But ξ, . . ., ξ are linearly independent, and hence α =
                                1n1

α′, . . ., α = α′. 
1nn


    13.5. Linear functionals. A numerical function f defined on a linear

                                          5
space L is called a functional (on L). A functional f is said to be additive if


                                f(x + y) = f(x) + f(y)for all y ∈ L and homogeneous if


                                      f(αx) = αf(x)


for every number α. A functional defined on a complex linear space is called

conjugate-homogeneous if


                                      f(αx) = f(x)


for every number α, where  is the complex conjugate of α. An additive

homogeneous  functional  is  called  a linear  functional,  while  an  additive

conjugate-homogeneous functional is called a conjugate-linear functional.


                      n
  Example 1. Let R be real n-space, with elements x = (x, . . ., x), and let
                                                                      1n
                                            n
a = (a, . . ., a) be a fixed element of R. Then
    1n





                            n
is a linear functional on R. Similarly,





                                                              n
is a conjugate-linear functional on complex n-space C.


  Example 2. Consider the integral





or more generally





where φ(t) is a fixed continuous function on [a, b]. It follows at once from

elementary properties of integrals that I(x) is a linear functional. Similarly,

the integralor more generally





is a conjugate-linear functional on C.
                                          [a, b]


  Example 3. Another kind of linear functional on the space C is the
                                                                              [a, b]

functional


                                      δ(x) = x(t)
                                      t0
                                        0

which assigns to each function x(t) ∈ C its value at some fixed point t
                                                [a, b]0

∈ [a, b]. In mathematical physics, particularly in quantum mechanics, this

functional is often written in the form





where δ(t − t) is a “fictitious” or “generalized” function, called the (Dirac)
              0

delta function, which equals zero everywhere except at t  =  0  and  has  an

                      6
integral equal to 1. As we will see in Sec. 20.3, the delta function can be

represented as the limit, in a suitable sense, of a sequence of “true” functions

φ, each vanishing outside of some ε-neighborhood of the point t = 0 and
nn

satisfying the condition





(ε → 0 as n → ∞).
n


  Example 4. Let n be a fixed positive integer, and let


                              x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .)
                                      12k


be an arbitrary element of l. Then
                              2                                        f(x) = x
                                        nn


is obviously a linear functional on l. The same functional can be defined on
                                        2

other spaces whose elements are sequences, e.g., on the spaces c, c, m and
                                                                              0
∞
R considered in Example 5, p. 120.


  13.6. The null space of a functional. Hyperplanes. Let f  be  a  linear

functional defined on a linear space L. Then the set L of all elements x ∈ L
                                                              f

such that


                                        f(x) = 0


is called the null space of f. It will be assumed that f is nontrivial, i.e., that

f(x) ≠ 0 for at least one (and hence infinitely many) x ∈ L, so that the set L −

L is nonempty. Obviously L is a subspace of L, since x, y ∈ L implies
ff


                            f(αx + βy) = αf(x) + βf(y) = 0.


  THEOREM 3. Let x be any fixed element of L − L. Then every element x ∈
                      0f

L has a unique representation of the form


                                      x = αx + y,
                                            0


where y ∈ L.
              f


  Proof. Clearly f(x) ≠  0,  and  in  particular x ≠  0.  There  is  no  loss  of
                        00

generality in assuming that f(x) = 1, since otherwise we need only replace x
                                  00

by x/f(x), noting that
  00






Given any x ∈ L, let


                                      y = x − αx,
                                                  0


where                                        α = f(x).


Then y ∈ L, since
            f


                  f(y) = f(x − αx) = f(x) − αf(x) = f(x) − α = 0.
                                  00


Thus




Moreover, the representation (6) is unique. In fact, if there is another such

representation




then, subtracting (6′) from (6), we get


                                  (α − α′)x = y′ − y.
                                            0


If α = α′, then obviously y′ = y. On the other hand, if α ≠ α′, then





contrary to the choice of x. 
                            0


  COROLLARY 1. Two elements x and x belong to the same class generated
                                      12

by L if and only if f(x) = f(x).
  f12


  Proof. It follows from


                                  x = f(x)x + y,
                                    1101


                                  x = f(x)x + y
                                    2202


that


                      x − x = (f(x) − f(x))x + (y − y).
                          1212012


Hence x − x ∈ L if and only if the coefficient of x vanishes. 
        12f0  COROLLARY 2. L has codimension 1.
                    f


  Proof. Given any class ξ generated by L, let x be any element of ξ and
                                                    f

choose f(x)x  =  αx  as  the  “representative”  of  ξ.  By Corollary  1,  this
              00

representative is unique, and there is obviously a nonzero class since x ≠ 0
                                                                                    0

and f(x) ≠ 0 for some x − L. Moreover, given any two distinct classes ξ and η

with representatives αx and βx, respectively, we have
                          00


                                  β(αx) − α(βx) = 0
                                      00


and hence


                                      βξ − αη = 0,


where at least one of the numbers α, β is nonzero (why?). Therefore any two

distinct elements of L/L are linearly dependent. It follows that L/L is one-
                            ff

dimensional, i.e., L has codimension 1. 
                    f


  COROLLARY 3. Two nontrivial linear functionals f and g with the same null

space are proportional.


  Proof. Again let x be such that f(x) = 1. Then g(x) ≠ 0. In fact,
                      000


                            x = f(x)x + y(y ∈ L),
                                      0f


and hence


                        g(x) = f(x)g(x) + g(y) = f(x)g(x),
                                        00


since L = L. But then g(x) = 0 would imply that g is trivial, contrary to
      gf0

hypothesis. It follows that


                                    g(x) = g(x)f(x),
                                              0


i.e., g(x) is proportional to f(x) with constant of proportionality g(x). 
                                                                              0


  Given a linear space L, let L′ ⊂ L be any subspace of codimension 1.

Then every class in L generated by L′ is called a hyperplane “parallel to L”(in particular, L′ itself is a hyperplane containing 0, i.e., “going through the

origin”). In other words, a hyperplane M′ parallel to a subspace L′ is the set

obtained by subjecting L′ to the parallel displacement (or shift) determined by

                          7
the vector x − L, so that
            0


                      M′ = L′ + x = {x: x = x + y, y − L′}.
                                    00


It is clear that M′ = L′ if and only if x ∈ L′. We can now give a simple
                                              0

geometric interpretation of linear functionals:


  THEOREM 4. Given a linear space L, let f be a nontrivial linear functional

on L. Then the set M = {x:f(x) = 1} is a hyperplane parallel to the null space
                      f

L of the functional. Conversely, let M′ = L′ + x(x ∉ L′) be any hyperplane
f00

parallel to a subspace L′ ⊂ L of codimension 1 and not passing through the

origin. Then there exists a unique linear functional f on L such that M′ =

{x:f(x) = 1}.


  Proof. Given f, let x be such that f(x) = 1 (such an x can always be
                            000

found). Then, by Theorem 3, every vector x ∈ M can be represented in the
                                                          f

form x = x + y, where y ∈ L.
          0f

    Conversely, given M′ = L′ + x(x ∉ L′), it follows from Theorem 2 and
                                        00

its proof that every element x ∈ L can be uniquely represented in the form x

= αx + y, where y ∈ L′. Setting f(x) = α, we get the desired linear functional.
  0

The uniqueness of f follows from the fact that if g(x) ≡ 1 for x ∈ M′, then

g(y) ≡ 0 for y ∈ L′ (why?), so that


                            g(αx + y) = α = f(αx + y). 
                                00


  Remark. Thus we have established a one-to-one correspondence between

the set of all nontrivial linear functionals on L and the set of all hyperplanes

in L which do not pass through the origin.


  Problem 1. Prove that the set of all polynomials of degree n − 1 with real

(or complex) coefficients is a linear space, isomorphic to the n-dimensional

                nn
vector space R (or C).                                nn
  Problem 2. Verify that R and C are n-dimensional, as anticipated by the

terminology in Example 2, p. 119.


                                                                      ∞
  Problem 3. Verify that the spaces C, l, c, c, m and R are all infinite-
                                              [a,b]20

dimensional.


  Problem 4. Given a linear space L, a set {x} of linearly independent
                                                          α

elements  of L  is  said  to  be  a Hamel basis  (in L)  if  the  linear  subspace

generated by {x} coincides with L. Prove that
                α

    a)Every linear space has a Hamel basis;

  b)If {x} is a Hamel basis in L, then every vector x ∈ L has a unique
              α

          representation as a finite linear combination of vectors from the set

        {x};
          α

  c)Any  two  Hamel  bases  in  a  linear  space L  have  the  same  power

        (cardinal number), called the algebraic dimension of L;

    d)Two linear spaces are isomorphic if and only if they have the same

        algebraic dimension.


  Problem 5. Let L′ be a k-dimensional subspace of an n-dimensional linear

space L. Prove that the factor space L/L′ has dimension n − k.


  Problem 6. Let f, f, . . ., f be linear functionals on a linear space L such
                        1n

that f(x) = · · · = f(x) = 0 implies f(x) = 0. Prove that there exist constants a,
    1n1

. . ., a such that
    n





for every x ∈ L.



14. Convex Sets and Functionals. The Hahn-Banach Theorem


    14.1. Convex sets and bodies. Many important topics in the theory of

linear spaces rely on the notion of convexity. This notion, stemming from

intuitive geometric ideas, can be formulated purely analytically. Given a real

linear space L, let x and y be any two points of L. Then by the (closed)segment in L joining x and y we mean the set of all points in L of the form αx

+ βy where α, β  0 and α + β = 1. Such a segment minus its end points x and

y is called an open segment. By the interior of a set M ⊂ L, denoted by I(M),

we mean the set of all points x ∈ M with the following property: Given any y

∈ L, there exists a number ε = ε(y) > 0 such that x + ty ∈ M if |t| < ε.


  DEFINITION 1. A set M ⊂ L is said to be convex if whenever it contains two

points x and y, it also contains the segment joining x and y.


  DEFINITION  2. A  convex  set  is  called  a convex  body if  its  interior  is

nonempty.


  Example 1.  The  cube,  ball,  tetrahedron  and  half-space  are  all  convex

                                                      3
bodies in three-dimensional Euclidean space R. On the other hand, the line

                                                        3
segment, plane and triangle are convex sets in R, but not convex bodies.


  Example 2. As usual, let C be the space of all functions continuous on
                                  [a,b]

the interval [a, b], and let M be the subset of C consisting of all functions
                                                        [a,b]

satisfying the extra condition


                                        |f(t)| < 1.


Then M is convex, since


                                |f(t)| < 1,|g(t)| < 1


together with α, β  0, α + β = 1 implies


                              |αf(t) + βg(t)| < α + β = 1.


  Example 3. The closed unit sphere in l, i.e., the set of all points x = (x,
                                                  21

x, . . ., x, . . .) such that
2n





is a convex body. Its interior consists of all points x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .)
                                                                    12n

satisfying the condition  Example 4. The Hilbert cube Π (see Example 5, p. 98) is a convex set in

l, but not a convex body. In fact,
2





if x ∈ Π. Let





and suppose x + ty ∈ Π, i.e.,
                    0






Then






for all n = 1, 2, . . ., which implies t = 0. Therefore the interior of Π is empty.


  THEOREM 1. If M is a convex set, then so is its interior I(M).


  Proof. Suppose x, y ∈ I(M), and let z = αx + βy, α, β  0, α + β = 1. Then,

given any a ∈ L, there are numbers ε > 0, ε > 0 such that the points x + ta,
                                            121

y + ta belong to M if |t| < ε, |t| < ε. Therefore
    21122


                            α(x + ta) + β(y + ta) = z + ta


belongs to M if |t| < ε = min {ε, ε}, i.e., z ∈ I(M). 
                                  12


  THEOREM 2. The intersectionof any number of convex sets M is itself a convex set.
                                    α


  Proof. Let x and y be any two points of M. Then x and y belong to every

M, and hence so does the segment joining x and y. But then the segment
α

joining x and y belongs to M. 


  Given any subset A of a linear space L, there is a smallest convex set

containing A, i.e., the intersection of all convex sets containing A (there is at

least one convex set containing A, namely L itself). This minimal convex set

containing A is called the convex hull of A. For example, the convex hull of

three noncollinear points is the triangle with these points as vertices.


    14.2. Convex functionals. Next we introduce the important concept of a

convex functional:


  DEFINITION 3. A functional p defined on a real linear space L is said to be

convex if

    1)p(x)  0 for all x ∈ L (nonnegativity);

    2)p(αx) = αp(x) for all x ∈ L and all α > 0;

  3)p(x + y)  p(x) + p(y) for all x, y ∈ L.


  Remark. Here, unlike the case of linear functionals, we do not assume that

p(x) is finite for all x ∈ L, i.e., we allow the case where p(x) = +∞ for some x

∈ L.


                                                                          n
  Example 1. The length of a vector in Euclidean n-space R is a convex

functional. The first and second conditions are immediate consequences of

                                  n
the definition of length in R (length is inherently nonnegative), while the

third condition means that the length of the sum of two vectors does not

exceed the sum of their lengths (the triangle inequality).


  Example 2. Let M be the space of bounded functions of x defined on some

set S, and let s be a fixed point of S. Then
              0


                                    P(x) = |x(s)|
                                      s0
                                      0is a convex functional.


  Example 3. Let m be the space of bounded numerical sequences x = (x,
                                                                                          1

x, . . ., x, . . .). Then the functional
2k





is convex.


    14.3.  The  Minkowski  functional.  Next  we  consider  the  connection

between convex functionals and convex sets:


  THEOREM 3. If p is a convex functional on a linear space L and k is any

positive number, then the set


                                  E = {x : p(x) < k}


is convex. If p is finite, then E is a convex body with interior


                                  I(E) = {x: p(x) < k}


(so that in particular 0 ∈ I(E)).


  Proof. If x, y ∈ E, α, β > 0, α + β = 1, then


                          p(αx + βy) > αp(x) + βp(y) > k,


i.e., E is a convex set. Now suppose p is finite, and let p(x) < k, t > 0, y ∈ L.

Then


                              p(x ± ty) > p(x) + tp(±y).


If p(−y) = p(y) = 0, then x ± ty ∈ E for all t. On the other hand, if at least one

of the numbers p(y), p(−y) is nonzero, then x ± ty ∈ E if





  Suppose we choose a definite value of k, say k = 1. Then every finite

convex functional p uniquely determines a convex body E in L, such that 0 ∈I(E). Conversely, suppose E is a convex body whose interior contains the

point 0, and consider the functional





called the Minkowski functional of the convex body E. Then we have


  THEOREM 4. The Minkowski functional (1) is finite and convex.


  Proof. Given any x ∈ L, the element x/r belongs to E if r is sufficiently

large (why?), and hence p(x) is nonnegative and finite. Clearly p(0) = 0. If
                              EE

α > 0, then









Next, given any ε > 0 and any x, x ∈ L, choose numbers r (i = 1, 2) such
                                      12i

that


                              P(x) < r < P(x) + ε.
                                EiiEi


Then x/r ∈ E. If r = r + r, then
      ii12





belongs to the segment with end points x/r and x/r. Since E is convex, this
                                                1122

segment and hence the point (x + x)/r belongs to E. It follows that
                                    12


                P(x + x) < r = r + r < P(x) + P(x) + 2ε
                    E1212E1E2


orsince ε is arbitrary. Together (2) and (3) imply that p(x) is convex. 
                                                            E


    13.4. The Hahn-Banach theorem. Given a real linear space L and any

subspace L ⊂ L, let f be a linear functional defined on L. Then a linear
            000

functional f defined on the whole space L is said to be an extension of the

functional f if
            0


                          f(x) = f(x)for allx ∈ L.
                                  00


A problem frequently encountered in analysis is that of extending an arbitrary

linear functional, originally defined on some subspace, onto a larger space. A

central role in problems of this kind is played by


  THEOREM 5 (Hahn-Banach). Let p be a finite convex functional defined on

a real linear space L, and let L be a subspace of L. Suppose f is a linear
                                      00

functional on L satisfying the condition
                0




on L. Then f can be extended to a linear functional on L satisfying (4) on
    00

the whole space L. More exactly, there is a linear functional f defined on L

and equal to f at every point of L, such that f(x)  p(x) on L.
              00


  Proof. Suppose L ≠ L, since otherwise the theorem is trivial. We begin by
                      0

showing that f can be extended onto a larger space L without violating the
                0

condition (4). Let z be any element of L − L, and let  be the subspace
                                                      0

generated by L and the element z, i.e., the set of all linear combinations
                0


                                  x + tz(x ∈ L).
                                                    0


If  is to be an extension of f onto , we must have
                                0


                                (x + tz) = f(x) + t (z)
                                            0or




after  setting (z)  = c.  We  now  choose c  such  that  the  “majorization”

condition (x + tz)  p(x + tz) is satisfied, i.e., such that


                                f(x) + tc < p(x + tz).
                                0


We can write this condition as






or





if t > 0, and as






or





if t < 0. Hence we want to show that there is always a value of c satisfying (6)

and (7). Let y′ and y″ be arbitrary elements of L. Then it follows from the
                                                          0

inequality






thatLet







Then


                                        c″ > c′,


by (8) and the fact that y′ and y″ are arbitrary. Hence, choosing c such that


                                      c″ > c > c′,


we find that the functional  defined on  by the formula (5) satisfies the

condition (x)  p(x).  Thus  we  have  succeeded  in  showing  that  if f  is
                                                                                      0

defined on a subspace L ⊂ L and satisfies (4) on L, then f can be extended
                          000

onto a larger subspace  with the condition (4) being preserved.

  To complete the proof, suppose first that L is generated by a countable

set of elements x, x, . . ., x, . . . in L. Then we construct a functional on L
                  12n

by induction, i.e., by constructing a sequence of subspaces

                        (1)(2)(1)
                      L = {L, x},L = {L, x}, . . . ,
                                  12

                                            (k)
each  contained  in  the  next.  Here  {L, x}  denotes  the  minimal  linear
                                                  k+1
                                (k)
subspace of L containing L and x This process extends the functional
                                          k+1.

onto the whole space L, since every element x ∈ L belongs to some subspace

(k)
L.

    More  generally,  i.e.,  in  the  case  where  there  is  no  countable  set

generating L, the theorem is proved by applying Zorn’s lemma (see p. 28).

The  set   of  all  possible  extensions  of  the  functional f  satisfying  the
                                                                        0

majorization  condition (5)  is  partially  ordered,  and  each linearly  ordered

subset  ⊂   has  an  upper  bound.  This  upper  bound  is  the  functional
        0

which is defined on the union of the domains of all functionals  ∈  and
                                                                                    0coincides with every such functional  on the domain of . Hence, by Zorn’s

lemma,  has a maximal element f. Clearly f must be the desired functional

extending f onto L and satisfying the condition p(x)  f(x), since otherwise
            0

we could extend f in turn, by the method described above, from the proper

subspace on which it is defined onto a large subspace, thereby contradicting

the maximality of f. 


Next we turn to the case of complex linear spaces:


  DEFINITION 3′. A functional p defined on a complex linear space L is said

to be convex if

    1)p(x)  0 for all x ∈ L (nonnegativity);

    2)p(αx) = |α| p(x) for all x ∈ L and all complex α;

  3)p(x + y)  p(x) + p(y) for all x, y ∈ L.


  The corresponding complex version of the Hahn-Banach theorem is given

by

    THEOREM 5′. Let p be a finite convex functional, defined on a complex

linear space L, and let L be a subspace of L. Suppose f is a linear functional
                            00

on L satisfying the condition
    0




on L. Then f can be extended to a linear functional on L satisfying (4′) on
    00

the whole space L.


  Proof. Let L and L denote the spaces L and L, regarded as real linear
                R0R0

spaces. Clearly p is a finite convex functional on L, while
                                                          R


                                    f(x) = Ref(x)
                                    0R0


is a real linear functional on L satisfying the condition
                                  0R


                                    |f(x)| < P(x)
                                      0R


and hence (a fortiori) the condition                                    f(x) < p(x).
                                      0R


By Theorem 5, there exists a real linear functional f defined on all of L,
                                                              RR

satisfying the conditions


                        f(x) < P(x)ifx ∈ L(= L),
                          RR


                      f(x) < f(x)ifx ∈ L(= L).
                        R0R0R0


Clearly


                        − f(x) = f(− x) < P(− x) = P(x),
                            RR


and hence




  We now define the functional


                                f(x) = f(x) − if(ix)
                                          RR


on L, using the fact that L is a complex linear space in which multiplication

by complex numbers is defined. It is easily verified that f is a complex linear

functional on L such that


                            f(x) = f(x)ifx ∈ L,
                                    00


                          R f(x) = f(x)ifx ∈ L.
                            eR


Finally, to show that |f(x)|  p(x) for all x ∈ L, suppose to the contrary that

                                                        iφ
|f(x)| > p(x) for some x ∈ L. Writing f(x) = ρe where ρ > 0, we set y = e
  00000
−iφ
x. Then
  0

                                          −iφ
              f(y) = R f(y) = R[e f(x)] = ρ > P(x) = P(y)
                R0e0e000


which contradicts (9). 


    14.5. Separation of convex sets in a linear space. Given a real linear

space L, let M and N be two subsets of L. Then a linear functional f definedon L is said to separate M and N if there exists a number C such that


                              f(x) > Cifx ∈ M,


                              f(x) < Cifx ∈ N,


It follows at once from this definition that

  1)A linear functional f separates two sets M and N if and only if it

        separates M − N = {z: z = x − y, x ∈ M, y ∈ N} and {0}, i.e., the set

        consisting of all differences x − y where x ∈ M, y ∈ M and the set

        whose only element is 0 (note that the minus sign in M − N does not

        have the usual meaning of a set difference);

  2)A linear functional f separates two sets M and N if and only if it

        separates the sets M − x = {z: z = x − x, x ∈ L} and N − x = {z: = y
                                    000

        − x y ∈ N} for every x ∈ L.
                                    0


  The following theorem on the separation of convex sets in a linear space

has numerous applications and is an easy consequence of the Hahn-Banach

theorem:


  THEOREM 6. Let M and N be two disjoint convex sets in a real linear space

L, where at least one of the sets, say M, has a nonempty interior (i.e., is a

convex  body). Then  there  exists  a  nontrivial  linear  functional  f  on  L

separating M and L.


  Proof. There is no loss of generality in assuming that the point 0 belongs

to the interior of M, since otherwise we need only consider the sets M − x =
                                                                                        0

{z: z = x − x, x ∈ M} and N − x = {z: z = y − x, y ∈ N}, where x is some
            0000

point of the interior of M. Let y be a point of N. Then the point −y belongs
                                    00

to the interior of the set M − N = {z: z = x − y, x ∈ M, y ∈ N}, and 0 belongs

to the interior of the set M − N + y = {z: z = x − y + y, x ∈ M, y ∈ N}.
                                          00

Since M and N are disjoint, we have 0 ∉ M − N, y ∉ M − N + y. Let p be the
                                                          00

Minkowski functional for the set M − N + y. Then p(y)  1 since y ∉ M −
                                                    000

N + y. Consider the linear functional
    0


                                    f(αy) = αp(y)
                                    000defined on the one-dimensional subspace of L consisting of all elements of

the form αy. Clearly f satisfies the condition
            00


                                    f(αy) < p(αy),
                                    000


since


                          p(αy) = αp(y)ifα > 0,
                                00


while


                  f(αy) = αf(y) < 0 < p(αy)ifα < 0.
                    00000


Hence, by the Hahn-Banach theorem, the functional f can be extended to a
                                                                0

linear functional f defined on the whole space L and satisfying the condition

f(y)  p(y) on L. It follows that f(y)  1 if y ∈ M − N + y, while at the same
                                                                  0

time f(y)  1, i.e., f separates the sets M − N + y and {y}. Therefore f
        000

separates the sets M − N and {0}. But then f separates the sets M and N. 


  Problem 1. Let M be the set of all points x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .) in l
                                                              12n2

satisfying the condition





Prove that M is a convex set, but not a convex body.


  Problem 2. Give an example of two convex bodies whose intersection is

not a convex body.


  Problem 3. We say that n + 1 points x, x, . . ., x in a linear space L are
                                                12n+1

“in  general  position”  if  they  do  not  belong  to  any  (n  −  1)-dimensional

subspace of L. The convex hull of a set of n + 1 points x, x, . . ., x in
                                                                      12n+1

general position is called an n-dimensional simplex, and the points x, x, . . .,
                                                                                12

x themselves are called the vertices of the simplex. Describe the zero-
n+1

dimensional,  one-dimensional,  two-dimensional  and  three-dimensional

                                            3
simplexes in Euclidean three-space R. Prove that the simplex with verticesx, x, . . ., x is the set of all points in L which can be represented in the
12n+1

form





where





  Problem 4. Show that if the points x, x, . . ., x are in general position,
                                              12n+1

then so are any k + 1 (k < n) of them.


  Comment. Hence the k + 1 points generate a k-dimensional simplex, called

a k-dimensional face of the n-dimensional simplex with vertices x, x, . . .,
                                                                                12

x.
n+1


  Problem  5.  Describe  all  zero-dimensional,  one-dimensional  and  two-

                                              3
dimensional faces of the tetrahedron in R with vertices e, e, e, e.
                                                                  1234


  Problem  6.  Show  that  in  the  Hahn-Banach  theorem  we  can  drop  the

condition that the functional p be finite.



15. Normed Linear Spaces


    15.1. Definitions and examples. Chapters 2 and 3 deal with topological

(in  particular,  metric)  spaces,  i.e.,  spaces  equipped  with  the  notion  of

closeness of elements, while Secs. 14 and 15 deal with linear spaces, i.e.,

spaces  equipped  with  the  operations  of  addition  of  elements  and

multiplication of elements by numbers. We now combine these two ideas,

arriving at the notion of a topological linear space, equipped with a topology

as well as with the algebraic operations characterizing a linear space. In this

section and the next, we will study topological linear spaces of a particularly

important  type,  namely normed  linear  spaces  and Euclidean  spaces.

Topological linear spaces in general will be considered in Sec. 17.  DEFINITION 1. A functional p defined on a linear space L is said to be a

norm (in L) if it has the following properties:

  a)p is finite and convex;

    b)p(x) = 0 only if x = 0;

    c)p(αx) = |α| p(x) for all x ∈ L and all α.


  Recalling the definition of a convex functional, we see that a norm in L is

a finite functional on L such that

    1)p(x)  0 for all x ∈ L, where p(x) = 0 if and only if x = 0;

    2)p(αx) = |α| p(x) for all x ∈ L and all α;

  3)p(x + y)  p(x) + p(y) for all x, y ∈ L.


  DEFINITION 2. A linear space L, equipped with a norm p(x) = ∥x∥, is called

a normed linear space.


  The notation ∥x∥ will henceforth be preferred for the norm of the element

x ∈ L. In terms of this notation, properties 1)—3) take the form:

    1′)∥x∥  0 for all x ∈ L, where ∥x∥ = 0 if and only if x = 0;

    2′)∥αx∥ = |α| ∥x∥ for all x ∈ L and all α;

    3′)Triangle inequality: ∥x + y∥  ∥x∥ + ∥y∥ for all x, y ∈ L.


  Every normed linear space L becomes a metric space if we set




for arbitrary x, y ∈ L. The fact that (1) is a metric follows at once from

properties 1′)–3′). Thus everything said about metric spaces in Chap. 2 carries

over to the case of normed linear spaces.

    Many of the spaces considered in Chap. 2 as examples of metric spaces

(or in Sec. 13 as examples of linear spaces) can be made into normed linear

spaces in a natural way, as shown by the following examples (in each case,

verify that the norm has all the required properties):


                                  1
  Example 1. The real line R becomes a normed linear space if we set ∥x∥

                                1
= |x| for every number x ∈ R.                                            n
  Example 2. To make real n-space R into a normed linear space, we set






                                                n
for every element x = (x, x, . . ., x) in R. The formula
                          12n






                                      n
then defines the same metric in R as already considered in Example 3, p. 38.


  Example 3. We can also equip real n-space with the norm





or the norm





The  corresponding  metrics  lead  to  the  spaces   and   considered  in

Examples 4 and 5, p. 39.


  Example 4. The formula





                                                nn
introduces a norm in complex n-space C. Other possible norms in C are

given by (2) and (3).


  Example 5. The space C of all functions continuous on the interval [a,
                                [a, b]

b] can be equipped with the normThe metric space corresponding to this norm has already been considered in

Example 6, p. 39.


  Example 6. Let m be the space of all bounded numerical sequences


                              x = (x, x,. . ., x, . . .),
                                      12k


and let





Then (4) obviously has all the properties of a norm. The metric “induced” by

this norm is the same as that considered in Example 9, p. 41.


  Example 7. A complete normed linear space, relative to the metric (1), is

called a Banach space. It is easy to see that the spaces in Examples 1–6 are

all Banach spaces (the details are left as an exercise).


    15.2. Subspaces of a normed linear space. In Sec. 13.3 we defined a

subspace of a linear space L (unequipped with any topology) as a nonempty

set L with the property that if x, y ∈ L, then αx + βy ∈ L for arbitrary α
    000

and β. The subspaces of greatest interest in a normed linear space are the

closed subspaces, i.e., those containing all their limit points. In the case of an

infinite-dimensional space, it is easy to give examples of subspaces that are

          9
not closed:


  Example 1. In the space of all bounded sequences, the sequences with

only finitely many nonzero terms form a subspace, but not a closed subspace,

since, for example, the closure of the subspace contains the sequence





  Example 2. The set P of all polynomials defined on the interval [a, b]
                            [a,b]

is a subspace of C, but obviously not a closed subspace. On the other
                      [a,b]

hand,  the  closure  of P  coincides  with C  since every  function
                              [a,b][a,b]

continuous  on  [a, b]  is  the  limit  of  a  uniformly  convergent  sequence  of                                                              10
polynomials, by Weierstrass’ approximation theorem.


  In what follows, we will be concerned as a rule with closed subspaces.

Hence it is natural to modify somewhat the terminology adopted in Sec. 13.3,

i.e., by a subspace of a normed normed linear space we will always mean a

closed subspace. In particular, by the subspace generated by a set of elements

{x} we will always mean the smallest closed subspace containing {x}. This
αα

subspace  will  also  be  called  the linear closure  of  {x}.  The  term linear
                                                                  α

manifold will be reserved for a set of elements L (not necessarily closed)
                                                            0

such that x, y ∈ L implies αx +βy ∈ L for arbitrary numbers α and β. A set
                    00

of elements {x} in a normed linear space L is said to be complete (in L) if the
              α

linear closure of {x} coincides with L.
                    α


  Remark. This is another meaning of the word “closed,” not to be confused

with its meaning in Sec. 6.4. The context will always make it clear which

meaning is intended.


  Example 3. By Weierstrass’ approximation theorem, the set of functions

    2n
1, t, t, . . ., t, . . . is complete in C.
                                        [a,b]


  Problem 1. A subset M of a normed linear space R is said to be bounded if

there is a constant C such that ∥x∥  C for all x ∈ M. Reconcile this with

Problem 5, p. 65.


  Problem 2. Given a Banach space R, let {B} be a nested sequence of
                                                        n

closed spheres in R (so that yB ⊃ B ⊃ . . . ⊃ B ⊃ . . .). Prove that 
                                  12n

is nonempty (it is not assumed that the radius of B approaches 0 as n → ∞).
                                                          n

Give an example of a nested sequence {E} of nonempty closed bounded
                                                    n

convex sets in a Banach space R such that  is empty (cf. Problem 6, p.

66).


  Problem 3. Prove that the algebraic dimension (defined in Problem 4c, p.

128) of an infinite-dimensional Banach space is uncountable.


  Problem 4. Let R be a Banach space, and let M be a closed subspace of R.Define a norm in the factor space P = R/M by setting





for every element (residue class) ξ ∈ P. Prove that

    a)∥ξ∥ is actually a norm in P;

    b)The space P, equipped with this norm, is a Banach space.


  Problem 5. Let R be a normed linear space. Prove that

    a)Every finite-dimensional linear subspace of R is closed;

  b)If M is a closed subspace of R and N a finite-dimensional subspace of

        R, then the set





        is a closed subspace of R;

  c)If Q is an open convex set in R and x ∉ Q, then there exists a closed
                                                    0

        hyperplane which passes through the point x and does not intersect
                                                              0

        Q.


  Problem 6. Let x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .) be an arbitrary element of l. Prove
                            12k2

that l is a normed linear space when equipped with the norm
    2






Give an example of two closed linear subspaces M and N of l whose “linear
                                                                        2

sum” M + N is not closed.


  Problem 7.  Two  norms ∥·∥, ∥·∥  in  a  linear  space R  are  said  to  be
                                    12

equivalent if there exist constants a, b > 0 such that


                              a ∥x∥ < ∥x∥ < b ∥x∥
                                      121


for all x ∈ R. Prove that if R is finite-dimensional, then any two norms in R

are equivalent.16. Euclidean Spaces


    16.1. Scalar products. Orthogonality and bases. We begin with two

key definitions:


  DEFINITION 1. By a scalar product in a real linear space R is meant a real

function defined for every pair of elements x, y ∈ R and denoted by (x, y),

with the following properties:

    1)(x, x)  0where (x, x) = 0 if and only if x = 0;

    2)(x, y) = (y, x);

    3)(λx, y) = λ(x, y);

    4)(x, y + z) = (x, y) + (x, z)

(valid for all x, y z ∈ R and all real λ).


  DEFINITION 2. A linear space R equipped with a scalar product is called a

Euclidean space.


  LEMMA. Any two elements x, y of a Euclidean space R satisfy the Schwarz

inequality




where




  Proof. The quadratic polynomial






is obviously nonnegative. Therefore




since otherwise φ(λ) would become negative for some λ (why?). But (2) is

equivalent to (1).   We now use the scalar product in a Euclidean space R to introduce a norm

in R:


  THEOREM 1. A Euclidean space R becomes a normed linear space when

equipped with the norm




  Proof. Properties 1′) and 2′) on p. 138 are immediate consequences of the

definition  of  a  scalar  product.  To  prove  property  3′),  i.e.,  the  triangle

inequality, we note that







    because of the Schwarz inequality)(1)(, and hence


                              ∥x + y∥ < ∥x∥ + ∥y∥. 


  The scalar product in R can be used to define the angle between two

vectors as well as the length (i.e., norm) of a vector:


  DEFINITION 3. Given any two vectors x and y in a Euclidean space R, the

quantity θ defined by the formula





  is called the angle between x and y.


  Remark. It follows from Schwarz’s inequality (1) that the right-hand side

of (3) cannot exceed 1. Therefore, given any x and y, (3) actually determines

a unique angle in the interval [0, π].


  Suppose (x, y) = 0, so that (3) implies θ = π/2. Then the vectors x and y are

said to be orthogonal. A set of nonzero vectors {x} in R is said to be an
                                                              α

orthogonal system if                                (x, x) = 0for α≠β
                                  αβ


and an orthonormal system if






If {x} is an orthogonal system, then clearly
    α





is an orthonormal system.


  THEOREM  2. The  vectors  in  an  orthogonal  system  {x} are  linearly
                                                                        α

independent.


  Proof. Suppose


                          cx + cx + . . . + cx = 0
                            1α2αnα
                                12n

Then, taking the scalar product with x, we get
                                          α
                                            1

                (x, cx + cx + . . . + cx) = c(x, x) = 0,
                  α1α2αnαiαα
                    112n11

by the orthogonality of {x}. But (x, x)≠ 0, and hence
                            ααα
                                          11

                              c = 0(i = 1, 2,..., n). 
                                i


  An orthogonal system {x} is called an orthogonal basis if it is complete,
                                α

i.e., if the smallest closed subspace containing {x} is the whole space R.
                                                            α

Similarly, a complete orthonormal system is called an orthonormal basis.


  16.2. Examples. We now give some examples of Euclidean spaces and

orthogonal bases in them:


                      n
  Example 1. Let R be real n-space, i.e., the set of all ordered n-tuples x =(x, x, . . ., x), y = (y, y, . . ., y), . . ., equipped with the same algebraic
12n12n

operations as in Example 2, p. 119. Using the formula





                                          n11
to  define  a  scalar  product  in R,  we  get Euclidean  n-space.  The

                                            n
corresponding norm and distance in R are






  and






  The vectors







                                  n
form an orthonormal basis in R, one of infinitely many such bases.


  Example 2. The space l with elements x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .), y = (y, y,
                              212k12

. . ., y, . . .), . . ., where
    k





becomes an infinite-dimensional Euclidean space when equipped with the

scalar productThe convergence of the right-hand side of (6) follows from the elementary

inequality




and it is an easy matter to verify that (6) has all the properties of a scalar

product. The simplest orthonormal basis in l consists of the vectors
                                                  2







The orthonormality of the system (7) is obvious. As for the completeness of

the system, given any vector x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .) in l, let
                                        12k2

                              (k)
                              x = (x,,.,., x, 0, 0,...).
                                        12k

      (k)(k)
Then x is a linear combination of the vectors e, e, . . ., e and ∥x − x∥ →
                                                        12k

0 as k → ∞.


  Example 3. The space  consisting of all continuous functions on [a,

b] equipped with the scalar product





is  another  example  of  a  Euclidean  space.  Among  the  various  orthogonal

bases in ,  one  of  the  most  important  is  the  system  of  trigonometric

functions





The  orthogonality  of  this  system  can  be  verified  by  a  simple  calculation.

Making the choice a = −π, b = π, we sipmlify (8) toThus (8′) is an orthogonal basis in the space . As for the completeness,

we have


  THEOREM 3. The system (8) is complete in .


                                                                                  12
  Proof. By another version of Weierstrass’ approximation theorem, every

function φ continuous on the interval [a, b] and such that φ(a) = φ(b) is the

limit of a uniformly convergent sequence of trigonometric polynomials, i.e.,

linear combinations of elements of the system (8). This sequence converges

(a fortiori) to φ in the norm of the space . But an arbitrary function 

can be represented as the limit in the  norm of a sequence of functions

{φ}, where
n

















                                        FIGURE 16

coincides with f in the interval [a, b − (1/n)], is linear on [b − (1/n), b] and

takes the same value at the point b as at the point a (see Figure 16). Hence

every element of  can be approximated arbitrarily closely (in the 

norm) by a linear combination of elements of the system (8). 


  16.3. Existence of an orthogonal basis. Orthogonalization. From now

on, we will be mainly concerned with the case of separable Euclidean spaces,

i.e., Euclidean spaces containing a countable everywhere dense subset. For

                        n
example, the spaces R, l and  are all separable, as shown in Sec. 6.3.
                            2

An example of a nonseparable Euclidean space is given in Problem 2.  THEOREM 4. Every orthogonal system {x} in a separable Euclidean space
                                                  α

R has no more than countably many elements x.
                                                      α

    Proof. There is no loss of generality in assuming that the system {x} is
                                                                                      α

orthonormal as well as orthogonal, since otherwise we need only replace {x}
                                                                                        α

by






  We then have





Consider the set of open spheres S(x,. These spheres are pairwise disjoint,
                                          α

because of (9). Moreover, each sphere contains at least one element from

some countable subset {y} everywhere dense in R. Consequently there are
                              n

no  more  than  countably  many  such  spheres,  and  hence  no  more  than

countably many elements x. 
                              α


                                                                                      n
  We have already exhibited an orthogonal basis in each of the spaces R, l
                                                                                          2

and . The existence of an orthogonal basis in any separable Euclidean

space is guaranteed by the following theorem and its corollary, analogous to

the theorem on the existence of an orthogonal basis in any finite-dimensional

                  13
Euclidean space:


  THEOREM 5 (Orthogonalization theorem). Let




be any (countable) set of linearly independent elements of a Euclidean space

R. Then R contains a set of elements




such that

    1)The system (11) is orthonormal;    2)Every element φ is a linear combination
                          n


                        ρ = af + af + af(a≠0)
                            nn11n22nnnnn


        of the elements f, f, . . ., f;
                            12n

    3)Every element f is a linear combination
                          n


                    f = bφ + bφ + . . . + bφ(b≠0)
                      nn11n22nnnnn


        of the elements φ, φ, . . ., φ.
                            12n

Moreover, every element of the system (10) is uniquely determined by these

conditions to within a factor of ±1.

    Proof. First we construct φ. Setting
                                  1


                                      φ = af,
                                        1111


we determine a from the condition
                11




which implies






This obviously determines φ uniquely (except for sign).
                                1

    Next suppose elements φ, φ, . . ., φ satisfying the conditions of the
                                  12n−1

theorem have already been constructed. Then f can be written in the form
                                                      n




where


                          (h,φ) = 0(k = 1, 1,. . ., n − 1).
                            nk


In fact, the coefficients b and hence the element h are uniquely determined
                            nkn

by the conditions    i.e.,


                        b = (f,φ)(k = 1, 2,. . ., n − 1).
                          nknk


Clearly  (h, h)  >  0,  since  (h, h)  =  0  contradicts  the  assumed  linear
            nnnn

independence of the elements (10). Let






Using (12) and (13), we express h and hence φ in terms of the functions f,
                                        nn1

f, . . ., f, i.e.,
2n


                          φ = af + af + . . . + af,
                            nn11n22nnn


where






Moreover






and


                    f = bφ + bφ + bφ + . . . +bφ
                      nn11n11n22nnn


where




Thus, starting from elements φ, φ, . . ., φ satisfying the conditions of the
                                    12n−1theorem, we have constructed elements φ, φ, . . ., φ, φ satisfying the
                                                  12n−1n

same conditions. The proof now follows by mathematical induction. 


  Remark. The process leading from the linearly independent elements (10)

to the orthonormal system (11) is called orthogonalization. It is clear that the

subspace generated by (10) coincides with that generated by (11). Hence the

set (10) is complete if and only if the set (11) is complete.


    COROLLARY. Every  separable  Euclidean  space  R  has  a  countable

orthonormal basis.


  Proof. Let , , . . ., , . . . be a countable everywhere dense subset of R.
                12n

Then a complete set of linearly independent elements f, f, . . ., f, . . . can be
                                                                12n

selected from {}. In fact, we need only eliminate from the sequence {}
                  nn

all elements  which can be written as linear combinations of elements 
                ki

with smaller indices (i < k). Applying the orthogonalization process to f, f, .
                                                                                    12

. ., f, . . ., we get an orthonormal basis. 
  n


  16.4. Bessel’s inequality. Closed orthogonal systems. Let e, e, . . ., e
                                                                            12n
                                  nn
be an orthonormal basis in R. Then every vector x ∈ R can be written in

the form





where


                                      c = (x, e).
                                        kk


We now show how this generalizes to the case of an infinite-dimensional

Euclidean space R. Let φ, φ, . . ., φ, . . . be an orthonormal system in R, and
                            12k

let f be an arbitrary element of R. Suppose that with f we associate

    1)The sequence of numbers




        called the components or Fourier coefficients of f with respect to the        system {φ};
                    k

    2)The series





        (for the time being, purely formal), called the Fourier series of f with

        respect to the system {φ}.
                                    k

                                                                            14
Then  it  is  natural  to  ask  whether  the  series  (15)  converges,  and  if  so,

whether  the  sum  of  the  series  coincides  with  the  original  function f.  To

answer these questions, we first prove


  THEOREM 6. Given an orthonormal system




in  a  Euclidean  space  R, let  f  be  an  arbitrary  element  of  R.  Then  the

expression






achieves its minimum for


                        a = c = (f,φ)(k = 1, 2,. . ., n).
                          kkk


This minimum equals





Moreover





a result known as Bessel’s inequality.  Proof. Let





Then, by the orthonormality of (16),












or





where


                          c = (f,φ(k = 1, 2,. . ., n),
                            kk


The expression in the right-hand side of (19) obviously achieves its minimum

when its last term vanishes, i.e., when


                            a = c(k = 1, 2,. . ., n),
                              kk


and this minimum is just





                            2
Moreover, since ∥f − S∥  0, it follows from (20) that
                          nfor every n. Hence the series





is convergent. Taking the limit as n → ∞ in (21), we get (17). 


  Remark. Geometrically, Bessel’s inequality (17) means that the sum of the

squares of the projections of a vector f onto a set of mutually perpendicular

directions cannot exceed the square of the length of the vector itself. For a

geometric interpretation of the rest of Theorem 6, see Problems 5 and 6.


  The case where Bessel’s inequality becomes an equality is particularly

important:


  DEFINITION 4. Suppose equality holds in (17) for every f ∈ R, i.e., suppose





for every f ∈ R. Then the orthonormal system φ, φ, . . ., φ, . . . is said to be
                                                        12k

closed.


  Remark. This is another meaning of the word “closed,” not to be confused

with its meaning in Sec. 6.4. The context will always make it clear which

meaning is intended. Formula (22) is known as Parseval’s theorem.


  THEOREM 7. An orthonormal system φ φ, . . ., φ, . . . in a Euclidean
                                                12k

space R is closed if and only if every element f ∈ R is the sum of its Fourier

series.


  Proof. According to Definition 4, R is closed if and only if (22) holds for

every f ∈ R. Taking the limit as n → ∞ in (20) and using (18), we see that

(22) holds for every f ∈ R if and only ifor equivalently





for every f ∈ R. 


  The  properties  of  being complete  and  being closed  are  intimately

connected, as shown by


  THEOREM 8. An orthonormal system φ, φ, . . ., φ, . . . in a Euclidean
                                                12k

space R is complete if and only if it is closed.


  Proof. Suppose {φ} is closed. Then, by Theorem 7, every element f ∈ R
                        k

is the limit of the partial sums of its Fourier series. In other words, linear

combinations of elements of {φ} are everywhere dense in R, i.e., {φ} is
                                      kk

complete.


  Conversely, suppose {φ} is complete. Then every element f ∈ R can be
                              k

approximated arbitrarily closely by a linear combination





of elements of {φ}. But the partial sum
                  k





of the Fourier series of f is at least as good an approximation. Hence f is the

sum of its own Fourier series. It follows from Theorem 7 that {φ} is closed. 
                                                                            k



    COROLLARY. Every  separable  Euclidean  space  R  contains  a  closed

orthonormal system φ, φ, . . ., φ, . . .
                        12k


  Proof.  An  immediate  consequence  of Theorem 8  and  the  corollary  to

Theorem 5.   Example 1. The orthonormal system (7) is closed in l.
                                                                  2


  Remark. In introducing the concepts of Fourier coefficients and Fourier

series,  we  assumed  that  the  system  {φ} is orthonormal. More generally,
                                              k

suppose {φ} is orthogonal but not orthonormal, and let
            k





Then the system {} is orthonormal. Given any f ∈ R, let
                    k





and consider the series






where





Then the coefficients (23) are called the Fourier coefficients of the element f

∈  R  with  respect  to  the  orthogonal  (but  not  orthonormal)  system  {φ}.
                                                                                        k

Substituting c = a ∥φ∥ into (17), we get the following version of Bessel’s
              kkk

inequality for arbitrary orthogonal systems:





If equality holds in (17′) for every ∈R, the orthogonal system {φ} is said to
                                        fk

be closed, just as in Definition 4.


  Example 2. The orthogonal system (8) is closed in .  16.5. Complete Euclidean spaces. The Riesz-Fischer theorem. Given a

Euclidean space R, let {φ} be an orthonormal (but not necessarily complete)
                            k

system in R. It follows from Bessel’s inequality that a necessary condition for

the numbers c, c, . . ., c, . . . to be Fourier coefficients of an element c, c,.
              12k12

. ., c,. . . is that the series
  k





converge. It turns out that this condition is also sufficient if R is complete, as

shown by


  THEOREM  9  (Riesz-Fischer). Given  an  orthonormal  system  {φ} in  a
                                                                                  k

complete Euclidean space R, let the numbers c, c, . . ., c, . . . be such that
                                                      12k





converges. Then there exists an element f ∈ R with c, c, . . ., c, . . . as its
                                                              12k

Fourier coefficients, i.e., such that





where


                          c,φ = (f,φ)(k = 1, 2, ...).
                            kknk


    Proof. Writing





we haveHence f converges to some element f ∈ R, by the convergence of (24) and

the completeness of R. Moreover,




where the first term on the right equals c if n  k and the second term
                                                  k

approaches zero as n → ∞, since


                              |(f − f,φ)< ∥f −f∥φ∥.
                                      nknk


Taking the limit as n → ∞ in (25), we get


                                      f(φ) = c,
                                          kk


since the left-hand side is independent of n. Moreover,


                                    ∥f − f∥ → 0
                                            n


as n → ∞, and hence





as n → ∞, i.e.,





  THEOREM 10. Let {φ} be an orthonormal system in a complete Euclidean
                          k

space. Then {φ} is complete if and only if R contains no nonzero element
                k

orthogonal to all the elements of {φ}.
                                        k


  Proof. Suppose {φ} is complete and hence closed (by Theorem 8), and
                        k

suppose f  is  orthogonal  to  all  the  elements  of  {φ}.  Then  all  the  Fourier
                                                            k

coefficients of f vanish. Henceby the Riesz-Fischer theorem, i.e., f = 0.

    Conversely, suppose {φ} is not complete. Then R contains an element g
                                k

≠ 0 such that





(why?). By the Riesz-Fischer theorem, there exists an element f ∈ R such

that





But f − g is orthogonal to all the φ, by construction. Moreover, it follows
                                          k

from





that f − g ≠ 0. 


  16.6. Hilbert space. The isomorphism theorem. Continuing our study of

complete  Euclidean  spaces,  we  concentrate  our  attention  on  infinite-

dimensional spaces, since finite-dimensional spaces are considered in great

detail in courses on linear algebra.


                                          15
  DEFINITION 5. By a Hilbert space is meant a Euclidean space which is

complete, separable and infinite-dimensional.


  In other words, a Hilbert space is a set H of elements f, g, . . . of any kind

such that

                                                                    16
  1)H is a Euclidean space, i.e., a real linear space equipped with a

        scalar product;

  2)H is complete with respect to the metric ρ(f, g) = ∥f − g∥;

  3)H is separable, i.e., H contains a countable everywhere dense subset;

  4)H  is  infinite-dimensional,  i.e.,  given  any  positive  integer n, H

        contains n linearly independent elements.  Example. The real space l is a Hilbert space (check all the properties).
                                2


  DEFINITION 6. Two Euclidean spaces R and R* are said to be isomorphic

(to each other) if there is a one-to-one correspondence x ↔ x*, y ↔ y*

between  the  elements  of  R  and  those  of  R*  (x,  y ∈ R,  x*,  y* ∈ R*)

                                                                              17
preserving linear operations and scalar products in the sense that


                  x + y ↔ x* + y*,ax↔ax*,(x, y)= (x*, y*).


  It  is  well  known  that  any  two n-dimensional  Euclidean  spaces  are

isomorphic  to  each  other,  and  in  particular  that  every n-dimensional

                                                    n18
Euclidean space is isomorphic to the space R of Example 1, p. 144. On the

other  hand,  two  infinite-dimensional  Euclidean  spaces  need  not  be

isomorphic. For example, the spaces l and  are not isomorphic, as can
                                            2

be seen from the fact that l is complete while  is not (recall Examples 4
                              2

and 5, p. 57). Nevertheless, for Hilbert spaces we have


  THEOREM  11  (Isomorphism  theorem). Any  two  Hilbert  spaces  are

isomorphic.


  Proof. The theorem will be proved once we manage to show that every

Hilbert space H is isomorphic to l. Let {φ} be any complete orthonormal
                                        2k

system in H (such exists by the corollary to Theorem 5), and with every

element f ∈ H associate its Fourier coefficients {c} with respect to {φ}.
                                                              kk

Since





by Theorem 8, the sequence (c, c, . . ., c, . . .) belongs to l. Conversely, by
                                    12k2

the Riesz-Fischer theorem, to every element (c, c, . . ., c, . . .) in l there
                                                        12k2

corresponds an element f ∈ H with the numbers c, c, . . ., c, . . . as its
                                                              12k

Fourier  coefficients.  This  correspondence  between  the  elements  of H and

those of l is obviously one-to-one. Moreover, if
        2then clearly






i.e., sums go into sums and scalar multiples into scalar multiples with the

same factor. Finally, by Parseval’s theorem,












and hence





so that scalar products are preserved. 


  Remark. Theorem 11 shows that to within an isomorphism, there is only

one Hilbert space (i.e., only one space with the four properties listed above,

and that this space has l as its “coordinate realization,” just as the space of
                            2

all ordered n-tuples of real numbers with the scalar product  is the


“coordinate realization” of axiomatically defined Euclidean n-space.


  16.7. Subspaces. Orthogonal complements and direct sums. In keeping

with the terminology of Sec. 15.2, by a linear manifold in a Hilbert space H

we mean a set L of elements of H such that g ∈ H implies αf + βg ∈ L for

arbitrary numbers α and β, while by a subspace of H we mean a closed linearmanifold in H.


  LEMMA. If a metric space R has a countable everywhere dense subset, then

so does every subset R' ⊂ R.


  Proof. Let


                                    ξ,ξ,. . .,ξ,. . .
                                      12n


be a countable everywhere dense subset of R, and let





Then, given any positive integers n and p, there is a point η ∈ R' such that
                                                                    NP





Given any ε > 0 and any η ∈R', let





and choose n such that





Then





and hence ρ(η, η) < ε. In other words, R′ has an everywhere dense subset
                  np

{η} (n, p = 1, 2, . . .) containing no more than countably many elements. 
np


  THEOREM 12. Every subspace M of a Hilbert space H is either a (complete

separable) Euclidean space or itself a Hilbert space. Moreover, M has anorthonormal basis, like H itself.


  Proof. The fact that M has properties 1) and 2) of Definition 5 is obvious.

The separability of M follows from the lemma. To construct an orthonormal

basis in M, apply Theorem 5 to any countable everywhere dense subset of M. 



  Subspaces of a Hilbert space H have certain special properties (not shared

by  subspaces  of  an  arbitrary  normed  linear  space),  stemming  from  the

presence of a scalar product in H and the associated concept of orthogonality:


  THEOREM 13. Let M be a subspace of a Hilbert space H, and let


                                      M' = H  M


denote the orthogonal complement of M, i.e., the set of all elements h' ∈ H

orthogonal to every h ∈ M. Then M′ is also a subspace of H.


  Proof. The linearity of M′ is obvious, since




implies




for arbitrary numbers α and α. To show that M′ is closed, suppose {h′} is a
                          12n

sequence of elements of M′ converting to h′. Then, given any h ∈ M,





and hence h' ∈ M'. 


  Remark. By definition, h ∈ M if and only if h′ is orthogonal to every h ∈

M. But then h ∈ H if and only if h is orthogonal to every h' ∈ H'. Hence M′

=  H  M  implies M  =  H  M′,  and  we  can  call M  and M′  (mutually)

orthogonal subspaces of H.


  THEOREM 14. Let M be a subspace of a Hilbert space H, and let M′ = H M be the orthogonal complement of M. Then every element f has a unique

representation of the form




where h ∈ M, h' ∈M'.


  Proof. Given any f ∈ H, let {φ} be an orthonormal basis in M, and let
                                      k





By Bessel’s inequality,





and hence, by the Riesz-Fischer theorem, h exists and belongs to M. Let


                                      h' = f − h.


Then obviously


                                      (h',φ) = 0
                                            k


for all k, and since any element g ∈ M can be represented in the form





  we have





i.e., h' ∈ M'. This proves the existence of the representation (26).


  To prove the uniqueness of (26), suppose there is another representationwhere h ∈ M. Then
        1


                                  (h,φ) = (f,φ) = c
                                    1kkk


for all k, and hence




  COROLLARY 1. Every orthonormal system {φ} in a Hilbert space H can be
                                                      k

enlarged to give a complete orthonormal system in H.


  Proof. Let M be the linear closure of {φ}, so that {φ} is complete in M.
                                                  kk

Let M′ = H  M be the orthogonal complement of M, and let  be a

complete orthonormal system in M′ (such exists by Theorem 12, since M′ is a

subspace).  Recalling (26),  we  see  that  the  union  of  {φ}  and  {φ′}  is  a
                                                                    kk

complete orthonormal system in H. 


  COROLLARY 2. Let M be a subspace of a Hilbert space H, and let M′ = H 

M. Then M′ has codimension n if M has dimension n and dimension n if M

has codimension n.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of the representation (26) and Theorem

2, p. 122. 


  Let M be a subspace of a Hilbert space H, with orthogonal complement M′

= H  M. If every vector f ∈ H can be represented in the form


                            f = h + h'(h∈M, h' ∈M'),


we say that H is the direct sum of the orthogonal subspaces M and M′, and

write




The concept of a direct sum generalizes at once to the case of any finite or

even countable number of subspaces: Thus H is said to be the direct sum of

the subspaces M, M, . . ., M, . . . and we write
                  12nif

    1)The subspaces M are pairwise orthogonal, i.e., every element in M
                            jj

        is orthogonal to every element in M whenever j ≠ k;
                                                  k

    2)Every element f ∈ H has a representation of the form




        where h ∈ H(n = 1, 2, . . .)
                  nn

It is easy to see that the representation (27) is unique if it exists and that





(give the details).

    Besides direct sums of subspaces, we can also talk about direct sums of a

finite or countable number of Hilbert spaces. Thus, given two Hilbert spaces

H and H, by the direct sum
12




is meant the set of all ordered pairs (h, h) with h ∈ H, h∈H, where
                                              121122

linear operations and the scalar product in H are defined by







Consider the subspace of H consisting of all pairs of the form (h, 0) and the
                                                                            1

subspace consisting of all pairs of the form (0, h). Then clearly these two
                                                          2

subspaces are orthogonal and can be identified in a natural way with H and
                                                                                    1

H, respectively. More generally, given any Hilbert spaces H, H, . . ., H, . .
212n

., by the direct sum




is meant the set of all sequences                        h = (h, h,. . ., h,. . .)(h∈H)
                                12nnn


such that





with linear operations defined in the obvious way and the scalar product of

two elements h = (h, h, . . ., h, . . .), g = (g, g, . . ., g, . . .) defined by
                      12n12n





    16.8.  Characterization  of  Euclidean  spaces.  Given  a  normed  linear

space R, we now look for circumstances under which R is Euclidean. In other

words, we look for extra conditions on the norm of R which guarantee that

the norm be derivable from some suitably defined scalar product in R.


  THEOREM 15. A necessary and sufficient condition for a normed linear

space R to be Euclidean is that




for every g ∈ R.


  Proof. Thinking of f + g and f − g as the “diagonals of the parallelogram

in R with sides f and g,” we can interpret (28) as the analogue of a familar

property of parallelograms in the plane, i.e., the sum of the squares of the

diagonals of a parallelogram equals the sum of the squares of its sides. The

necessity of (28) is obvious, since if R is Euclidean, then








  To prove the sufficiency of (28), we setand show that if (28) holds, then (29) has all the properties of a scalar product

listed on p. 142. Since (29) implies




the scalar product (29) clearly generates the given norm ∥ · ∥ in R. Moreover,

it follows at once from (29) and (30) that

  1)(f, f)  0 where (f, f) = 0 if and only if f = 0;

  2)(f, g) = (g, f).

The proof of the linearity properties




and




requires a little work. To prove (31), consider the function of three vectors


                    Φ(f, g, h) = 4[(f + g, h) − (f, h) − (g, h)],


or equivalently






after using (29). It follows from (28) that




Substituting (34) into (33), we get






Taking half the sum (34) and (35), we find thatwhich becomes





after applying (28) to both expressions in parentheses. But φ(f, g, h) ≡ 0 is

equivalent to (31).

  To prove (32), we introduce the function


                                φ(c) = (cf, g) − c(f, g),


where f and g are fixed but arbitrary elements of R. It follows at once from

(29) that




and φ(−1) = 0, since (−f, g) = −(f, g). Hence, given any integer n,






i.e., φ(n) = 0. Moreover, given any integers p, q (q ≠ 0),





i.e., φ(c) = 0 for all rational c. But φ(c) is a continuous function of c (why?),

and hence φ(c) ≡ 0, which is equivalent to (32). 


  Example 1. The n-dimensional space , equipped with the normis a normed linear space if p  1 (see Example 10, p. 41) and a Euclidean

space if p = 2 (see Example 1, p. 144). However,  fails to be Euclidean if p

≠ 2. In fact, for the two vectors





we have





and hence




Therefore the “parallelogram condition” (28) fails if p ≠ 2.


  Example 2. Consider the space C of all functions continuous on the
                                          [0,π/2]

interval [0, π/2], and let


                            f(t) = cos t,g(t) = sin t.


Then




and







Therefore




It follows that the norm in C cannot be generated by any scalar product
                                [0, π/2]whatsoever, i.e., the space C fails to be Euclidean. It is easy to see that
                                [0, π/2]

the same is true of the space C for any a and b(a < b).
                                  [a,b]


  16.9. Complex Euclidean spaces. Besides real Euclidean spaces, we can

also consider complex Euclidean spaces, i.e., complex linear spaces equipped

with a scalar product. However, we must now modify the properties of the

scalar product listed on p. 142, since in the complex case these properties are

contradictory as they stand. In fact, it follows from properties 2) and 3), p.

142 that

                                              2
                                  (λx,λx) = λ(x, x),


and hence, after choosing λ = i, that


                                  (ix, ix) = −(x, x),


i.e., the norms of the vectors x and ix cannot both be positive, contrary to

property  1).  To  remedy  this  difficulty,  we  define  the  scalar  product  in  a

complex Euclidean space R as a complex-valued function (x, y), defined for

every pair of elements x, y ∥ R, with the following properties:


    1′)(x, x) 0 where (x, x) = 0 if and only if x = 0;

    2′)

    3′)(λx, y) = λ(x, y);

    4′)(x, y + z) = (x, z) + (y, z)

(valid for all x, y, z ∈ R and all complex λ). It follows from 2′) and 3′) that




(as usual, the overbar denotes the complex conjugate).


                                n
  Example 1. The space C introduced in Example 2, p. 119 becomes a

complex Euclidean space if we define the scalar product of two elements x =

                                    n
(x, . . ., x), y = (y, . . ., y) in C as
1n1n    Example 2. The complex space l with elements x = (x, x, . . ., x, . . .),
                                          212k

y = (y, y, . . ., y, . . .), . . ., where
    12k





becomes an infinite-dimensional complex Euclidean space when equipped

with the scalar product





    Example 3. The space  of all complex-valued functions continuous

on the interval [a, b], equipped with the scalar product





is another example of an infinite-dimensional complex Euclidean space.


  The norm (length) of a vector in a complex Euclidean space is defined by

the same formula




as in the real case. However, the notion of the angle between two vectors x

and y plays no role in the complex case, since the quantity





is in general complex and hence cannot be the cosine of a real angle. On the

other hand, the notion of orthogonality is defined in the same way as before,

i.e.,  two  elements x  and y  of  a  complex  Euclidean  space  are  said  to  be

orthogonal if (x, y) = 0.

  Let {φ} be any orthogonal system in a complex Euclidean space R, and
          k

let f be any element of R. Then, just as in the real case, the numbersand the series





are called the Fourier coefficients and the Fourier series of the function f,

with respect to the system {φ}. In the complex case, Bessel’s inequality (17′)
                                k

becomes





If the system {φ} is orthonormal, the Fourier coefficients become
                k


                                  a = c = (f,φ),
                                    kkk


and Bessel’s inequality simplifies to





  By a complex Hilbert space is meant a complex Euclidean space which is

complete,  separable  and  infinite-dimensional. Theorem 11  carries  over  at

once  to  the  complex  case,  with  isomorphism  being  defined  exactly  as  in

Definition 6:


  THEOREM 11′ (Isomorphism theorem). Any two complex Hilbert spaces

are isomorphic.


  Proof. This time show that every complex Hilbert space is isomorphic to

the complex space l, the “coordinate realization” of a complex Hilbert space.
                    2



  Remark. As an exercise, the reader should state and prove the complex

analogues of all the other theorems of Sec. 16.  Problem 1. Prove that in a Euclidean space, the operations of addition,

multiplication  by  numbers  and  the  formation  of  scalar  products  are  all

continuous. More exactly, prove that if x → x, y → y (in the sense of norm
                                                nn

convergence) and λ → λ (in the sense of ordinary convergence), then
                      n


                    x + y→ x + y, λx → λx,(x, y)→(x, y)
                      nnnnnn


    Hint. Use Schwarz’s inequality.


  Problem 2. Let R be the set of all functions f defined on the interval [0, 1]

such that

    1)f(t) is nonzero at no more than countably many points t, t, . . . ;
                                                                          12

  2)


Define addition of elements and multiplication of elements by scalars in the

ordinary way, i.e., (f + g)(t) = f(t) + g(t), (αf)(t) = αf(t). If f and g are two

elements  of R,  nonzero  only  at  the  points t, t,  .  .  .  and t′, t′,  .  .  .,
                                                        1212

respectively, define the scalar product of f and g as





Prove that this scalar product makes R into a Euclidean space. Prove that R is

nonseparable, i.e., that R contains no countable everywhere dense subset.


  Problem 3. Give an example of a (nonseparable) Euclidean space which

has  no  orthonormal  basis.  Prove  that  a  complete  Euclidean  space  (not

necessarily separable) always has an orthonormal basis.


  Problem 4. Prove that every nested sequence of nonempty closed bounded

convex sets in a complete Euclidean space (not necessarily separable) has a

nonempty intersection.


  Comment. Cf. Problem 6, p. 66 and Problem 2, p. 141.


  Problem 5. Given a Euclidean space R, let φ, φ, . . ., φ, . . . be an
                                                          12k

orthonormal basis in R and f an arbitrary element of R. Prove that the elementis orthogonal to all linear combinations of the form





if and only if


                          a = (f, φ)(k − 1, 2,. . ., n).
                            kk


  Problem  6.  According  to  elementary  geometry,  the  length  of  the

perpendicular dropped from a point P to a line L or plane Π is smaller than

the length of any other line segment joining P to L or Π. What is the natural

generalization of this fact to the case of an arbitrary Euclidean space?


  Hint. Use Theorem 6 and the result of the preceding problem.


  Problem  7.  Let R  be  a  complete  Euclidean  space  (not  necessarily

separable), so that R has an orthonormal basis {φ}, by Problem 3. Prove that
                                                        α

every vector f ∈ R satisfies the formulas





where neither sum contains more than countably many nonzero terms.


  Problem 8. Give an example of a Euclidean space R and an orthonormal

system {φ} in R such that R contains no nonzero element orthogonal to
          n

every φ, even though {φ} fails to be complete.
      nn


  Comment. By Theorem 10, R cannot be complete.


  Problem 9. Given a Euclidean space R, not necessarily complete, let R* be

the completion of R as defined in Sec. 7.4. Define linear operations and the

scalar product in R* by “continuous extension” of those in R ⊂ R*. More

exactly, if x → x, y → y where x, y ∈ R, let
            nnnnProve that

    a)These limits exist and are independent of the choice of the sequences

        {x}, {y} in R converging to x and y;
          nn

  b)R* is itself a Euclidean space.

Complete  in this way, and show that the resulting space is a Hilbert

space.


  Comment. The elements belonging to the completion of  but not to 

 are themselves functions, in fact discontinuous functions whose squares

are Lebesgue-integrable on [a, b], as defined in Sec. 29.


  Problem 10. Prove that each of the following sets is a subspace of the

Hilbert space l:
                2

    a)The set of all (x, x,. . ., x,. . .)∈/2 such that x = x;
                          12k12

    b)The set of all x, x,. . ., x,. . .)∈/2 such that x = 0 for all even k.
                          12kk


  Problem  11.  Show  that  every  complex  Euclidean  space  of  finite

                                                n
dimension n is isomorphic to the space C of Example 1, p. 164. Generalize

Problem 9 to the case where  is the complex space of Example 3, p. 164.



17. Topological Linear Spaces


    17.1. Definitions and examples. Specification of a norm is only one way

of introducing a topology into a linear space. There are many situations in

analysis, notably in the theory of generalized functions (to be discussed in

Sec. 21), where it is desirable to use other methods of equipping a linear

space with a topology:

    DEFINITION 1. By a topological linear space is meant a set E with the

following properties:

  1)E is a linear space;

  2)E is a topological space;

    3)The operations of addition of elements of E and multiplication of        elements  of  E  by  numbers (real  or  complex) are  continuous  with

        respect to the topology in E, in the sense that


        a)If z = x + y, then, given any neighborhood U of the point z,
                0000

            there  are  neighborhoods  V  and  W  of  the  points  x and  y,
                                                                                00

              respectively, such that x + y ∈ U whenever X ∈ V, Y ∈ W.

        b)If αx = y, then, given any neighborhood U of the point y,
                  0000

            there is a neighborhood V of the point x and a number ε > 0
                                                                0

            such that αx ∈ U whenever X ∈V,|α − α| > ε.
                                                              0


  THEOREM  1. Let  E  be  a  topological  linear  space, and  let  U  be  any

neighborhood of zero. Then the set


                          U + x = {y:y = x + x, x ∈ U}
                                00


is a neighborhood of x. Moreover, every neighborhood of x is a set of this
                          00

form, i.e., some neighborhood of zero “shifted by the vector x.”
                                                                        0


  Proof. It follows from property 3a) that the mapping f(x) = x − x carrying
                                                                                0
                                                                                    −1
E into itself is continuous. Hence, by Theorem 10, p. 87, the preimage f(U)

                                                                                    −1
of any neighborhood U of the point zero is itself a neighborhood. But f(U)

= U + x. Therefore U + x is a neighborhood, obviously of the point x.
        000

Similarly, given any neighborhood V of the point x, let U = V − x = V +
                                                              00

(−x). Then U is a neighborhood of zero, by the continuity of the mapping
  0

g(x) = x + x. But clearly U + x = V. 
            00


  Remark. Thus the topology in E is determined by giving a neighborhood

base at zero, i.e., a system  of neighborhoods of zero with the property that,
                                0

given any open set G ⊂ E containing the point zero, there is a neighborhood

N ∈   contained  in G.  In  fact,  the  mapping f(x)  = x  +  x  carries  a
        00

neighborhood base at zero into a neighborhood base at x. Hence  and its
                                                                    00

“translates, i.e., the system of all sets of the form V:V = U + X, U ∈ , x∈E}, constitute a base for the topology in E. In this sense,  “generates” the
                                                                      0

topology in E.


  Example  1.  Every  normed  linear  space  is  clearly  a  topological  linear

space. In fact, it is an immediate consequence of the properties of a norm that

the operations of addition of vectors and multiplication of vectors by scalars

are continuous with respect to the topology “induced” by the norm.


                      ∞
  Example 2. Let R be the linear space of all numerical sequences x = (x, .
                                                                                        1

. ., x, . . .), real or complex, and let  consist of all sets of the form
  k0




                                                                            ∞
for some number ε > 0 and positive integers k, . . ., k. Then R becomes a
                                                      1r

                                                                                        19
topological linear space when equipped with the topology generated by .
                                                                                      0


  Example 3. Let K be the linear space of all infinitely differentiable
                        [a,b]

                                    20
functions on the interval [a, b], and let  consist of all sets of the form
                                                0


                                                    (r)
    U = {φ:φ ∈ K,|φ(x)| < ε, ...,|φ(x)| < ε for all x ∈ [a, b]}
      r, g[a, b](0)


for  some  number  ε  >  0  and  positive  integer r.  Then K  becomes  a
                                                                        [a,b]

topological linear space when equipped with the topology generated by this

neighborhood base (again supply some missing details).


  DEFINITION 2. A subset M of a topological linear space E is said to be

bounded if, given any neighborhood U of zero, there is a number α > 0 such

                                        21
that M ⊂ αU = {z.z = αx, x ∈ U}.


  DEFINITION 3. A topological linear space E is said to be locally bounded if

it contains at least one nonempty bounded open set.


  THEOREM 2. Every normed linear space E is locally bounded.  Proof. Given any ε > 0, the set of all x ∈ E such that ∥x∥ < ε is obviously

nonempty, bounded and open. 


  DEFINITION 4. A topological linear space E is said to be locally convex if

every nonempty open set in E contains a nonempty convex open subset.


  THEOREM 3. Every normed linear space E is locally convex.


  Proof. Merely note that every nonempty open set in E contains an open

sphere. 

    Remark.  It  follows  from Theorems 2 and 3  that  every  normed  linear

space  is  both  locally  bounded  and  locally  convex.  Conversely,  it  can  be

shown that every locally bounded and locally convex topological linear space

satisfying the first axiom of separation is normable, in the sense that E can be

equipped with a norm ∥·∥ generating the given topology in E, via the metric

ρ(x, y) = ∥x − y∥.


  17.2. Historical remarks. For some time it was thought that the concept

of a normed linear space (introduced in the thirties, notably in the work of

Banach)  was  general  enough  to  serve  all  the  concrete  needs  of  analysis.

However, it subsequently became apparent that this was not so and that there

are a number of problems involving such spaces as the space of infinitely

                                            ∞
differentiable  functions,  the  space R  of  all  numerical  sequences,  etc.,  in

which  the  natural  topology  cannot  be  specified  in  terms  of  any  norm

whatsoever.  Thus  topological  linear  spaces,  as  opposed  to  normed  linear

spaces, are by no means “exotic” or “pathological.” On the contrary, some of

these  spaces  are  no  less  natural  and  important  a  generalization  of  finite-

dimensional Euclidean space than, say, Hilbert space.


  Problem 1. Reconcile Definition 2 with Problem 1, p. 141 in the case

where E is a normed linear space.


  Problem 2. Let E be a topological linear space. Prove that

  a)If U and V are open sets, then so is U + V = {z:z = x +y, x ∈ U, Y ∈

        V};

  b)If U is open, then so is αU = {z:z = αx, x∈U} provided that α ≠ 0;  c)If F ⊂ E is closed, then so is αF for arbitrary α.


  Problem 3. Prove that a topological linear space is a T-space if and only
                                                                    1

if the intersection of all neighborhoods of zero contains no nonzero elements.


  Problem 4. Prove that a topological linear space E automatically has the

following separation property: Given any point x ∈ E and any neighborhood

U of x, there is another neighborhood V of x such that [V]⊂ U.


  Hint. If U is a neighborhood of zero, then, by the continuity of subtraction,

                                                  22
there is a neighborhood V of zero such that


                  V − V = {z:z = x − y, x ∈ V, Y ∈ V} ⊂ U


Suppose y ∈ [V]. Then every neighborhood of y, in particular V + y, contains

a point of V. Hence there is a point z ∈ V such that z + y ∈ V. It follows that

y ∈ V− v ⊂ U.


  Problem 5. Prove that a topological space T has the separation property

figuring in Problem 4 if and only if for each pointx ∈ T and each closed set F

⊂ T not containing x, there is an open set O containing x and an open set O
                                                  12

containing F such that O ∩ O =∅.
                            12


  Comment.  Thus,  for T-spaces,  this  separation  property  is  “halfway
                                1

between” that of a Hausdorff space and that of a normal space.

    Problem 6. Given a topological linear space E, prove that

  a)If {x} is a convergent sequence of points in E, then the set M = {x,
            n1

        x, . . ., x, . . .} is bounded;
          2n

  b)A subset M ⊂ E is bounded if and only if, given any sequence {x}
                                                                                        n

        of points in M and any sequence {ε} of positive numbers converging
                                                  n

        to zero, the sequence {εx} also converges to zero.
                                    nn


  Problem 7. Prove that

                      ∞
    a)The space R of Example 2, p. 168 is not locally bounded;

    b)Every  locally  bounded  topological  linear  space  satisfies  the  first

        axiom of countability.  Problem 8. Let x be any point of a locally convex topological linear space

E,  and  let U  be  any  neighborhood  of x.  Prove  that x  has  a  convex

neighborhood contained in U.


  Hint. It is enough to consider the case x = 0. Suppose U is a neighborhood

of zero. Then there is a neighborhood V of zero such that V − V ⊂ U, where

V − V is the same as in the hint to Problem 4. Since E is locally convex, there

is a nonempty convex open set V' ⊂ V. If x ∈ V', then V′ − x is a convex
                                                    00

neighborhood of zero contained in U.


  Problem 9.  Prove  that  an  open  set U  in  a  topological  linear  space  is

convex if and only if U + U = 2U.


  Problem 10. Given a linear space E, a set U ⊂ E is said to be symmetric if

x ∈ U implies x ∈ U. Let  be the set of all convex symmetric subsets of E

such that each coincides with its own interior. Prove that

  a) is a system of neighborhoods of zero determining a locally convex

        topology τ in E which satisfies the first axiom of separation;

    b)The topology τ is the strongest locally convex topology compatible

        with the linear operations in E;

    c)Every linear functional on E is continuous with respect to τ.


  Problem 11. Two norms ∥·∥ and ∥·∥ in a linear space E are said to be
                                    12

compatible if, whenever a sequence {x} in E is fundamental with respect to
                                            k

both norms and converges to a limit x ∈ E with respect to one of them, it

also converges to the same limit x with respect to the other norm. A linear

space E equipped with a countable system of compatible norms ∥·∥ is said to
                                                                              n

be countably  normed.  Prove  that  every  countably  normed  linear  space

becomes  a  topological  linear  space  when  equipped  with  the  topology

generated by the neighborhood base consisting of all sets of the form




for some number ε > 0 and positive integer r.


  Problem 12. Prove that each of the following spaces is countably normed,i.e., in each case verify the compatibility of the given system of norms ∥·∥:
                                                                                      n

    a)The  space K  of  infinitely  differentiable  functions  on  [a, b],
                        [a,b]

        equipped with the norms





    b)The space S of all infinitely differentiable functions f(t) on (−∞, ∞)
                      ∞

        such that f(t) and all its derivatives approach zero as |t| → ∞ faster

                                                          p(q)
        than any power of 1/|t| (i.e., such that tf(t) → 0 as|t| → ∞ for

        arbitrary p and q), equipped with the norms





    c)The space φ of all numerical sequences x = (x, . . ., x, . . .) such that
                                                              1k





        converges for all n = 0, 1, 2, . . ., equipped with the norms






Show that (1) and (2) define the same topology in K as in Example 3, p.
                                                              [a,b]

169.

    Comment.  Φ  might  be  called  the  space  of  “rapidly  decreasing

sequences.”


  Problem 13. A norm ∥·∥ is said to be stronger than a norm ∥·∥ if there is
                                12

a constant c > 0 such that ∥x∥  c ∥x∥ for all x ∈ E (then ∥·∥ is said to be
                                  122

weaker than ∥·∥). Discuss the norms (2) in this language.
                1


  Comment. Two norms are said to be comparable if one is stronger than the

other, and equivalent if one is both stronger and weaker than the other (cf.Problem 7, p. 141).


  Problem 14. Prove that every countably normed space satisfies the first

axiom of countability.


  Hint. Replace the system of neighborhoods U by the subsystem such
                                                            r,ε

that ε takes only the values





  (this can be done without changing the topology).


  Comment. Thus the topology in E can be described in terms of convergent

sequences (recall Sec. 9.4).

    Problem 15. Prove that the topology in a countably normed space can be

specified in terms of the metric





First verify that ρ(x, y) has all the properties of a metric, and is invariant

under shifts in the sense that ρ(x + z, y + z) = ρ(x, y) for all x, y, z∈E.


  Comment.  A  countably  normed  space  is  said  to  be complete  if  it  is

complete with respect to the metric (3).


  Problem 16. Prove that a sequence {x} in a countably normed space is
                                                k

fundamental with respect to the metric (4) if and only if it is fundamental

with  respect  to  each  of  the  norms ∥·∥.  Prove  that  {x}  converges  to  an
                                              nk

element x ∈ E with respect to the metric (3) if and only if it converges to x

with respect to each of the norms ∥·∥.
                                          n


  Comment. Thus, in particular, a countably normed space E is said to be

complete if a sequence {x} in E converges whenever it is fundamental with
                              k

respect to each of the norms ∥·∥.
                                    n  Problem 17. An infinite-dimensional separable linear space H equipped

with a countable system of scalar products (·, ·) is said to be countably
                                                            n

Hilbert if the norms




generated  by  these  scalar  products  are  compatible  and  if  the  space H  is

complete. Prove that the space φ of Problem 12c is countably Hilbert when

equipped with the scalar products





where x = (x, . . ., x, . . .), y = (y, . . ., y, . . .) are any two elements of φ.
            1k1k


  Problem  18.  The  norms ∥·∥  in  a  countably  normed  space E  can  be
                                      n

assumed to satisfy the condition




since otherwise we can replace ∥·∥ by
                                        n




(Prove  that  this  does  not  change  the  topology  in E.)  Let E  denote  the
                                                                            n

completion of E with respect to the norm ∥·∥. Using (4), prove that
                                                    n


                            E ⊃ E ⊃. . . ⊃ E⊃. . .
                              12n


Clearly,





Prove that E is complete if and only if  Problem 19. Let  be the space of all functions defined on the interval

[a, b] with continuous derivatives up to order n inclusive, equipped with the

norm





(note  that ).  Prove  that   is  complete.  Prove  that K
                                                                                        [a,b]

equals the intersection





and hence is complete (by Problem 18).




  1
 More generally, one can consider linear spaces over an arbitrary field.

  2n
 It will be noted that certain symbols like R, C, l and m are used here with somewhat
                                                  [a,b]2
different meanings than in Sec. 5.1. The point is that there is no metric here, at least for the time being,
while on the other hand, sums and scalar multiples of vectors were not defined in Chaps. 2 and 3.

  3
 The left-hand side of (3) is called a linear combination of the elements x, y, . . ., w.

  4
 Here we use curly brackets in the same way as in footnote 10, p. 92.

  5
 The word “functional” has already been used in a somewhat different sense in Sec. 12.1, where a
functional means a real function defined on a function space (topological or metric). Later on, we will
deal with linear spaces which are also metric spaces and have functions as their elements. The two uses
of the word “functional” will then coincide (if we allow complex-valued functionals).

  6
 Clearly, no “true” function can have these properties!

  7
 The expression on the right is shorthand for the set of all x such that y ∈ L′ (the colon is read
“such that”). Similarly, {x : f(x) = 1} is the set of all x such that f(x) = 1, and so on.

  8
 One of the pioneer workers in this field was Stefan Banach (1892–1945), author of the classic
Théorie des Opérations Linéaires, reprinted by Chelsea Publishing Co., New York (1955).

  9
 This contingency cannot arise in a finite-dimensional subspace (see Problem 5a).

  10
 See e.g., G. P. Tolstov, Fourier Series (translated by R. A. Silverman), Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
Englewood Cliffs, N.J. (1962), p. 120.

  11
 The term “Euclidean n-space” has already been used in Example 3, p. 38 to describe the metric
space with distance (5). In so doing, we anticipated the eventual introduction of the scalar product (4).

  12
 See e.g., G. P. Tolstov, op. cit., Corollary 1, p. 117.  13
 See e.g., G. E. Shilov, An Introduction to the Theory of Linear Spaces (translated by R. A.
Silverman), Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J. (1961), Theorem 28, p. 142.

  14
 More exactly, whether the sequence of partial sums corresponding to (15) converges in the
metric of R.

  15
 Named after the celebrated German mathematician David Hilbert (1862–1943).

  16
 However, see Sec. 16.9.

  17
 Isomorphism of two normed linear spaces R and R* is defined in the same way, except that

preservation of scalar products is replaced by preservation of norms, i.e., by the condition ∥x∥ = ∥x*∥.

  18
 See e.g., G. E. Shilov, op. cit., Theorem 29, p. 144.

  19
 As an exercise, verify that  and its translates satisfy Theorem 2 (or Theorem 3) of Sec. 9.3
                              0

                            ∞
and that the linear operations in R are continuous with respect to the topology generated by .
                                                                                    0

  20(k)
 A function φ is said to be infinitely differentiable if it has derivatives φ of all orders k = 0, 1,
                        (0)
2, . . . (the zeroth derivative φ is just the function φ itself).

  21
 A sequence {x} of points in E is said to be bounded if the set {x, x, . . ., x, . . .}, consisting
                  n12n
of all terms of the sequence, is bounded.

  22
 Here the minus sign in V − V does not have the usual meaning of a set difference (the same kind
of notation was used in Sec. 14.5).                                          5



                      LINEAR FUNCTIONALS









18. Continuous Linear Functionals


    18.1. Continuous linear functionals on a topological linear space. A

(real) functional f defined on a topological linear space E is said to be linear

on E if


                              f(αx + βy) = αf(x) + βf(y)


for all x, y ∈ E and arbitrary numbers α, β (recall Sec. 13.5), and continuous

at the point x ∈ E if, given any ε > 0, there is a neighborhood U of x such
              00

that




for all x ∈ U (recall Sec. 9.6). We say that the functional f is continuous (on

E) if it is continuous at every point x ∈ E.
                                          0


  THEOREM 1. Let f be a linear functional on a topological linear space E,

and suppose f is continuous at some point x ∈ E. Then f is continuous on E,
                                                  0

i.e., at every point of E.


  Proof.  Given  any  point y ∈  E  and  any  number  ε  >  0,  let U  be  a

neighborhood of x such that x ∈ U implies (1). Then
                    0                  V = U + (y − x = {z:z = x + y − x, x ∈ U}
                                    00


is a neighborhood of y, by Theorem 1, p. 168. Moreover, x ∈ V implies x +

x − y − U and hence
0


                      |f(x) − f(y)| = |f(x + x− y)−f(x)|<ε
                                                00


i.e., f is continuous at y. 


    COROLLARY. The continuity of a linear functional on a topological linear

space need only be checked at a single point, for example, at the point zero.


  THEOREM 2. Let f be a linear functional on a topological linear space E.

Then f is continuous on E if and only if f is bounded in some neighborhood of

    1
zero.


  Proof. Suppose f is continuous on E, in particular at the point zero. Then,

given  any  ε  >  0,  there  is  a  neighborhood  of  zero  in  which  |f(x)|  <  ε.

Obviously, f is bounded in this neighborhood.

    Conversely, suppose f is bounded in some neighborhood U of zero, so

that |f(x)| < C for all x ∈ U, where C is a suitable constant. Then, given any ε

> 0, we have |f(x)| < ε for all x in the neighborhood





    i.e., f is continuous at zero and hence on all of E. 


  THEOREM  3. A  necessary  condition  for  a  linear  functional  f  to  be

continuous on a topological linear space E is that f be bounded on every

bounded set. The condition is also sufficient if E satisfies the first axiom of

countability.


  Proof. To prove the necessity, suppose f is continuous on E. Then f is

bounded in some neighborhood U of zero:


                                  |f(x)C(x ∈ U).


Let M⊂ E be any bounded set, as defined in Definition 2, p. 169. Then M⊂αE for some α > 0, and hence


                                  |f(x)|Cα(x ∈ U).


i.e., f is bounded on M.

  As for the sufficiency, let {U} be a countable neighborhood base at the
                                      n

point zero such that


                            U ⊃ U . . . ⊃ U ⊃ . . .
                                12n


(cf. the proof of Theorem 7, p. 84). If f fails to be continuous on E, it cannot

be bounded on any of these neighborhoods of zero. Therefore in each U
                                                                                          n

there is a point x such that |f(x)| > n. The sequence {x} is bounded (recall
                  nnn

footnote 21, p. 169), and even converges to zero, while the sequence {f(x)}
                                                                                        n

is unbounded. But then f fails to be bounded on the bounded set {x, x,. . .,
                                                                                12

x, . . .}, contrary to hypothesis. 
n


  Guided by Theorem 3, we introduce


  DEFINITION 1. Given a linear functional f on a topological linear space E,

suppose f is bounded on every bounded subset of E. Then f is said to be a

bounded linear functional.


  Remark. In general, a bounded linear functional need not be continuous.


  18.2. Continuous linear functionals on a normed linear space. Suppose

E is a normed linear space, so that in particular E satisfies the first axiom of

countability  (recall  the  remark  on  p.  83).  Then,  by Theorem  3,  a  linear

functional on E is continuous if and only if it is bounded. But by a bounded

set in a normed linear space we mean a set contained in some closed sphere

∥x∥  C (recall Problem 1,  p.  141).  Therefore  a  linear  functional f  on  a

normed linear space is bounded (and hence continuous) if and only if it is

bounded on every closed sphere ∥x∥  C, or equivalently on the closed unit

sphere ∥x∥  1, because of the linearity of f. In other words, f is bounded if

and only if the numberis finite.

    DEFINITION 2. Given a bounded linear functional f on a normed linear

space E, the number (2), equal to the least upper bound of |f(x)| on the closed

unit sphere ∥x∥  1, is called the norm of f.


  THEOREM 4. The norm ∥ f ∥ has the following two properties:








    Proof. Clearly,





(why?). But the set of all vectors in E of norm 1 coincides with the set of all

vectors





and hence





which proves (3). Moreover, since the vectors (5) all have norm 1, it follows

from (2) that





which implies (4) for x ≠ 0. The validity of (4) for x = 0 is obvious.                         n
  Example 1. Let R be Euclidean n-space, and let a be any fixed nonzero

          n
vector in R. Then the scalar product


                                f(x) = (x, a)(x ∈ R)
                                                        n

                                n
defines  a  functional  on R  which  is  obviously  linear.  By  Schwarz’s

inequality,




                                                          n
Therefore f is bounded and hence continuous on R. It follows from (6) that





The right-hand side of (7) is independent of x, and hence





i.e.,


                                        ∥f∥∥a∥,


But choosing x = a, we get

                                                        2
                                f(a) = |(a, a) = ∥a∥,


or equivalently





It follows from (3) that


                                      ∥f∥ = ∥a∥.


  Example 2. More generally, let R be an arbitrary Euclidean space, and let

a  be  a  fixed  element  of R.  Then  the  same  argument  as  in  the  precedingexample shows that the scalar product


                                f(x) = (x, a)(x ∈ R)


defines a bounded linear functional on R, with norm


                                        ∥f∥∥a∥,


  Example 3. The integral





is a linear functional on the space C. Since
                                        [a,b]





where  the  equality  holds  if x(t)  ≡  const,  we  see  that  the  functional I  is

bounded, with norm




    Example 4. More generally, let y(t) be a fixed function in C, and let
                                          0[a,b]





Then I is a linear functional on C. Since
                                      [a,b]





where the equality holds if x(t) ≡ const, the functional I is bounded, with

norm





Note that (9) reduces to (8) in the case y(t) ≡ 1.
                                              0  Example 5. As in Example 3, p. 124, let


                                      δ(x) = x(t)
                                      t0
                                        0

be the linear functional on C which assigns to each function C its
                                  [a,b][a, b]

value at some fixed point t ∈[a, b]. Clearly
                              0





where equality holds if x(t) ≡ const. Hence δ is bounded, with norm
                                                  t
                                                    0


                                        ∥δ∥ = 1.
                                          t
                                          0


  The concept of the norm of a bounded linear functional on a normed linear

space can be given a simple geometric interpretation. As shown in Theorem

4,  p.  127,  every  nontrivial  linear  functional f  can  be  associated  with  a

hyperplane


                                  M = {x:f(x) = 1}.
                                    f


Let d be the distance from the hyperplane M to the point x = 0, defined as
                                                  f





(cf. Problem 9, p. 54). Since, as always




f(x) = 1 implies





i.e.,On the other hand, it follows from (3) that, given any ε > 0, there is an

element x such that f(x) = 1 and
          εε


                                  (∥f∥ − ε)∥x∥ < 1
                                                ε


Therefore





and hence





since ε > 0 is arbitrary. Comparing (10) and (11), we get





i.e., the norm of the linear functional f equals the reciprocal of the distance

between the hyperplane f(x) = 1 and the point x = 0.


  18.3. The Hahn-Banach theorem for a normed linear space. Let f(x)
                                                                                      0

be a linear functional defined on a subset L of a linear space E, satisfying the

condition




where p is a finite convex functional on E. Then, according to the Hahn-

Banach theorem (Theorem 5, p. 132), f can be extended onto the whole
                                                0

space E without violating the condition (12) As applied to bounded linear

functionals  on  a  normed  linear  space E,  this  result  can  be  formulated  as

follows:


  THEOREM 5 (Hahn-Banach). Given a real normed linear space E, let L be

a subspace of E and f a bounded linear functional on L Then f can be
                          00

extended  to  a  bounded  linear  functional  f  on  the  whole  space  E  withoutincreasing its norm, i.e.,




  Proof. We need only choose the functional p in Theorem 5, p. 132 to be

the convex functional k ∥x∥, where




  This  form  of  the  Hahn-Banach  theorem  has  a  simple  geometric

interpretation. The equation




specifies a hyperplane in the subspace L, at distance





from  the  origin  (the  point x  =  0)  The  fact  that  the  functional f  can  be
                                                                                0

extended onto the whole space E without increasing its norm means that the

hyperplane (13) can be extended to a larger hyperplane in the whole space E

in such a way that the distance between the larger hyperplane and the origin

is the same as the distance between the hyperplane (13) and the origin.

  In the same way, starting from the complex version of the Hahn-Banach

theorem (Theorem 5′, p. 134), we get


  THEOREM 5′. Given a complex normed linear space E, let L be a subspace

of E and f a bounded linear functional on L. Then f can be extended to a
          00

bounded linear functional f on the whole space E without increasing its norm,

i.e.,


                                  ∥f∥ = ∥f∥
                                      on E0on L.


  In  the  case  of  an  arbitrary  topological  linear  space E,  a  nontrivial

continuous linear functional on E may not even exist. However, by imposing

suitable restrictions on E,  we  can  guarantee  the  existence  of  “sufficiently

                                                2
many” continuous linear functionals on E.  DEFINITION 3. A topological linear space E is said to have sufficiently

many continuous linear functionals if for each pair of distinct points x, x ∈
                                                                                  12

E there exists a continuous linear functional f on E such that f(x) ≠ f(x), or
                                                                            12

equivalently, if for each nonzero element x∈ E there exists a continuous
                                                    0

linear functional on E such that f(x) ≠ 0.
                                        0


  THEOREM  6. Every  normed  linear  space  E  has  sufficiently  many

continuous linear functionals.


  Proof. Given any nonzero element x ∈ E, we define a linear functional
                                            0


                                      f(λx) = λ
                                        00


on the set L of all elements of the form λx. We then use the Hahn-Banach
                                                  0

theorem to extend f onto the whole space E. This gives a continuous linear
                      0

functional on E such that f(x) = 1 ≠ 0. 
                                0


  Problem 1. Prove that a functional f on a T-space E is continuous at a
                                                        1

point x ∈ E if and only if x → x implies f(x) → f(x).
                              nn


  Problem  2.  Prove  that  every  linear  functional  on  a  finite-dimensional

topological linear space is automatically continuous.


  Problem  3.  Let E  be  a  topological  linear  space.  Prove  that  a  linear

functional f on E is continuous if and only if

  a)Its null space {x:f(x) = 0} is closed in E;

    b)There exists an open set U ⊂ E and a number t such that t ∉f(U).

    Problem 4. Given a topological linear space E, prove that

  a)If every linear functional on E is continuous, then the topology in E is

        the topology τ of Problem 10, p. 171;

  b)If E is infinite-dimensional and normable, then there exists a non-

        continuous linear functional on E;

  c)If E has a neighborhood base at zero whose power does not exceed

        the algebraic dimension of E, then there exists a noncontinuous linear

        functional on E.  Hint. In b) use the existence of a Hamel basis in E (recall Problem 4, p.

128, where algebraic dimension is also defined).


  Problem 5. Prove that







are  both  bounded  linear  functionals  on  the  space C.  What  are  their
                                                                [0,  1]

norms?


  Problem 6. As in Problem 11, p. 171, let E be a countably normed space

with norms ∥·∥, where
                n




(as in Problem 18, p. 173, this condition entails no loss of generality). Let E*

be the set of all continuous linear functionals on E, and let E be the set of all

linear functionals on E which are continuous with respect to the norm ∥·∥.
                                                                                          n

Prove that




and





    Hint. If f is a continuous linear functional on E, then, by Theorem 2, there

is a neighborhood U of zero in which f is bounded. It follows from (14) and

the definition of the topology in E that there is a number ε > 0 and a positive

integer k such that the open sphere ∥x∥ < ε is contained in U. Being bounded
                                            k

on this sphere, f is bounded and continuous with respect to the norm ∥·∥.
                                                                                    k


  Comment. Let f be a continuous linear functional on E, i.e., let f ∈E*.

Then by the order of f is meant the smallest integer n for which f ∈E. Itfollows from (15) that every continuous linear functional on E is of finite

order.


  Problem 7. Prove that every countably normed space E has sufficiently

many continuous linear functionals.


  Hint. Given any nonzero element x∈E, use Theorem 6 to construct a
                                              0

linear functional f continuous with respect to the norm ∥·∥ such that f(x) ≠
                                                                      10

0.


  Problem 8. Show that every real locally convex topological linear space E

satisfying  the  first  axiom  of  separation  has  sufficiently  many  continuous

linear functionals.


  Hint. Given any nonzero element x ∈ E, show that there is a convex
                                              0
          3
symmetric  neighborhood U  of  zero  such  that x ∉  U.  Let p  be  the
                                                              0U

Minkowski functional of U. Then, as in the proof of Theorem 6, p. 136, P is
                                                                                      U

a finite convex functional on E such that p(−x) = p(x) and
                                                UU




Define a linear functional f(λx) = λ on the set L of all elements of the form
                              00

λx. Clearly |f(x)|  p(x) on L and f(x) = 1. Now use the Hahn-Banach
  00000

theorem to extend f onto the whole space E.
                    0


  Comment. The importance of locally convex spaces is mainly due to this

property (which continues to hold in the complex case).



19. The Conjugate Space


    19.1. Definition of the conjugate space. The operations of addition of

functionals and multiplication of functionals by numbers are defined in the

obvious way:

    DEFINITION 1. Let f and g be two functionals defined on a topological

linear space E, and let α be any number. Then by the sum off and g, denotedby f + g, is meant the functional whose value at every point x ∈ E is the sum

of the values of f and g at x, while by the product of α and f, denoted by αf, is

meant the functional whose value at every point x ∈ E is the product of α

and the value of f at x. More concisely,






  for every x ∈ E.


  Clearly,  if f  and g  are  linear  functionals,  then  so  are f  +  g  and  αf.

Moreover, if f and g are bounded (and hence continuous), so are f + g and αf.


  Let E* be the set of all continuous linear functionals on E. Then the space

E*, called the conjugate space of E, is itself a linear space, when equipped

with  the  operations  of  addition  of  functionals  and  multiplication  of

functionals  by  numbers.  This  can  be  seen  at  once  by  verifying  the  three

axioms  in Definition 1,  p.  118.  Note  that  the  zero  element  in E*  is  the

functional f = 0, equal to zero for all x ∈ E.

  The  next  step  is  to  introduce  a  topology  in E*,  besides  the  linear

operations just described. This can be done in various ways. First we consider

the particularly simple case where the original space E is a normed linear

space.


  19.2.  The  conjugate  space  of  a  normed  linear  space.  Let f  be  a

continuous linear functional on a normed linear space E. In Sec. 18.2 we

introduced the concept of the norm of f, equal to





(recall Theorem 4, p. 177). This quantity clearly has all the properties of a

norm, as listed on p. 138. In fact,

    1)∥f∥  0 where ∥f∥ = 0 if and only if f = 0;

    2)∥αf∥ = |α| ∥f∥;

  3)∥f + g∥  ∥f∥ + ∥g∥, since obviouslyHence the space E* conjugate to E can be made into a normed linear space by

simply  equipping  each  functional f ∈  E*  with  its  norm ∥f∥.  The

corresponding topology in E* is called the strong topology in E*. In cases

where we want to emphasize that E* is equipped with the norm ∥·∥, we will

write (E*, ∥·∥) instead of E*.


  Example 1. Let E be Euclidean n-space (real or complex), and let e, . . .,
                                                                                    1

e be any basis in E, so that every vector x ∈ E has a unique representation
n

of the form





If f is a linear functional on E, then clearly





Thus a linear functional on E is uniquely determined by its values on the

basis vectors e, . . ., e, where these values can be assigned arbitrarily.
                1n

Consider the linear functionals f, . . ., f defined by
                                    1n






It is clear that these functionals are linearly independent, and moreover that


                                        f(x) = x
                                        i1


Hence we can write (1) in the formThus the functionals f, . . ., f form a basis in the space E*, called the dual of
                        1n

the basis e, . . ., e in the original space E. Therefore E* is itself an n-
            1n

dimensional linear space. Of course, different norms in E “induce” different

norms in E* (see Problem 1).


  Example 2. Let c be the space of all sequences x = (x, . . ., x, . . .)
                        01k

converging to zero, with norm




Then the space  conjugate to c is isomorphic (see footnote 17, p. 155) to
                                      0
                                                                                    4
the space l of all absolutely summable sequences f = (f, . . ., f, . . .), with
          11k

norm






To prove this, we first note that, given any element f = (f,. . ., f,. . .)∈l, the
                                                                  1k1

formula





defines a functional  on the space c, where  is clearly linear. Moreover, it
                                          0

follows from (2) that





and hence




Consider the vectorsin c, and let
  0





                                      (n)
(if f = 0, we set f/|f| = 0). Then x∈ co, and
  kkk




Moreover





so that





It follows from (4) and (5) that




(why?). Comparing (3) and (6), we get




    Thus the mapping carrying f into ; is a “norm-preserving” mapping of

l into . We must still verify that this mapping is one-to-one and “onto” (see
1

p. 5), i.e., that every functional  has a unique representation of the form (2),

where f = (f,. . ., f. . .)∈l Let x = (x,. . ., x,. . .)∈co. Then
            1k11kwhere the series on the right converges in c to the element x, since
                                                  0





as n → ∞. Since the functional  is continuous,





(where is the continuity used?). Hence ; has a unique representation of the

form (2), and we need only verify that





This time let





              (n)(n)
Noting that x∈ co and ∥x∥  1, we find that






But this implies (7), since n can be made arbitrarily large.


  Whether or not the original space E is complete, we have


  THEOREM 1. The conjugate space (E*, ∥·∥) is complete.


  Proof. Let {f} be a fundamental sequence of functionals in E*. Then,
                  n

given any ε > 0, there is an integer N such that n, n′ > N impliesso that




for every {f(x)}. Therefore the sequence {f(x)} is fundamental and hence
            nn

convergent for every x ∈ E. Let




Then f is linear, since







Moreover, choosing n so large that ∥f − f∥ < 1 for all p  0, we have
                                              nn+p

∥f∥ < ∥f∥ + 1 for all p  0, and hence
n+pn




It follows that





so that f is bounded and hence continuous.


  To complete the proof, we now show that the functional f is the limit of

the sequence {f}, i.e., that
                n





Given any ε > 0, let n be so large thatfor all p  0. By the definition of the norm in E*, there is a nonzero element

x ∈ E such that
n,ε






where





Therefore








or





after using (9) and the fact that ∥u∥ = 1. But
                                      n,ε




by the very definition of f. Hence, taking the limit as p → ∞ in (10), we get


                                      ∥f −f∥ > ε
                                        n


which implies (8), since ε > 0 is arbitrary. 


Next we examine the structure of the space conjugate to a Hilbert space:


  THEOREM 2. Let H be a real Hilbert space. Then, given any x ∈ E, the
                                                                              0

formuladefines  a  continous  linear  functional  on  H, with ∥f∥  = ∥x∥. Conversely,
                                                                        0

given any continuous linear functional f on H, there is a unique element x ∈
                                                                                      0

H such that (11) holds, with ∥x∥ = ∥f∥.
                                  0


  Proof.  Given  any x ∈  E,  formula  (11)  obviously  defines  a  linear
                            0

functional on H. By Schwarz’s inequality,




so that f is bounded and hence continuous. Moreover ∥f∥ = ∥x∥, because of
                                                                          0

                                      2
(12) and the fact that f(x) = ∥x∥.
                          00

    Conversely, let f be any continuous linear functional on H. If f = 0, then f

obviously has the representation (11) with x = 0 (in this case ∥x∥ = ∥f∥ = 0).
                                                  00

Otherwise, let


                                  H = {x:f(x) = 0}
                                    0


be the null space of f. Since f is continuous, H is a closed subspace of H.
                                                        0

According to Theorem 3, Corollary 2, p. 126, the codimension of the null

space of any nontrivial linear functional f equals 1. Therefore, by Theorem

14, Corollary 2, p. 159, the orthogonal complement H′ of the space H is
                                                                  00

one-dimensional, i.e., there exists a nonzero vector y orthogonal to H such
                                                              00

that every vector x ∈ H has a unique representation of the form




where Y ∈ H ∈ E. Clearly, there is no loss of generality in assuming that
              0

∥y∥ = 1. Now let
0




Then, given any x ∈ H, we have


                              f(x) = f(y) + λyo) = (λf(yo)because of (13), and


                    (x, x)= λ(y, x) = λf(y)(y, y) = λf(y)
                          0000000


because of (14). Therefore (11) holds for all x ∈ H. To prove the uniqueness

of x, suppose
  0




Then, subtracting (11′) from (11), we get




which immediately implies  after choosing  


    COROLLARY. The correspondence x ↔ f is an isomorphism between H and
                                            0

H*, regarded as normed linear spaces.


  Proof. If


                            f(x) = (x, x,g(x)= (x, y),
                                          00


then


                            αf(x) βg(x) = (x, ax + αyo).
                                                  0


Moreover ∥x∥ = ∥f∥. 
              0


  19.3. The strong topology in the conjugate space. Let E be a normed

linear space. Then as we have seen, the conjugate space E* is itself a normed

linear  space,  and  a  neighborhood  of  zero  in E*  means  the  set  of  all

continuous linear functionals on E satisfying the condition ∥f∥ < ε for some ε

> 0. In other words, for a neighborhood base at zero in the space E* we can

take the set of all functionals in E* such that |f(x)| < ε when x ranges over the

closed unit sphere ∥x∥  1 in the space E. Suppose E is a topological linear

space, but not a normed linear space. Then in defining the topology in E* it

seems natural to start from an arbitrary bounded set A ⊂ E, since there is no

longer a “unit sphere.” This suggests  DEFINITION 2. Let E be a topological linear space, with conjugate space

                                      5
E*. Then by the strong topology in E* is meant the topology generated by

the neighborhood base at zero consisting of all sets of the form




                                                      6
for some number ε > 0 and bounded set A ⊂ E.

Regardless of the topology in the original set E, we have


  THEOREM 3. The conjugate space E*, equipped with the strong topology, is

a locally convex T-space.
                    1


  Proof. If f ≠ 0 and f ≠ 0, then there is an element x ∈ E such that f(x)
              00000

≠ 0. Let




Then clearly f∉U, and hence E* is a T-space. To verify that the strong
                0A1

topology in E* is locally convex, we need only note that U is a convex set
                                                                      A,ε

in E* for any ε > 0 and any bounded set A ⊂ E. 


  Remark. The strong topology in E* will be denoted by the symbol b. In

cases  where  we  want  to  emphasize  that E*  is  equipped  with  the  strong

topology, we will write (E*, b) instead of E*.


  19.4. The second conjugate space. Since the set of all continuous linear

functionals on a topological linear space E is itself a topological linear space,

namely  the  conjugate  space  (E*, b),  we  can  also  talk  about  the second

conjugate space E** = (E*)*, i.e., set of all continuous linear functionals on

                                    ***
E*, the third conjugate space E = (E**)*, and so on.


  THEOREM 4. Given a topological linear space E with conjugate space E*,

let x be any fixed element of E. Then
  0


                                      x(f) = f(x)
                                        00


is a continuous linear functional on E*.  Proof. The linearity is obvious, since




As  for  the  continuity,  given  any  ε  >  0,  let A  be  a  bounded  subset  of E

containing x, and let U be the neighborhood (15). Then
            0A,ε


                          |(f)| = |f(x) < εif f ∈U
                            zo0A, tε


i.e., the functional  is continuous at 0 and hence continuous on the whole
                      Z0

space E*. 

Thus the mapping


                                      π(x) = (f),
                                              x


called the natural mapping of E into E*, is a mapping of the whole space E

onto some subset π(E) of the second conjugate space E**. Clearly π is linear,

in the sense that


            π(αx + βy) = f(αx + βy) = αf(x) + βf(y) = απ(x) + βπ(y).


Suppose E has sufficiently many continuous linear functionals, e.g., suppose

E  is  a  normed  linear  space  or  a  locally  convex  topological  linear  space

                                              7
satisfying the first axiom of separation. Then π is one-to-one, since, given

any two distinct elements x, x ∈ E, there is a functional f ∈ E* such that
                                12

f(x) ≠ f(x) and hence π(x) ≠ π(x). Being the conjugate space of (E*, b),
  1212

E** can also be equipped with a strong topology (introduced by the obvious

analogue of Definition 2), which we denote by b*.

  If π(E) = E**, the space E is said to be semireflexive. It can be shown

                                                  −1
(see Problem 9) that the inverse mapping π carrying π(E) into E is always

                                                                  −1
continuous. If E is semireflexive and if π (as well as π) is continuous, the

space E  is  said  to  be reflexive  and  π  then  establishes  a  homeomorphism

between the space E and (E**, b*). In this case, each element x ∈ E can be

identified  with  the  corresponding  element π(x)∈E**,  and  hence  it  is

convenient to denote the value of a functional f ∈ E * at the point x ∈ E by

the more symmetric notation


                                      f(x) = (f, x).Thus (f, x) can be regarded as a functional on E for each fixed x ∈ E, and as

a functional on E* for each fixed x ∈ E* (in the latter case, x also acts like an

element of E**).


  THEOREM 5. If E is a normed linear space (so that in particular E* and

E** are also normed linear spaces), then the natural mapping of E into E**

is an isometry.


  Proof. Given an element x ∈ E, let ∥x∥ denote the norm of x in E and

∥x∥ the norm of its image in E**. We want to show that ∥x∥ = ∥x∥. To this
  22

end, let f be any element of E*. Then


                                  |(f, x)  ∥f∥ ∥x∥,


i.e.,





and since the left-hand side is independent of f,





On the other hand, by the Hahn-Banach theorem, for every x ∈ E there is a
                                                                        0

linear functional f such that
                  0




In fact, to construct such a functional, we need only set f(x) = λ for any
                                                                      0

element of the form λx, and then extend f to a functional on the whole space
                        00

E (without changing its norm). It follows from (17) that





Comparing (16) and (18), we get                                    ∥x∥ = ∥x∥. 
                                                2


    COROLLARY. The concepts of semireflexivity and reflexivity coincide for a

normed linear space.


  Proof. If the natural mapping π is an isometry, then obviously both π and π

−1
 are continuous. 

    Remark.  According  to Theorem  5,  every  normed  linear  space E  is

                                                **s
isometric to the linear manifold π(E) ⊂ E. Identifying E with π(E), we can

                          8
assert  that E ⊂  E**  in  general,  and E  =  E**  if E  is  reflexive  (or

semireflexive).


  THEOREM 6. Every reflexive normed linear space is complete.


  Proof. If E is reflexive, then E = E**. But E** = (E*)* is complete, by

Theorem 1, p. 187. 


  Example 1. Finite-dimensional Euclidean spaces and Hilbert space are the

simplest examples of reflexive spaces (in fact, for such spaces E = E*). This

follows from Theorem 2 (cf. Problem 5).


  Example 2. The space c of all sequences x = (x, . . ., x, . . .) converging
                              01k

to zero is an example of a complete nonreflexive space. In fact, as we saw in

Example 2, p. 185, the conjugate space of c is the space l of all absolutely
                                                    01

summable sequences, which in turn has the space m of all bounded sequences

(not necessarily converging to zero) as its conjugate space (see Problem 2c).


  Example  3.  It  can  be  shown  that  the  space C  of  all  continuous
                                                                [a,b]

functions on [a, b] is nonreflexive, and even that there is no normed linear

space with C as its conjugate space.
              [a,b]


  Example 4. The space l, where 1 < p ≠ 2, is an example of a reflexive
                              p

space  which  does  not  coincide  with  its  conjugate  space.  In  fact, ,

whereand hence .


  Problem 1. Let E be Euclidean n-space (real or complex), and let e, . . .,
                                                                                    1

e be a basis in E. Let x, . . ., x be the coordinates of a vector x ∈ E with
n1n
                                                  1n
respect to the basis e, . . ., e, and let f, . . ., f be the coordinates of a
                        1n

functional f ∈ E* with respect to the dual basis f, . . ., f. Prove that in each
                                                          1n

of  the  following  pairs,  the  norm  in E*  is  the  norm  “induced”  by  the

corresponding norm in E:

  (a)


  (b)


    where 


  (c)


  (d)


  Problem 2. Let l be the normed linear space of all sequences x = (x, . . .,
                      p1

x, . . .) with norm
k





Prove that

  a)If p > 1, the space  conjugate to l is isomorphic to the space l,
                                                    pq

        where





  b)If p > 1, the general form of a continuous linear functional on l is
                                                                                  p        where x = (x. . ., x,. . .)∈l, f = (f. . ., f. . .)∈l;
                        1kp1kq

  c)If p = 1 is isomorphic to the space m of all bounded sequences x =

        (x, . . ., x, . . .) with norm .
          1k


  Problem 3. Let E be an incomplete normed linear space, with completion

Ē. Prove that the conjugate spaces E* and (Ē)* are isomorphic.


  Hint. Given any f ∈ E*, extend f by continuity to a functional .

Conversely, given any , let f be the restriction of  to E, namely the

functional f(x)  = (x)  for  all x ∈  E.  Show  that f  ↔   is  the  desired

isomorphism (with ∥f∥ = ∥∥).


  Problem 4. Let E be an incomplete Euclidean space with the Hilbert space

H as its completion. Prove that E* and H are isomorphic.


  Problem 5. Particularize Theorem 2 to the case of a finite-dimensional

Euclidean space.


  Problem 6. Generalize Theorem 2 to the case of a complex Hilbert space.


  Hint. Write  instead of (14). The isomorphism of H and H*

associating the functional f(x) = (x, x) with x is then “conjugate-linear” in
                                            00

the sense that f is associated with αx.
                                          0


  Problem  7.  Let  Φ  be  the  same  countably  normed  space  of  “rapidly

decreasing sequences” as in Problem 12c, p. 172. Find the conjugate space

Φ*.

    Hint. Use Problem 6, p. 182.

  Ans. Φ* is the space of all functionals ; of the form





where f = (f, . . ., f, . . .) is any sequence satisfying the condition
            1kfor some nonnegative integer n.


  Problem 8. Let E, E*, and U be the same as in Definition 2. Verify that
                                    A,ε

the system U actually generates a topology b in E* such that the linear
              A,ε

operations in E* are continuous with respect to b. Prove that if E is a normed

linear space, then b coincides with the “norm topology” of Sec. 19.2.


  Problem 9. Let E be a topological linear space, and let b* be the strong

                                                                                      −1
topology in E** and π the natural mapping of E into E**. Prove that π is

continuous.


                                                      −1
  Hint. The topology b* induces a topology π(b*) in the space E, in which

                                                    −1
a set G ⊂ E is said to be open if its image π(G) is the intersection of π(E)

                                                          −1
with an open subset of (E**, b*). Show that π(b*) is stronger than the

original topology in E.


  Problem 10. Prove that every closed subspace of a reflexive space is itself

reflexive.



20.The Weak Topology and Weak Convergence


    20.1.  The  weak  topology  in  a  topological  linear  space. Let E  be  a

topological linear space, with conjugate space E*. Given any ε > 0 and any

finite set of continuous linear functionals f,. . .f∈E*, the set
                                                1r




is open in E and contains the point zero, i.e., U is a neighborhood of zero. Let

0 be the system of all sets of the form (1). Then 0 is a neighborhood base at

zero, generating a topology in E which is again the topology of a topological

linear space (the details are left as an exercise). This topology is called the

weak topology in E. Every subset of E which is open in the weak topology is

also open in the original topology of E, but the converse may not be true, i.e., 0 may not be a neighborhood base at zero for the original topology in E. In

other words, the weak topology is weaker (as defined on p. 80) than the

original  topology,  as  anticipated  by  the  terminology.  Clearly,  the  weak

topology in E is the weakest topology τ with the property that every linear

functional continuous with respect to the original topology is also continuous

with respect to τ.


  20.2. Weak convergence. The weak topology in E may not satisfy the

first axiom of countability, even in the case where E is a normed linear space.

Hence the weak topology cannot in general be described in the language of

convergent  sequences.  Nevertheless,  the  weak  topology  determines  an

important kind of convergence in E, called weak convergence. By contrast,

the convergence in E determined by the original topology (by the norm, if E

is a normed linear space) is called strong convergence.


  THEOREM 1. A sequence {x} of elements in a topological linear space E is
                                  n

weakly  convergent  to  an  element x ∈  E if  and  only  if  the  numerical
                                            0

sequence {f(x)} converges to f(x) for every f ∈ E, i.e., for every continuous
              n0

linear functional f on E.


  Proof. Clearly, there is no loss of generality in assuming that x = 0.
                                                                                    0

Suppose f(x) → 0 for every f ∈ E*. Then, given any “weak neighborhood”
            n

(1), let N be such that |f(x)| < ε for all n > N (i = 1, . . ., r), and let N = max
        iini

{N, . . ., N}. Then x ∈ U for all n > N, i.e., {x} converges to x in the
  1rnn0

weak topology.

    Conversely, suppose that for each neighborhood (1), there is an integer N

= N(U) such that x ∈ U for all n > N. Then obviously f(x) → 0 for any
                      nn

given f ∈ E*, as we see by choosing f to be one of the functionals f, . . ., f
                                                                                1r

figuring in the definition of U. 

    Specializing to the case where E is a normed linear space, we have


  THEOREM 2. Let {x} be a weakly convergent sequence of elements in a
                        n

normed linear space E. Then {x} is bounded, i.e., there is a constant C such
                                    n

that  Proof.  Suppose  {x}  is  unbounded.  Then  {x}  is  unbounded  on  every
                        nn

closed sphere


                              S[f,ε] = {f:∥f − f∥ ε}
                                  00


in E*, in the sense that the set of numbers


                          {(f, x)f∈S[f,ε], n = 1, 2,. ..}
                                  n0


is unbounded for every S [f, ε]⊂E*. In fact, if the sequence {x} is bounded
                              0n
    0
on S[f, ε], then it is also bounded on the sphere


                                S[0,ε] = {g:∥g∥  ε}


since if g ∈ S[0,ε], then


                                  f + g ∈ S[f,ε),
                                    00


                          (g, x) = (f + g, x) − (f, x),
                                n0n0n


where the numbers (f, x) are bounded, by the weak convergence of {x}.
                        0nn

But if |(g, x)  C for all g ∈ S[0,ε], then, by the isometry of the natural
            n

mapping of E into E**,





so that {x} is unbounded, contrary to assumption. It follows that if {x} is
          nn

unbounded, then {x} is unbounded on every closed sphere in E*.
                      n


  Next, choosing any closed sphere S ⊂ E*, we find an integer n and an
                                            01

element f ∈ S such that
              0




Since (f, x)  depends  continuously  on x,  the  inequality  (2)  holds  for  all fbelonging to some closed sphere S ∞ S. Repeating this argument, we find
                                        10

an integer n and a closed sphere S ∞ S such that
            221


                                      |(f, x)|>2
                                            n


for all f ∈ S, and so on, where in general there is an integer n and a closed
            2k

sphere S ∈ S such that
        kk−1


                                      |(f, x)|>k
                                            n


for all f ∈ S. At the same time, we can obviously see to it that the radius of
            k

the sphere S approaches zero as k → ∞. Since E* is complete, by Theorem 1,
            k

p. 187, it follows from the nested sphere theorem (Theorem 2, p. 60) that

there is an element ; contained in all the spheres S. But then
                                                            k




contrary to the assumed weak convergence of the sequence {x}. 
                                                                        n


  COROLLARY 1. Let {x} be a sequence of elements in a normed linear
                            n

space E such that the numerical sequence {(f, x)} is bounded for every f ∈
                                                        n

E*. Then {x} is bounded.
            n


  Proof. In proving Theorem 2, the weak convergence of {x} was invoked
                                                                        n

only to infer the boundedness of the sequence {(f, x)}. 
                                                        0n


  Generalizing Corollary 1, we get


  COROLLARY 2. Let  M  be  a  weakly  bounded  subset  of  a  normed  linear

space E, i.e., a subset bounded in the weak topology. Then M is strongly

bounded, i.e., M is contained in some closed sphere.


  Proof. Suppose M contains a sequence {x} such that ∥x∥ → ∞, and let M
                                                    nn

′ be the set of all points x (n = 1, 2, . . .). Since M is weakly bounded, so is M
                            n

′. This means that M′ is “absorbed” by any weak neighborhood of zero, in

particular by any neighborhood                              U = {x:|(f, x)|>1, f∈E*


in the sense that there is a number α > 0 such that M' ⊂εU. But then |(f, x)| <
                                                                                      n

α for all n, which, by Corollary 1, contradicts the assumption that ∥x∥ → 0. 
                                                                                n


  COROLLARY 3. A necessary and sufficient condition for a subset M of a

normed linear space E to be (strongly) bounded is that every continuous

linear functional f ∈ E* be bounded on M.


  Proof. The necessity follows at once from the inequality


                                    |(f, x)|∥f∥∥x∥


while the sufficiency is an immediate consequence of Corollary 2 and the

meaning of weak boundedness. 


  A useful test for weak convergence of a sequence is given by


  THEOREM 3. A bounded sequence {x} of elements in a normed linear
                                                n

space E is weakly convergent to an element x ∈ E for every f ∈ Δ, where Δ

is any set whose linear hull is everywhere dense in E*.


  Proof. Let φ be an arbitrary element of E*, and let {φ} be a sequence of
                                                                    k

linear combinations of elements of Δ converging to φ (such a sequence exists,

since Δ is everywhere dense in E*). Let C be such that




Moreover, given any ε > 0, choose k so large that ∥φ − φ∥ < ε (this is
                                                                        k

possible, since φ → φ). Then
                  k







But φ(x) → φ(x) as n → ∞, since φ is a linear combination of elements of
    knkk

Δ, and f(x) → f(x) for every f ∈ Δ, by hypothesis. Therefore we can make
          nthe right-hand side of (3) as small as we please, by choosing ε sufficiently

small and n sufficiently large. It follows that φ(x) → φ(x) for every φ ∈ E*,
                                                        n

i.e., {x} converges weakly to x. 
      n

  The meaning of weak convergence in various spaces is illustrated by the

following examples:


                                                                        n
  Example 1. Given a finite-dimensional Euclidean space R, let e, . . ., e
                                                                                1n
                                  n(k)n
be any orthonormal basis in R, and let {x} be a sequence in R converging

weakly to a vector x = x,. . ., x. Then
                          1n




                                          (k)(k)
i.e.,  for  every j  the  sequence  {x}  of  components  of  the  vectors x

converges to the corresponding component of the limit vector x. But then





                        (k)
as k → ∞, so that {x} converges strongly to x. On the other hand, strong

convergence obviously implies weak convergence in any space. Thus we see

that weak convergence and strong convergence are equivalent concepts in

n
R.


                        (k)
  Example 2. Let {x} be a (strongly) bounded sequence of elements of l.
                                                                                          2
        (k)
Then {x} converges weakly to an element x ∈ l if
                                                          2




where


                        e = (1, 0, 0,. . .)e = (0, 1, 0,. . .)
                          12


is  an  orthonormal  basis  in l.  This  follows  from Theorem 3,  since  linear
                                  2

combinations of the elements e, e, . . . are everywhere dense in l, which
                                    122

coincides with its own conjugate space (recall Problem 2a, p. 194). Thus

weak convergence in l has the same interpretation in terms of components as
                        2          n
in R, i.e., for every j the sequence 

  of  components  of  the  vectors

(k)
x  converges  to  the  corresponding  component  of  the  limit  vector x.

However,  the  concepts  of  weak  convergence  and  strong  convergence  no

longer coincide in l. In fact, although obviously not strongly convergent, the
                    2

sequence of basis vectors {e} converges weakly to zero. To see this, we note
                                k

that by Theorem 2, p. 188, every continuous linear functional f on l can be
                                                                                2

written as a scalar product


                                      f(x) = (x, a)


of a variable vector x ∈ l with a fixed vector a = (a,. . ., a,. . .)∈l, so that
                            21n2

in particular


                                        f(e = a.
                                          kk


But a → 0 as k → ∞ for every f(e), and hence f(e) → 0 = f(0).
    kkk

    Example 3. Consider the space C of all functions continuous on [a,
                                            [a, b]

b], and let {x(t)} be a sequence of functions in C converging weakly to a
              n[a, b]

function . Among the continuous linear functionals on C, we have
                                                                          [a,b]

the functionals δ, a  t  b (see Example 5, p. 179), where δ assigns to
                  t0t
                  00

each function x(t) ∈  its value at the fixed point t. Clearly,
                                                                0


                                    δ(x) → δ(x)
                                    tnt
                                      00

means that


                                      x(t→ x(t)
                                      n00


Hence, if the sequence {x(t)} is weakly convergent, then
                            n

    1){x(t)} is uniformly bounded on [a, b], i.e., there is a constant C such
          n
                                                                      9
        that |x(t)|  C for all n = 1, 2, . . . and all t ∈[a, b];
              n

    2){x(t)} is pointwise convergent on [a, b], i.e., {x(t)} is a convergent
          nn

        numerical sequence for every fixed t ∈ [a, b].


  20.3. The weak topology and weak convergence in a conjugate space.Let E be a topological linear space, with conjugate space E*. Suppose that in

Definition 2, p. 190, we require A to be finite instead of bounded. Then the

resulting topology, generated by the neighborhood base at zero consisting of

all sets of the form




for some number ε > 0 and finite set A ⊂ E, is called the weak topology in E*

instead of the strong topology. Clearly, the set (4) can also be written as




for some ε > 0 and points x,. . ., x ∈ E Since every finite set A ⊂E is
                                  1n

bounded,  while  in  general  there  are  bounded  infinite  sets  in E,  the  weak

topology in E*  is  in  fact  weaker  than  the  strong  topology  in E* (and in

general does not coincide with the strong topology).

  The weak topology in E* determines a kind of convergence in E*, called

weak convergence (of functionals). Weak convergence of functionals plays

an important role in many problems of functional analysis, in particular in the

theory  of  generalized  functions  (to  be  discussed  in  the  next  section).

Obviously, a sequence {f} of functionals f ∈ E* is weakly convergent to a
                            nn

functional f ∈ E* if and only if {f(x)} converges to f(x) for every x ∈ E.
                                      n

    For weakly convergent sequences of functionals, we have the following

analogues of Theorems 2 and 3:

    THEOREM 2′. Let {f} be a weakly convergent sequence of continuous
                          n

linear functionals on a Banach space E. Then {f} is bounded, i.e., there is a
                                                        n

constant C such that




  Proof. The proof is the exact analogue of that of Theorem 2. Note that this

time we must specify that E is a complete normed linear space (i.e., a Banach

space). 


  THEOREM 3′. A bounded sequence {f} of continuous linear functionals on
                                              n

a Banach space E is weakly convergent to a functional f ∈E* if f(x) if f(x)
                                                                              nn→ f(x) for every x ∈ Δ, where Δ is any set whose linear hull is everywhere

dense in E.


  Proof. The exact analogue of the proof of Theorem 3. 


  Example. Let E be the space C of all functions continuous on [a, b],
                                        [a,b]

and consider the functional




as in Example 3 above. For simplicity (and without loss of generality), we

assume that t = 0 ∈(a, b), so that (5) becomes
              0




                                                                                10
Let {f(t)} be a sequence of functions continuous on [a, b] such that
    n


    1)f(t) is positive if |t|< and zero if |t|>,
        n

  2) for all n = 1, 2, . . . ,

and let





    Then  is a continuous linear functional on C (recall Example 4, p.
                                                              [a,b]

179). Moreover, given any function x(t)∈C, we have
                                                  [a, b]





for some τ ∈[−1/n, 1/n], by the mean value theorem for integrals, and hence




                                                        (n)
as n → ∞. Thus the sequence of functionals {δ} converges weakly to the
                                                        0

functional δ. Suppose we write (6) in the form
            0in terms of the “delta function” δ(t), as in Example 3, p. 124. Then, loosely

speaking, (7) says that “the generalized function δ(t) is the weak limit of the

sequence of ordinary functions f(t).”
                                    n


  20.4. The weak* topology. There are two ways of regarding the space E*

of  continuous  linear  functionals  on  a  given  space E,  either  as  the  space

conjugate to the original space E, or else as an “original space” in its own

right,  with  conjugate  space E**.  Correspondingly,  there  are  two  ways  of

introducing a weak topology into E*, either by using neighborhoods of the

form (4′), or else by using the values of functionals in E** on the space E*,

as in Sec. 20.1. Clearly, the two topologies will be the same if and only if E is

reflexive (why?). Suppose E is nonreflexive. Then, to avoid confusion, the

weak topology determined in E* with the aid of E** will be called simply the

weak topology, while the topology determined in E* with the aid of E

                                          11
will be called the weak* topology. Clearly, the weak* topology in E* is

weaker than the weak topology in E*, i.e., the weak* topology has fewer

open sets than the weak topology. Note that weak convergence as defined in

Sec. 20.3 now means weak* convergence.

  The following theorem is important in various applications of the concept

of weak convergence of functionals:


  THEOREM 4. Every bounded sequence {f} of functionals in the space E*
                                                  n

conjugate  to  a  separable  normed  linear  space  E  contains  a  weakly*

convergent subsequence.


  Proof. Since E is separable, there is a countable set of points x, x, . . ., x,
                                                                            12n

. . . everywhere dense in E. Suppose the sequence {f} of functionals in E*,
                                                              n

i.e.,  continuous  linear  functionals  on E,  is  bounded  (in  norm).  Then  the

numerical sequence


                              f(x), f(x,. . ., f(x),. . .
                                1121n1


is bounded, and hence, by the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem (see p. 101), {f}
                                                                                        n

contains a subsequencesuch that the numerical sequence




converges.  By  the  same  token,  the  subsequence   in  turn  contains  a

subsequence




such that the sequence




converges. Continuing this construction, we get a system of subsequences 

    , k = 1, 2, . . . such that

  1) is a subsequence of  for all k = 1, 2, . . . ;

    2)converges at the points x, x, . . ., x.
                                            12k

Hence, taking the “diagonal sequence”




we get a sequence of continuous linear functionals on E such that




converges for all n. But then, by Theorem 3′, the sequence




    converges for all x ∈ E. 


  COROLLARY 1. Every bounded set in the space E* conjugate to a separable

normed linear space E is relatively countably compact in the weak* topology.


  Proof.  An  immediate  consequence  of Theorem  4  and  the  meaning  of

relative countable compactness (see Sec. 10.4).   COROLLARY 2. A subset of the space E* conjugate to a separable Banach

space E is bounded if and only if it is relatively countably compact in the

weak* topology.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of Theorem 2′ and Corollary 1. 


  As  we  will  see  in  a  moment,  the  word  “countably”  is  superfluous  in

Corollaries 1 and 2. First we need


  THEOREM 5. Given a separable normed linear space E, let S be the closed

unit sphere in E and S* the closed unit sphere in the conjugate space E*.

Then the topology induced in S* by the weak* topology in E* is the same as

that induced by the metric





where {x, . . ., x, . . .} is any countable set everywhere dense in S.
        1n


  Proof. Clearly, ρ(f, g) has all the properties of a metric, and moreover is

invariant under shifts, in the sense that


                              ρ(f + h, g + h) = ρ(f, g).


    Hence we need only verify that

    1)Every “open sphere”


                                  Q = {f:ρ(f, 0)<ε}
                                    ε


        contains the intersection of S* with some weak neighborhood of zero

        in E*;

    2)Every weak neighborhood of zero in E* contains the intersection of S

        with some Q.
                      ε

                      −N
Let N be such that 2 < ε/2, and consider the weak neighborhood of zero    Then f ∈ S*∩ U implies








and hence S*∩ U ⊂ Q. This proves 1).
                          ε

  To prove 2), this time let


                  U = U = {f:|f, y)>δ,. . .,|f, t)|>δ}
                          y1. . ., ym :δ1m


be any weak neighborhood of zero in E*, where it can clearly be assumed

that ∥y∥ < 1, . . ., ∥y∥ < 1. Since {x, . . ., x, . . .} is everywhere dense in S,
      1m1n

there are indices n, . . ., n such that
                    1m





Let





Then f ∈ S*∩ Q implies
                  ε





and hence

                                                n
                                      |f, x)|2ε
                                            n


in particular





Therefore f ∈ S*∩ Q implies
                        εso that S*∩ Q ⊂ U. 
              ε


  We can now drop the word “countably” in Corollaries 1 and 2:


  COROLLARY  1′. Every  bounded  set  in  the  space  E* conjugate  to  a

separable normed linear space E is relatively compact in the weak* topology.


  Proof.  Use Theorem  5  and  the  fact  that  compactness  and  countable

compactness are equivalent concepts in a metric space (see Sec. 11.2.). 


  COROLLARY 2′. A subset of the space E* conjugate to a separable Banach

space  E  is  bounded  if  and  only  if  it  is  relatively  compact  in  the  weak*

topology.


  Proof. Identical with that of Corollary 1′. 


  Finally we prove


  THEOREM  6. Every  closed  sphere  in  the  space  (E*, b) conjugate  to  a

separable normed linear space E is compact in the weak* topology.


  Proof. Every closed sphere in the space (E*, b) is closed in the weak*

topology. In fact, since a shift in E* carries every closed set (in the weak*

topology) into another closed set, we need only prove the assertion for every

sphere of the form


                                    S = {f:∥f∥c}.
                                    c


Suppose f ∉ S. Then, by the definition of the norm of the functional f, there
          000

is an element x ∈ E such that ∥x∥ = 1 and


                                    f(x) = α > c.
                                      0


But then the setis a weak* neighborhood of f containing no elements of S. Therefore S is
                                  0cc

closed in the weak* topology, and hence compact in the weak* topology, by

Corollary 1′. 


  Remark. Theorem  6  is  a  special  case  of  the  following  more  general

theorem, which will not be proved here: Every bounded subset of the space

(E*, b) conjugate to a locally convex topological linear space E is relatively

compact in the weak* topology.


  Problem 1. Given a topological linear space E, suppose E has sufficiently

many continuous linear functionals. Prove that E is a Hausdorff space, when

equipped with the weak topology.


  Problem 2. Let {x} be a sequence of elements in a Hilbert space H such
                        n

that

    1){x} converges weakly to an element x ∈ H;
          n

    2)∥x∥ → ∥x∥ as n → ∞.
          n


Prove that {x} converges strongly to x, i.e., ∥x − x∥ → 0 as n → ∞.
              nn


  Problem 3. Prove that the conclusion of the preceding problem remains

valid if the condition 2) is replaced by either of the following conditions:


    2′)∥x∥  ∥x∥ for all n;
            n

    2″)


  Problem 4. Let H be a (separable) Hilbert space and M a bounded subset

of H. Prove that the topology in M induced by the weak topology in H can be

specified by a metric.


  Problem 5. Prove that every closed convex subset of a Hilbert space H is

closed  in  the  weak  topology  (so  that,  in  particular,  every  closed  linear

subspace of H is weakly closed). Give an example of a closed set in H which

is not weakly closed.  Problem  6.  Show  that  the  two  conditions  in Example  3,  p.  199  are

sufficient as well as necessary for weak convergence of a sequence {x(t)} in
                                                                                  n

C. Give an example of a weakly convergent sequence in C which is
[a,b][a,b]

not strongly convergent.



21. Generalized Functions


    21.1. Preliminary remarks. The degree of generality attaching to the

notion of “function” varies from problem to problem. Some problems involve

continuous  functions,  others  involve  functions  differentiable  one  or  more

times, and so on. However, there are a number of situations in which the

classical  notion  of  a  function  turns  out  to  be  inadequate,  even  when

understood in the most general sense (i.e., as an arbitrary rule f assigning a

number f(x) to each element x in the domain of definition of f). Here are two

such cases:

  1)A  linear  mass  distribution  can  be  conveniently  characterized  by

        giving  the  density  of  the  distribution.  However,  no  “ordinary”

        function can specify the density corresponding to one or more points

        with positive mass.

  2)In many problems, situations arise in which various mathematical

        operations cannot be carried out. For example, a function with no

        derivative (at certain, possibly all, points) cannot be differentiated if

        the  derivative  is  interpreted  in  the  usual  way,  as  an  “ordinary”

        function.  Of  course,  such  difficulties  can  be  avoided  without

          relinquishing classical definitions, by suitably restricting the class of

        “admissible  functions,”  for  example,  by  considering  only  analytic

        functions. However, restricting the class of admissible functions in

        this  way  is  often  quite  undesirable.  Fortunately,  it  turns  out  that

        difficulties of this kind can be overcome, and just as successfully at

        that, by enlarging  (rather  than  restricting)  the  class  of  admissible

        functions, i.e., by introducing the notion of a “generalized function,”

        not encountered in classical analysis. In doing so, a key role will be

        played by the concept of a conjugate space, considered earlier in this

        chapter.


  Remark.  It  cannot  be  emphasized  too  strongly  that  the  introduction  ofgeneralized functions is motivated by the need to solve perfectly concrete

problems of analysis, and not merely by a desire to see how far the notion of

function can be pushed.


  Before going into details, we indicate the basic idea behind the theory of

generalized functions. Let f be a fixed function on the real line, integrable on

every finite interval, and let φ be any continuous function vanishing outside

                                                                    12
some finite interval (such a function φ is said to be finite). Suppose each φ

is assigned the number





involving the given function f, where the integration is in effect only over a

finite interval, because of the finiteness of φ. In other words, the function f

can be regarded as a functional (a linear functional, because of the basic

properties  of  the  integral)  defined  on  some  space K  of  finite  functions.

However, there are many other linear functionals on K besides functionals of

the form (1). For example, by assigning each function φ its value at the point

x = 0, we get a linear functional which cannot be represented in the form (1).

In this sense, the functions f can be regarded as part of a much larger set,

namely the set of all possible linear functionals on K. The space K of “test

functions” φ can be chosen in various ways. For example, K might consist of

all continuous finite functions, as above. However, as will soon be apparent,

it  makes  sense  to  require  the  test  functions  to  satisfy  rather  stringent

smoothness conditions (besides being continuous and finite).


  21.2. The test space and test functions. Generalized functions. Turning

now to details, let K be the set of all finite functions φ on (− ∞, ∞) with

continuous  derivatives  of  all  orders  (equivalently,  the  set  of  all  infinitely

differentiable functions), where every function φ ∈ K, being finite, vanishes

outside some interval depending on the choice of φ. Clearly K is a linear

space, when equipped with the usual operations of addition of functions and

multiplication  of  functions  by  numbers.  Although  the  space K  is  not

normable, there is a natural way of introducing the notion of convergence in

K:


  DEFINITION 1. A sequence {φ} of functions in K is said to converge to a
                                    nfunction φ ∈ K if

    1)There exists an interval outside which all the functions φ vanish;
                                                                            n

    2)The sequence φ of derivatives of order k converges uniformly

                                (k)13
        on this interval to φ for every k = 0, 1, 2, . . . .

The linear space K equipped with this notion of convergence is called the test

space  (or fundamental  space), and  the  functions  in  K  are  called test

functions (or fundamental functions).


  DEFINITION 2. Every continuous linear functional T(φ) on the test space K

is called a generalized function on (− ∞, ∞), where continuity of T(φ) means

that φ → φ in K implies T(φ) → T(φ).
    nn


  Let f(x) be a locally integrable function, i.e., a function integrable on every

finite interval. Then f(x) generates a generalized function via the expression





which is clearly a continuous linear functional on K. Generalized functions of

this type will be called regular, and all other generalized functions, i.e., those

not representable in the form (2), will be called singular. The following are

all examples of singular generalized functions:


  Example 1. The “delta function”




is a continuous linear functional on K, i.e., a generalized function in the sense

of Definition 2. This functional can be written in the form





                                          14
where δ(x) is a “fictitious” function, equal to zero everywhere except at x =

0 and such that(these  properties  are  of  course  paradoxical),  since  then  we  have,  purely

formally,





The advantage of regarding the delta function as a functional on the test space

K  rather  than  on  the  space C  as  in Example 3,  p.  124  will  soon  be
                                    [a,b]

apparent.


  Example 2. Generalizing (3) and (4), we can write the functional




  in the form





in terms of the “shifted delta function” δ(x − a).


  21.3.  Operations  on  generalized  functions.  Addition  of  generalized

functions and multiplication of generalized functions by numbers are defined

in  the  same  way  as  for  linear  functionals  in  general,  i.e.,  by  the  obvious

analogue of Definition 1, p. 183 (with φ and K playing the roles of x and E).

In  the  case  of  regular  generalized  functions,  these  are  just  the  operations

associated with the corresponding operations for “ordinary” functions. More

exactly, if





where f and g are locally integrable and φ ∈ E, then clearly


                  (T + T) + T(φ) = T(φ) + T(φ) = T(φ)
                      fgGfgf+g


and


                              (αT(φ) = αT(φ) = T(φ)
                                  ffαf


for any number α.  DEFINITION  3. A  sequence  of  generalized  functions  {T} is  said  to
                                                                          n

converge to a generalized function T if T(φ) → T(φ) for every φ ∈ K. The
                                                n

space of generalized functions equipped with this notion of convergence is

denoted by K*.


  Remark.  In  other  words,  convergence  of  generalized  functions  is  just

weak* convergence of continuous linear functionals on K.


  We  will  often  denote  a  generalized  function  by  the  symbol f,  as  if  a

representation of the form





existed, even in the case where the generalized function is singular. Let f be a

regular generalized function, and let α = α(x) be an infinitely differentiable

“ordinary” function. Then (5) implies







where αφ obviously belongs to K. Carrying this over to the singular case, we

get


  DEFINITION 4. The product αf of an infinitely differentiable function α and

a generalized function f is the functional defined by the formula




  Remark. It follows from (6) that the functional αf is linear and continuous,

and hence itself a generalized function.


  Again let T be a regular generalized function of the form





and suppose the derivative f′ exists and is locally integrable. Then it is naturalto define the derivative of T as the functional





Integrating (7) by parts and using the fact that every test function φ vanishes

outside some finite interval, we find at once that





thereby  obtaining  an  expression  for dT/dx  which  does  not  involve  the

derivative of f. Carrying this over to the singular case, we get


  DEFINITION  5. The  derivative  dT/dx  of  a  generalized  function  T  is  the

functional defined by the formula







  Remark 1.  The  functional  (9)  is  obviously  linear  and  continuous,  and

hence itself a generalized function. Second, third and higher-order derivatives

are defined in the same way.


  Remark 2. If a generalized function is denoted by the symbol f, as in (6),

then its derivative is denoted by f′, and (9) takes the form




  It is an immediate consequence of Definition 5 that

    1)Every generalized function has derivatives of all orders;

  2)If  a  sequence  of  generalized  functions  {f}  converges  to  a
                                                                  n

        generalized  function f  (in  the  sense  of Definition  3),  then  the

        sequence of derivatives {f′}  converges  to  the  derivative f′ of the
                                          n
                        15
        limit function.


  Example 1. If f is a regular generalized function whose derivative existsand is locally integrable (in particular, continuous or piecewise continuous),

then the derivative of f as a generalized function coincides with its derivative

in the ordinary sense. In fact, integrating (8) by parts, we get back (7).


  Example 2. As in Example 1, p. 208, consider the delta function




It follows from Definition 5 that





    Example 3. Consider the “step function”





    defining the linear functional






It follows from Definition 5 that





since φ vanishes at infinity. Hence the derivative of (10) is just the delta

function δ(x).


  21.4.  Differential  equations  and  generalized  functions.  The

development  of  the  theory  of  generalized  functions  was  to  a  large  extent

motivated by problems involving differential equations, particularly partial

differential  equations.  We  now  discuss  a  few  simple  ideas  concerning

generalized functions and ordinary differential equations. The application of

generalized  functions  to  partial  differential  equations  is  a  subject  lying

                                  16
beyond the scope of this book.  LEMMA  1. A  test  function  φ can  be  represented  as  the  derivative  of
                                      0

another test function φ if and only if
                        1





  Proof. If φ(x) = φ′(x), where φ is a test function, then
              011





Conversely,





is an infinitely differentiable function, with derivative φ(x), and in fact a
                                                                    0

finite function if (11) holds, since then φ and φ vanish outside the same
                                                  01

interval. 


  LEMMA 2. Let φ be a fixed test function such that
                    1





Then an arbitrary test function φ can be represented in the form


                                    φ = φ + cφ,
                                            01


where c is a constant and φ is a test function which is the derivative of
                                  0

another test function.


  Proof. Let





Thenand the proof follows from Lemma 1. 


  THEOREM 1. Every solution of the differential equation




(in the space K* of generalized functions) is a constant.


  Proof. Equation (13) means that




for every φ ∈ K. This determines the value of the functional





for  every  function  in  the  space K' ⊂ K  of  all  test  functions  which  are

derivatives of other test functions. In fact,


                                      (y, φ) = 0
                                            1


for every φ ∈ K'. Let φ be an arbitrary test function. By Lemma 2, φ = φ +
            00

cφ, where φ ∈K' and φ is a fixed test function satisfying the condition
  101

(12). We are free to give (y, φ) any value at all, without violating (14). Let
                                  1


                                  (y,φ) = α = const.
                                      1


Then


              (y,φ) = (y,φ + cφ) = (y,φ) + αc(y, φ) = αc = const
                            0101


and moreover y satisfies the differential equation (13). In fact, φ ∈ E implies

and hence


                                (y',φ) = (y, −φ') = 0. 


    COROLLARY. If  two  generalized  functions  f  and  g  have  the  same

derivative, then f = g + const.  Proof. Obvious, since (f − g)′ = 0. 


  THEOREM 2. Given any generalized function f, there is another generalized

function y satisfying the differential equation




    Proof.  Any  generalized  function  satisfying  (15)  is  called  an anti-

derivative of f. Equation (15) means that





for every φ ∈ K. This determines the value of the functional (y, φ) for every

function in the space K' ⊂ K of all test functions which are derivatives of

other test functions. In fact,





for every φ ∈ K'. Let φ be an arbitrary test function. By Lemma 2, φ = φ +
            00

cφ, where φ ∈ K' and φ is a fixed test function satisfying (12). We are free
  101

to give (y, φ) any value at all, without violating (16). Let
            1


                                  (y, φ) = α = const.
                                      1


Then y satisfies the differential equation (15). In fact, φ ∈ K implies — φ' ∈

K' and hence





    COROLLARY. Any two antiderivatives of a generalized function f differ only

by a constant.


  Proof. Obvious by construction or from the corollary to Theorem 1. 


  21.5.  Further  developments.  We  now  sketch  some  of  the  many

extensions and modifications of the notion of generalized functions.                                                                    n
  a) Generalized  functions  of  several  variables. Let K  be  the  set  of  all

functions φ(x, . . ., x) of n variables with partial derivatives of all orders
              1n

with respect to all arguments, such that every φ ∈ K vanishes outside some
                                                              n

parallelepiped




                        n
in n-space.  Then K  is  a  linear  space,  with  addition  of  functions  and

multiplication  of  functions  by  numbers  defined  in  the  usual  way.  We

                                n
introduce convergence in K by the natural generalization of Definition 1,

                                            n
i.e., a sequence {φ} of functions in K is said to converge to a function φ ∈
                    k
n
K if

    1)There exists a parallelepiped (17) outside which all the functions φ
                                                                                          k

        vanish;

    2)The sequence of partial derivatives





        converges uniformly on this parallelepiped to the partial derivative





        for all r, α, . . ., α.
                    1n

                                              n
Every continuous linear functional on K is then called a generalized function

of n variables, and moreover every “ordinary” function f(x, . . ., x) of n
                                                                        1n

variables integrable on every parallelepiped can be regarded as a generalized

function, in fact the one giving rise to the functional


                                (f, φ) = ∫ f(x) φ (x) dx,


where


                        x = x,. . ., x),dx = dx . . . dx
                                1n1n


and the integral is over all of n-space. Convergence of generalized functionsis defined by the obvious analogue of Definition 3, while partial derivatives

of generalized functions are defined by the formula






It is clear that every generalized function of n variables has partial derivatives

of all orders.


  b) Complex generalized functions. So far we have only considered real

generalized  functions.  Suppose  the  test  functions  are  now  allowed  to  be

complex-valued,  but  still  finite  and  infinitely  differentiable.  Then  every

continuous linear functional on the corresponding test space K is called a

complex generalized function. If (f, φ) is such a functional, then


                                  (f, αφ) = α (f, φ).


We  can  also  consider  conjugate-linear  functionals  on K,  satisfying  the

condition (cf. p. 123)


                                  (f, αφ) =  (f, φ).


where  the  overbar  denotes  the  complex  conjugate.  If f  is  an  “ordinary”

complex-valued  function  on  the  line,  there  are  two  natural  ways  of

associating linear functionals with f, i.e.,








and two natural ways of associating conjugate-linear functionals with f:








Each of these four choices corresponds to a possible way of embedding thespace  of  “ordinary”  functions  in  the  space  of  generalized  functions.

Operations on complex generalized functions are defined by analogy with the

real case.


  c) Generalized  functions  on  the  circle.  Sometimes  it  is  convenient  to

consider  generalized  functions  defined  on  a  bounded  set.  As  a  simple

example, consider generalized functions on a circle C, choosing the test space

K to be the set of all infinitely differentiable functions on C, equipped with
C

the usual operations of addition of functions and multiplication of functions

by numbers. (Note that the test functions are now automatically finite, since

C is bounded.) Then every continuous linear functional on K is called a
                                                                            C

generalized function on the circle. Every “ordinary” function on C can be

regarded as a periodic function on the line. In the same way, we regard every

generalized function on the circle as a periodic generalized function, where a

generalized function f is said to be periodic, with period a, if


                            (f (x), φ(x – a)) = (f(x), φ(x))


for every test function φ ∈ K.


  d) Other test spaces. There are many possible choices of the test space

other than the space of infinitely differentiable finite functions. For example,

we  can  choose  the  test  space  to  be  the  somewhat  larger  space S  of  all
                                                                                  ∞

infinitely differentiable functions which, together with all their derivatives,

approach  zero  faster  than  any  power  of  1/|x|.  More  exactly,  a  function  φ

belongs to S if and only if, given any p, q = 0, 1, 2, . . ., there is a constant
            ∞
                                              17
C (depending on p, q and φ) such that
pq

                            p(q)
                          |x φ (x)| < C(– ∞ < x ∞).
                                            pq


A sequence {φ} of functions in S is said to converge to a function φ ∈ S
                n∞∞

if

                              (q)(q)
    1)The  sequence  {φ}  converges  uniformly  to  φ  on  every  finite
                              n

        interval;

    2)The constants C in the inequalities
                          pq                                    p(q)
                                  |x φ (x)| < C
                                          npq


        can be chosen independently of n.


  There are somewhat fewer continuous linear functionals on S than on K.
                                                                            ∞
                                            x2
For  example,  the  function f (x)  = e  corresponds  to  a  continuous  linear

functional (f, φ) on K but not on S.
                                      ∞


  Remark. As the theory of generalized functions has evolved, it has become

apparent that there is no need to commit oneself once and for all to any

definite choice of test space. Rather it is best to choose a test space which is

most  suitable  for  solving  the  class  of  problems  at  hand.  In  general,  the

smaller  the  test  space,  the  greater  the  freedom  in  carrying  out  various

analytical operations (differentiation, passage to the limit, etc.) and the larger

the number of continuous linear functionals on the space (why?). However,

we must make sure not to make the test space too small, i.e., we must require

not only that the test functions be “sufficiently smooth” but also that there be

“sufficiently many” of them (in the sense of Problem 9) to allow us to “tell

                    18
ordinary functions apart.”


  Problem  1.  In  the  test  space K  of  all  infinitely  differentiable  finite

functions, let  be the neighborhood base at zero consisting of all sets of the
                0

form

                                                          (n)
      U,. . ., = {φ : φ ∈ K, |φ(x)| < γ(x),. . .,|φ(x)| γ (n) for all x}
        γ0γ00n


for some positive functions γ, . . ., γ continuous on (− ∞, ∞). Prove that the
                                0n

topology generated in K by  leads to the same kind of convergence in K as
                                  0

in Definition 1.

    Comment.  There  are  other  topologies  in K  leading  to  the  same

convergence.


  Problem 2. Let K be the test space of all infinitely differentiable finite

functions, and let K be the subspace of K consisting of all functions φ ∈ K
                      m

vanishing outside the interval [−m, m]. We can make K into a countably
                                                                    mnormed space by setting





(cf. Problem 12a, p. 171). Verify that the topology induced in K by the
                                                                                m

system  of  norms ∥·∥  coincides  with  the  topology  induced  in K  by  the
                        nm

topology of Problem 1. Verify that the convergence in K induced in K by
                                                                    mm

the  norms ∥·∥  coincides  with  the  convergence  induced  in K  by  the
                nm

convergence in Definition 1. Clearly K ⊂ K ⊂ . . . ⊂ K ⊂ . . ., and
                                            12m





Show that a set Q ⊂ K is bounded with respect to the topology in K if and

only if there is an integer m such that Q is a bounded subset of the countably

normed space K.
                m


  Problem 3. Let K and K be the same as in Problem 2, and let T be a
                                m

linear  functional  on K.  Prove  that  the  following  four  conditions  are

equivalent:

  a)T is continuous with respect to the topology of the space K;

  b)T is bounded on every bounded subset Q ⊂ K;

  c)If φ ∈ K and φ → 0, then T(φ) → 0 (provided convergence of
            nnn

        sequences is defined as in Definition 1);

    d)The restriction T of the functional T to the space K ⊂ K  is  a
                            mm

        continuous functional on K for every m = 1, 2, . . .
                                        m


  Problem 4. Let





for every φ in the test space K. Prove that T(φ) is a generalized function if the

integral is understood in the sense of the Cauchy principal value.

    Hint. If φ vanishes outside the interval [a, b], write  Problem 5. Prove that the delta function and its derivative are singular

generalized functions. Prove that the same is true of (18).


  Problem  6.  Prove  that  addition  of  two  generalized  functions  and

multiplication  of  a  generalized  function  by  an  infinitely  differentiable

function α (in particular, a constant) are continuous operations in the sense

that f → f,  →  implies f +  → f + , αf → αf. Prove that there is no
    nnnnn

way of similarly defining a continuous product of two generalized functions,

unless the functions are regular, in which case the appropriate definition is T
                                                                                          fg

= TT where
  fg







  Problem  7.  Let f  be  a  piecewise  continuous  function  on  (−  ∞,  ∞),

differentiable everywhere except at the points x, x, . . ., x, . . ., where it has
                                                        12n

jumps


                    f(x + 0) – f(x + 0) = h(n = 1, 2,. . .).
                        nnn


Prove that the generalized derivative of f (i.e., the derivative of f regarded as a

generalized function) is the sum of its ordinary derivative (at the points where

it exists) and the generalized function





  Comment. Note that (g, φ) reduces to a finite sum for every test function

φ.


  Problem 8. Find the generalized derivative of the function of period 2π

equal toin the interval [−π, π].


  Ans. 


  Comment. The function (19) is the sum of the trigonometric series





Differentiating (20) term by term, we get the divergent series





Hence the concept of a generalized function allows us to ascribe a definite

meaning to a series that diverges in the ordinary sense. The same can be done

for many divergent integrals (like those encountered in quantum field theory

and other branches of theoretical physics).


  Problem 9. Prove that the test space K of all infinitely differentiable finite

functions has “sufficiently many” functions in the sense that, given any two

distinct continuous functions f and f, there exists a function φ ∈ K such that
                                  12





    Hint. Since f(x) = f(x) − f(x) ≢ 0, there is a point x such that f(x) ≠ 0,
                          1200

and hence an interval [α, β] in which f(x) does not change sign. LetThen φ ∈ K and





  Comment.  This  result  can  be  extended  to  functions  more  general  than

continuous functions, with the help of the concept of the Lebesgue integral

(introduced in Sec. 29).


  Problem 10. Consider the homogeneous system of n linear differential

equations





in n unknowns y, . . ., y, where the a are infinitely differentiable functions.
                  1nik

Prove that every solution of (21) in the class K* of generalized functions is a

set of “ordinary” (in fact, infinitely differentiable) functions.


  Comment.  This  can  be  expressed  by  saying  that  every  “generalized

solution” of (21) is also a “classical solution.”


  Problem 11. Consider the nonhomogeneous system of n linear differential

equations





where the a are infinitely differentiable functions and the f are generalized
            iki

functions.  Prove  that  (22)  has  a  generalized  solution,  which  is  unique  to

within a solution of the homogeneous system (21). What happens if the f are
                                                                                      i

“ordinary” functions?


  Problem 12. Interpret





as a periodic generalized function.  Hint. Recall Problem 8.


  Problem  13.  Show  that S  becomes  a  countably  normed  space  when
                                  ∞

equipped with the system of norms






Prove  that  convergence  of  sequences  in  this  countably  normed  space  is

equivalent to convergence of sequences in S as defined on p. 216.
                                                  ∞




  1
 Recall footnote 14, p. 110.

  2
 See Theorem 6 and Problems 7–8.

  3
 Recall Problem 10, p. 171.

  4
 A sequence {f}, or f = (f, . . ., f, . . .) in “point notation,” is said to be absolutely summable if
                k1k





  5
 As opposed to the weak topology in E*, to be discussed in Sec. 20.3.

  6
 See Problem 8.

  7
 Recall Problem 8, p. 183.

  8
 The set π(E) need not be closed.

  9
 This follows from Theorem 2.

  10
 As an exercise, give an explicit example of such a sequence {f(t)}.
                                                            n

  11
 Read “weak*” as “weak star.–

  12
 Do not confuse the notion of a finite function (which vanishes outside some finite interval) with
the notion of a bounded function (whose range is contained in some finite interval). Finite functions are
often called “functions of finite (or compact) support.”

  13
 As always, .

  14
 The term “delta function” will be applied to both the generalized function T(φ) and the fictitious
function δ(x) generating T(φ) via the representation (4).

  15
 Equivalently, every convergent series of generalized functions can be differentiated term by termany number of times.

  16
 See e.g., A. Friedman, Generalized Functions and Partial Differential Equations, Prentice-Hall,
Inc.,  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.  (1963).  A  key  role  in  the  development  of  the  theory  of  generalized
functions was played by the pioneer work of L. Schwartz, Théorie des Distributions, Hermann et Cie.,
Paris, Volume 1 (1957), Volume 2 (1959).

  17
 As an exercise, verify that this is the same space S as in Problem 12b, p. 172.
                                                  ∞

  18
 More exactly, regular generalized functions.                                          6



                        LINEAR OPERATORS









22.Basic Concepts


  22.1. Definitions and examples. Given two topological linear spaces E

and E, any mapping
    1


                              y = Ax(x ∈ E, y ∈ E)
                                                          1


of a subset of E (possibly E itself) into E is called an operator (from E to
                                                  1

E). The operator A is said to be linear if
1


                            A(αx + βx) = αAx + βAx.
                                  1212


Let D be the set of all x ∈ E for which A is defined. Then D is called the
    AA

domain (of definition) of the operator A. Although in general D need not
                                                                              A

equal E, we will always assume that D is a linear subspace of E, i.e., that x, y
                                            A

∈ D implies αx + βy ∈ D for all α and β.
    AA

  The operator A is said to be continuous at the point x ∈ D if, given any
                                                                  0

neighborhood V of the point y = Ax, there is a neighborhood U of the point
                                  00

x such that Ax ∈ V for all x ∈ U ∩ D . We say that the operator A is
0A

continuous if it is continuous at every point x ∈ D.
                                                    0A


  Remark 1. Suppose E and E are normed linear spaces. Then it is easy to
                                    1see that A is continuous if and only if, given any ε > 0, there is a δ > 0 such

that


                            || x' – x'' || < δ(x', x'' ∈ D)
                                                            A


implies


                                  || Ax' – Ax'' || < ε.


  Remark 2. In the case where E is the real line, the concept of a linear
                                        1

operator reduces to that of a linear functional, and the definition of continuity

reduces to that given on p. 175. As we will see below, much of the theory of

linear functionals carries over in a straightforward way to the case of linear

operators.


  Example 1. Given a topological linear space E, let Ix = x for all x ∈ E.

Then I is a continuous linear operator, called the identity (or unit) operator,

carrying each element of E into itself.


  Example 2. Let E and E be arbitrary topological linear spaces, and let Ox
                              1

= 0 for all x ∈ E, where 0 is the zero element of the space E. Then O is a
                                                                          1

continuous linear operator, called the zero operator.


  Example 3. Suppose A is a linear operator mapping the m-dimensional

      mn
space R with basis e, . . ., e into the n-dimensional space R with basis e′,
                        1m1
                                          m
. . ., e′. If x is an arbitrary vector in R, then
    n





and hence, by the linearity of A,





                                                                                          n
Thus the operator A is completely determined once we know the vectors in R

into which A carries the basis vectors e, . . ., e. Suppose we expand each
                                              1m

vector Ae with respect to the basis e′, . . ., e′, obtaining
          j1nThen





and hence





i.e., the operator A is completely determined by the matrix ∥a∥ made up of
                                                                          ij

the coefficients a.
                  ij


  Example 4. Let H be any subspace of a Hilbert space H, and let H = H 
                        12

H be the orthogonal complement of H, so that an arbitrary element h ∈ H
11

has a unique representation of the form


                        h = h + h(h ∈ H, h ∈ H)
                                121122


(see Theorem 14, p. 158). Let


                                        Ph = h.
                                                1


Then P  is  a  continuous  linear  operator,  called  a projection  operator.

Interpreted geometrically, P “projects the whole space H onto the subspace

H.”
1


  22.2. Continuity and boundedness. A linear operator mapping E into E
                                                                                          1

is said to be bounded if it maps every bounded subset of E into a bounded

subset of E. The operator analogue of Theorem 3, p. 176 for functionals is
            1

given by

    THEOREM  1. A  necessary  condition  for  a  linear  operator  A  to  be

continuous  on  a  topological  linear  space  E  is  that  A  be  bounded.  The

condition is also sufficient if E satisfies the first axiom of countability.  Proof. To prove the necessity, suppose A is continuous and suppose there

is  a  bounded  set M  in E  whose  image AM  =  {y  : y  = Ax, x ∈ M}  is
                              1

unbounded in E. Then there is a neighborhood V of zero in E such that none
                11

of the sets


 AM (n = 1, 2,...)


is contained in V. Hence there is a sequence {x} of elements of M such that
                                                        n

none of the elements


 Ax(n = 1, 2,...)
                                      n


belongs to V. But then the sequence





converges to zero in E (recall Problem 6b, p. 170), while the sequence





fails  to  converge  to  zero  in E,  contrary  to  the  assumption  that A  is
                                      1

continuous.

  As for the sufficiency, let {U} be a countable neighborhood base at zero
                                      n

in E such that


                            U ⊃ U ⊃ ... ⊃ U ⊃ ....
                              12n


If A fails to be continuous on E, then, by the operator analogue of Theorem 1,

      1
p. 175, there is a neighborhood V of zero in E and a sequence {x} in E
                                                          1n

such that





The sequence {nx} is bounded in E (and even converges to zero), while the
                    nsequence {nAx} is unbounded in E, since it is contained in none of the sets
                n1

nV. But then A fails to be bounded on the bounded set {x, x, . . ., x, . . .},
                                                                    12n

contrary to hypothesis. 


  Next we consider the operator analogues of Definition 2 and Theorem 4,

p. 177. Suppose E and E are both normed linear spaces, so that in particular,
                            1

E  satisfies  the  first  axiom  of  countability.  Then,  by Theorem 1,  a  linear

operator A mapping E into E is continuous if and only if it is bounded. But
                                1

by a bounded set in a normed linear space we mean a set contained in some

closed sphere ∥x∥  C. Therefore a linear operator A on a normed linear

space is bounded (and hence continuous) if and only if it is bounded on every

closed sphere ∥x∥  C, or equivalently on the closed unit sphere ∥x∥  1,

because of the linearity of A. In other words, A is bounded if and only if the

number





is finite.


    DEFINITION. Given a bounded linear operator mapping a normed linear

space E into another normed linear space E, the number (1), equal to the
                                                    1

least upper bound of ∥Ax∥ on the closed unit sphere ∥x∥  1, is called the

norm of A.


  THEOREM 2. The norm ∥A∥ has the following two properties:








    Proof. Clearly,





(why?). But the set of all vectors in E of norm 1 coincides with the set of allvectors





and hence





which proves (2). Moreover, since the vectors (4) all have norm 1, it follows

from (1) that





which implies (3) for x ≠ 0. The validity of (3) for x = 0 is obvious. 


  22.3. Sums and products of operators. Let A and B be two operators

from one topological linear space E to another topological linear space E.
                                                                                          1

Then by the sum of A and B,  denoted  by A + B,  we  mean  the  operator

assigning the element


                                  y = Ax + Bx ∈ E
                                                      1


to each x ∈ E. The domain D of the sum C = A + B is just the intersection
                                  C

D ∩ D of the domains of A and B. It is clear that C is linear if A and B are
AB

linear, and continuous if A and B are continuous. Let E and E be normed
                                                                            1

linear spaces, and suppose A and B are bounded operators. Then C = A + B is

also bounded, with norm


                                || C ||  || A || + || B ||,


since, by Theorem 2 and Problem 10,


          || C || = || Ax + Bx ||  || Ax || + || Bx ||  (|| A || + || B ||) || x ||
              x


for every x ∈ E.

    Next, given three topological linear spaces E, E and E, let A be an
                                                                12operator from E to E and B an operator from E to E. Then by the product
                        112

of A and B, denoted by BA (in that order), we mean the operator assigning the

element


                                  z = B(Ax) ∈ E
                                                    2


to each x ∈ E. The domain D of the product C = BA consists of those x ∈
                                  C

D for which x ∈ D. Again it is clear that C is linear if A and B are linear,
AB

and continuous if A and B are continuous. Let E, E and E be normed linear
                                                            12

spaces, and suppose A and B are bounded operators. Then C = BA is also

bounded, with norm


                                || C ||  || A || || B || ,


since


              || Cx || = || B(Ax) ||  || B || || Ax ||  || B || || A || || x ||.


  Remark 1. Sums and products of three or more operators are defined in the

natural way, e.g.,


                              CBA = C(BA) = (CB)A,


                      A + B + C = A +(B + C) = (A + B) + C.


Note  that  addition  of  operators  is  associative  and  commutative,  while

multiplication  of  operators  is  associative  but  in  general  not  commutative

(give an example where AB ≠ BA).


  Remark 2. By the product αA of the operator A and the number α is meant

the operator assigning the element αAx to each x ∈ E. Let (E, E) be the set
                                                                            1

of all continuous linear operators mapping E into E. Then (E, E) is clearly
                                                            11

a linear space when equipped with the operations of addition of operators and

multiplication of operators by numbers.


  Problem 1. Prove that every linear operator on a finite-dimensional space

is automatically continuous (cf. Problem 2, p. 181).


  Problem 2. Let A be a linear operator mapping m-space R into n-space
                                                                          mnmm
R.  Prove  that  the  image  of R,  i.e.,  the  set  {y  : y  = Ax, x ∈ R,  has

dimension no greater than m.


  Problem 3. Let C be the linear space of functions continuous on the
                        [a,b]

interval a  x  b, equipped with the norm





Let K(x, y) be a fixed function of two variables, continuous on the square a 

x  b, a  y  b, and let A be the operator defined by





Prove that A is a continuous linear operator mapping C into itself.
                                                                [a,b]


  Problem 4.  Let   be  the  space  of  functions  continuous  on  [a, b],

equipped with the norm





and  let A  be  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  problem.  Prove  that A  is  a

continuous linear operator mapping  into itself.


  Problem 5. Given a fixed function φ(x) continuous on [a, b], let A be the

mapping defined by


                              g(x) = Af(x) = φ(x) f(x).


Prove that A is a continuous linear operator on both spaces C and ,
                                                                          [a,b]

mapping each space into itself.


  Problem 6. Let  be the set of all continuously differentiable functions

on [a, b], and let D be the differentiation operator, defined by


                                      Df(x) = f'(x)  for all . Prove that

  a) is a linear space;

  b)D is a linear operator mapping  onto C;
                                                            [a,b]

  c)D is not continuous on C;
                                      [a,b]

  d)D is continuous with respect to the norm





  Problem 7. Let K be the space of infinitely differentiable functions on
                      [a,b]

[a, b],  equipped  with  the  topology  generated  by  the  countable  system  of

norms





(cf. Problem  12a,  p.  171).  Prove  that  the  differentiation  operator D  is  a

continuous linear operator on K, mapping K onto itself.
                                    [a,b][a,b]


  Problem 8.  Interpret  the  differentiation  operator  as  a  continuous  linear

operator on the space of all generalized functions.


  Hint. Take continuity to mean that if a sequence of generalized functions

{f(x)} converges to a generalized function f(x), then {f′(x)} converges to f
nn

′(x).


  Problem 9. Prove that

    a)The operators in Problems 3–7 and Examples 1–4,  p.  222  are  all

        bounded;

  b)A linear operator on a countably normed space is continuous if and

        only if it is bounded.


  Problem 10. Let A be a bounded linear operator mapping a normed linear

space E into another normed linear space E. Suppose ∥A∥ is defined as the
                                                  1

smallest number C such that ∥Af∥  C ∥f∥ for all x ∈ E. Prove that ∥A∥ is the

same number as in the definition on p. 224. Particularize this to the case of abounded linear functional on E.


  Problem 11. Let E and E be normed linear spaces, and let (E, E) be the
                                11

same as in Remark 2 above. Prove that

    a)(E, E) is a normed linear space;
                1

  b)If E is complete, so is (E, E);
            11

  c)If E is complete, (E, E and
            11





        then the series





        converges to an operator A ∈ (E, E) and
                                                    1






23.Inverse and Adjoint Operators


    23.1. The inverse operator. Invertibility. Given two topological linear

spaces E and E, let A be an operator from E to E, with domain D ⊂ E and
                11A

range R = {y : y = Ax, x ∈ D. Then A is said to be invertible if the equation
      AA




has a unique solution for every y ∈ R. If A is invertible, we can associate
                                              A

the unique solution of (1) with each y ∈ R. This gives an operator, with
                                                    A
                                                            −1
domain R, called the inverse of A and denoted by A.
          A


                                −1
  THEOREM 1. The inverse A of a linear operator A is itself linear.


  Proof. If                                Ax = y,Ax = y,
                                    1122


then

                                −1−1
                              Ay = x,Ay = x,
                                    1122


and hence




On the other hand,


                            A(αx + αx) = αy + αy,
                                11221122


by the linearity of A, and hence




Comparing (2) and (3), we get

                      −1−1−1
                    A (αx + αx) = αAy + αAy.
                            11221122


  LEMMA. If M is an everywhere dense subset of a normed linear space E,

then every nonzero element y ∈ E is the sum of a series of the form


                              y = y + y + ... + y + ...,
                                    12k


where y ∈ M and
      k





  Proof. Since M is everywhere dense in E, given any y ∈ E, there is an

element y ∈ M such that
          1





By the same token, there are elements y, y, . . ., y, . . . such that
                                              23kThen





as n → ∞, by the construction of the sequence {y}, i.e., the series
                                                        k





converges to y. Moreover









and in general,









  THEOREM 2 (Banach). Let  A  be  an  invertible  bounded  linear  operator

mapping a Banach space E onto another Banach space E. Then the inverse
                                                                    1          −1
operator A is itself bounded.


  Proof. Let M be the subset of E consisting of all such that
                k1

                                      −1
                                  || Ay ||  k || y ||.


Every element in E belongs to some M, i.e.,
                    1k





By Baire’s theorem (Theorem 3, p. 61), at least one of the sets M, say M, is
                                                                            kn

dense in some (open) sphere S ⊂ E. Choosing a point y S ∩ M, we can
                                          10n

find numbers α and β (α < β) such that S contains the spherical layer


                      P = {z : α < || z – y || < β, z ∈ M}.
                                              01


Shifting P  so  that  its  center  coincides  with  the  origin,  we  get  another

spherical layer P. Some set M is dense in P. In fact, if z ∈ P ∩ M, then z
                  0N0n

– y ∈ P and
  00










where the quantity





is independent of z. Let


                                      N = 1 + [γ]


(recall footnote 4, p. 8). Then, by (4), z – y ∈ M. Hence M is dense in P,
                                                  0nN0since M is dense in P.
        n

    Now, given any nonzero element y ∈ E, we can always find a number λ
                                                  1

≠ 0 such that α < ∥λy∥ < β, i.e., such that λy ∈ P. Since M is dense in P,
                                                          0N0

there is a sequence {η}, η ∈ M converging to λy. Then {η/λ} converges
                        kkNk

to y. Clearly, if η ∈ M, then η/λ ∈ M for any λ ≠ 0. Therefore M is
                    kNkNN

dense in E − {0} and hence in E itself. It follows from the lemma that y is
          11

the sum of a series of the form


                              y = y + y + ... + y + ...,
                                    12k


where y ∈ M and
        kN





Consider the series





                    −1
with terms x = Ay ∈ E, equal to the preimages of the elements y ∈ E.
              kkk1

Since





the series (5) converges to an element x ∈ E, where





Since  (5)  is  convergent  and  the  operator A  is  continuous  on E  (being

bounded), we can apply A term by term to (5), obtaining


          Ax = Ax + Ax + ... + Ax + ... = y + y + ... + y + ... = y,
                    12k12k


which implies                                              −1
                                        x = Ay


Moreover,

                                  −1
                              || A y || = ||x||  3N ||y||

                            −1
for all y ≠ 0, and hence A is bounded.


  THEOREM 3. Let A be an invertible bounded linear operator mapping a
                        0

Banach space E into another Banach space E, and let ΔA be a bounded
                                                        1

linear operator mapping E into E such that
                                      1





Then the operator


                                    A = A + ΔA
                                            0


maps E onto E and has a bounded inverse.
                1


  Proof. Let y be a fixed element of E, and consider the mapping B of the
                                              1

space E into itself defined by

                                        −1−1
                              Bx = Ay – AΔAx.
                                        00


  It follows from (6) that B is a contraction mapping. Hence, by Theorem

1, p. 66, B has a unique fixed point x such that




But (7) implies


                                Ax = Ax + ΔAx = y.
                                        0


Clearly, if Ax′ = y, then x′ is also a fixed point of B, and hence x′ = x.

Therefore, given any y ∈ E, the equation Ax = y has a unique solution in E,
                                1
                                                      −1−1
i.e., the operator A is invertible with inverse A. Moreover, A is bounded,by Theorem 2. 


  THEOREM 4. Let E be a Banach space, and let I be the identity operator on

E. Suppose A is a bounded linear operator mapping E into itself, such that




                              −1
Then the operator (I − A) exists, is bounded and can be represented in the

form





                                                            −1
  Proof. The existence and boundedness of (I − A) follows from Theorem

3 (and will also emerge in the course of the proof). It follows from (8) that





But then, by the completeness of E, the sum of the series





is a bounded linear operator (see Problem 11c, p. 227). Given any n, we have





Hence, taking the limit as n → ∞ and bearing in mind that

                                  n+1n+1
                              || A ||  || A || → 0,


we get





which implies (9).  23.2. The adjoint operator. Given two topological linear spaces E and

E, let A be a continuous linear operator mapping E into E, and let g be a
11

continuous linear functional on E, i.e., an element of the conjugate space
                                        1

E*. Suppose we apply g to the element y = Ax, thereby obtaining a new
1

functional




Clearly, f  is  continuous  and  linear  (why?),  and  hence  an  element  of  the

conjugate space E*. Thus (10)  associates  a  functional f ∈ E*  with  each

functional g ∈ E*, i.e., (10) defines an operator mapping E* into E*. This
                    11

operator is called the adjoint of A, and is denoted by A*. Using the symmetric

notation (f, x) for the functional f(x), we can write (10) in the form


                                    (g, Ax) = (f, x).


  or




Equation (11) can be regarded as a concise definition of the adjoint of A.


  Example. As in Example 3, p. 222, suppose A is a linear operator with

                                      mn
matrix ∥a∥ mapping m-space R into n-space R. Then the mapping y = Ax
          ij

can be written as a system of equations





while the functional f(x) can be written in the form





                                                        m
where f = f(e) in terms of a basis e, . . ., e in R. Since
      jj1mwe find that





or





after interchanging the roles of the indices i and j. But f = A*g, and hence

comparing (12) and (13), we see that the matrix of the operator A* is ∥a∥,
                                                                                        ji

i.e., the transpose of the matrix of A.


  It follows at once from the definition of the adjoint of an operator that

  1)A* is linear;

  2)(A + B)* = A* + B*;

    3)(αA)* = αA* for arbitrary complex α.

A somewhat less obvious property of the adjoint operator is given by


  THEOREM 5. Let A be a bounded linear operator mapping a Banach space

E into another Banach space E, and let A* be the adjoint of A. Then A* is
                                    1

bounded and




    Proof. By the properties of the norm of an operator, we have


                      | (A*g, x) |(g, Ax) |  || g || || A || || x ||,


which implies


                                || A*g ||  || A || ||g||,


and hence




Suppose x ∈ E, Ax ≠ 0, and letso that, in particular, ∥y∥ = 1. Let g be the functional such that
                          0


                                      g(λy) = λ
                                            0


on the set L ⊂ E of all elements of the form λy. Then clearly (g, y) = 1,
                    100

∥g∥ = 1. Using the Hahn-Banach theorem, we can extend g to a functional
  on L

on the whole space E such that ∥g∥ = 1 and
                        1


                          (g, y) = 1, ie., (g, Ax) = ||Ax ||.
                                0


Therefore


||Ax || = (g, Ax) = |(A*g, x)|  || A*g|| ||x||  || A* || || g || || x || = || A* || || x ||,


which implies




Comparing (15) and (16), we get (14).


  23.3.  The  adjoint  operator  in  Hilbert  space.  Self-adjoint  operators.

Next we consider the case where A is a bounded linear operator mapping a

(real or complex) Hilbert space H into itself. According to the corollary to

Theorem 2, p. 188, the mapping τ assigning the linear functional


                                    (τy)(x) = (x, y)


to every y ∈ H establishes an isomorphism between H and the conjugate

          2
space H*. Let A* be the adjoint of the operator A. Then clearly the mapping

      −1
Ã* = τA*τ is a bounded linear operator mapping H into itself, such that




for all x, y ∈ H. Moreover ∥Ã*∥ = ∥A∥, since ∥A*∥ = ∥A∥ and the mappings

      −1
τ and τ are isometric.  We now establish the following convention: If H is a Hilbert space, then

by the adjoint of an operator A mapping H into H, we mean the operator Ã*

defined by (17). Note that Ã*, like A, maps H into H. To keep the notation

simple, we will henceforth drop the tilde, writing A* instead of Ã*. Replacing

Ã* by A* in (17), we get




for all x, y ∈ H.


  Remark. It should be emphasized that this definition of A* differs from the

definition of the adjoint of an operator A mapping an arbitrary Banach space

E into itself, in which case A* is defined on the conjugate space E* rather

than on the space E itself. The context will always make it clear whether A*

is the operator defined by (11) or the operator defined by (17′).


  Let A be a bounded linear operator mapping a Hilbert space H into itself.

Then it makes sense to ask whether or not A = A*, since A and A* are defined

on the same space. This leads to the following


    DEFINITION. A bounded linear operator A mapping a Hilbert space H into

itself is said to be self-adjoint if A = A*, i.e., if


                                    (Ax, y) = (x, Ay)


for all x, y ∈ H.


  Remark. Everything said above continues to hold if we replace H by the

              nn
real n-space R or complex n-space C.


  23.4.  The  spectrum  of  an  operator.  The  resolvent.  In  the  theory  of

linear operators and their applications, a central role is played by the notion

                                        3
of  the  “spectrum”  of  an  operator. Let A  be  a  linear  operator  mapping  a

topological linear space E into itself. Then a number λ is called an eigenvalue

of A if the equation


                                        Ax = λx


has  at  least  one  nonzero  solution,  and  every  such  solution x  is  called  aneigenvector of A (corresponding to the eigenvalue λ). Suppose E is finite-

dimensional. Then the set of all eigenvalues of A is called the spectrum of A,

and all other values of λ are said to be regular (points). In other words, λ is

                                                                                        −1
regular if and only if the operator A − λI is invertible. The operator (A − λI)

is then automatically bounded, like every operator on a finite-dimensional

space (cf. Problem 1, p. 226). Thus there are just two possibilities in the

finite-dimensional case:

    1)The equation Ax = λx has a nonzero solution, i.e., λ is an eigenvalue

                                                −1
        of A, so that the operator (A − λI) fails to exist;

                                    −1
    2)The operator (A − λI) exists and is bounded, i.e., λ is a regular

        point.

However,  in  the  case  where E  is  infinite-dimensional,  there  is  a  third

possibility:

                                    −1
    3)The operator (A − λI) exists (i.e., the equation Ax = λx has no

        nonzero solutions), but is not bounded.

  To  describe  this  more  general  situation,  we  introduce  some  new

terminology  and  make  an  important  modification  in  the  definition  of  the

spectrum. Given an operator A mapping a (complex) topological linear space

E into itself, the operator




is called the resolvent of A. The values of λ for which R is defined for all E
                                                                  λ

and continuous are said to be regular (points) of A, and the set of all other

values of λ is called the spectrum of A. The eigenvalues of A still belong to

the spectrum, since if (A − λI)x = 0 for some x ≠ 0, then (18) fails to exist.

The set of all these eigenvalues is now called the point spectrum, and the rest

of  the  spectrum  is  called  the continuous  spectrum.  In  other  words,  the

continuous spectrum consists of all λ for which (18) exists but fails to be

continuous. Thus there are now exactly three possibilities for any given value

of λ:

  1)λ is a regular point;

  2)λ is an eigenvalue;

  3)λ is a point of the continuous spectrum.

The  possibility  of  an  operator  having  a  continuous  spectrum  is  acharacteristic  feature  of  the  theory  of  operators  in  infinite-dimensional

spaces, distinguishing it from the finite-dimensional case.


  THEOREM 6. Let A be a linear operator mapping a Banach space E into

itself. Then the set Λ of all regular points of A is open (equivalently, the

complement of Λ is closed).


                                                    −1
  Proof. If λ is regular, the operator (A − λI) exists and is bounded. Hence,

                                                                −1
for  sufficiently  small  δ,  the  operator  (A  −  (λ  +  δ)I)  also  exists  and  is

bounded,  by Theorem  3.  In  other  words,  the  point  λ  +  δ  is  regular  for

sufficiently small δ. 


  THEOREM 7. If A is a bounded linear operator mapping a Banach space E

into itself and if |λ| > ∥A∥, then λ is a regular point. In other words, the

spectrum of A is contained in the disk of radius ∥A∥ with center at the origin.


  Proof. Obviously





and





If ∥A∥ < λ, then ∥A/λ∥ < 1, and hence R exists and is bounded, by Theorem
                                              λ

4.


  Example 1. In the space C = C, consider the operator A defined by
                                      [0, 1]


                                Ax(t) = μ(t) – λ)x(t),


where μ(t) is a fixed function continuous on [0, 1]. Then


                            (A – λI)x(t) = (μ(t) – λ)x(t),


andHence the spectrum of A consists of all λ such that μ(t) − λ vanishes for some

t in the interval [0, 1], i.e., the spectrum is the range of the function μ(t).


  Example 2. Suppose μ(t) = t in the preceding example. Then the spectrum

is  just  the  interval  [0,  1].  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  obviously  no

eigenvalues. Thus the operator A defined by


                                      Ax(t) = tx(t)


is an example of an operator with a purely continuous spectrum.


  Finally, for self-adjoint operators in a Hilbert space, we have the following

analogue  of  a  well-known  result  for  finite-dimensional  Euclidean  spaces

(proved in exactly the same way):

    THEOREM  8. Let  A  be  a  self-adjoint  operator  mapping  a  (complex)

Hilbert space H into itself. Then all the eigenvalues of A are real, and two

eigenvectors of A corresponding to distinct eigenvalues are orthogonal.


  Proof. If


                                  Ax = λx(x ≠0),


then


                  λ(x, x) = (Ax, x) = (x, Ax) = (x, λx) = (x, x),


and hence λ = . Moreover, if


                              Ax = λx, Ay = μy (λ ≠ μ),


then


        λ(x, y) = (Ax, y) = (x, Ay) = (x, Ay) = (x, μy) = (x, y) = μ(x, y),


and hence


                                        (x, y) = 0i.e., the vectors x and y are orthogonal. 


  Problem 1. Given two normed linear spaces E and E, a linear operator A
                                                                  1

from E to E, with domain D, is said to be closed if x ∈ DS, x → x Ax
            1AnAnn

→ y implies x ∈ D, Ax = y. Prove that every bounded operator is closed.
                      A


  Problem 2. Let E and E be normed linear spaces, with norms ∥·∥ and
                                1

∥·∥, respectively. By the direct (or Cartesian) product of E and E, denoted
  11

by E × E, we mean the set of all ordered pairs (x, y), x ∈ E, y ∈ E. Prove
        11

that E × E is a normed linear space when equipped with the norm
          1


                              || (x, y || = || x || + || y ||
                                                        1


(addition  of  elements  and  multiplication  of  elements  by  numbers  being

defined in the obvious way). By the graph of a linear operator A from E to E
                                                                                          1

we mean the subset of E × E equal to
                                1


                          G = {(x, y) : x ∈ D, y = Ax}.
                            AA


    Prove that

  a)G is a linear subspace of E × E;
          A1

  b)G is closed if and only if the operator A is closed;
          A

  c)If E and E are Banach spaces and if A is closed and defined for all x
                    1

        ∈ E, so that D = E, then A is bounded (this is Banach’s closed
                            A

        graph theorem).

    Hint. In c) apply Theorem 2 to the projection operator P carrying each

ordered pair (x ∈ Ax) ∈ G into the element x ∈ E.
                              A


  Problem 3.  Prove  that  if A  is  an  invertible  continuous  linear  operator

mapping  a  complete  countably  normed  space E  into  another  complete

                                                                −1
countably normed space E, then the inverse operator A is itself continuous.
                              1

State and prove the closed graph theorem for countably normed spaces.


  Problem 4. Let A be a continuous linear operator mapping a Banach space

E onto another Banach space E. Prove that there is a constant α > 0 such if B
                                    1∈  (E, E and ∥A − B∥ < α, then B also maps E onto (all of) E.
          11


  Problem 5. Let A be an operator mapping a Hilbert space H into itself.

Then a subspace M ⊂ H is said to be invariant under A if x ∈ M implies Ax

∈ M. Prove that if M is invariant under A, then its orthogonal complement M′

= H  M is invariant under the adjoint operator A* (in particular, under A

itself if A is self-adjoint).


  Problem 6. Let A and B be bounded linear operators mapping a complex

Hilbert space H into itself. Prove that

    a)(αa + βB)* = A* + B*;

    b)(AB)* = B* A*;

    c)(A*)* = A;

  d)I* = I, where I is the identity operator.


  Problem 7. Give an example of an operator whose spectrum consists of a

single point.


  Problem 8. Given a bounded linear operator A mapping a Banach space E

into itself, prove that the limit





exists. Show that the spectrum of A is contained in the disk of radius r with

center at the origin.


  Comment. The quantity r is called the spectral radius of the operator A.

                                                                    nn
This result contains Theorem 8 as a special case, since ∥A∥  ∥A∥.


                                        −1−1
  Problem 9. Let R = (A − λI) and R = (A − μI) be the resolvents
                        λμ

corresponding to the points λ and μ. Prove that RR = RR and
                                                        λμμλ





  Hint. Multiply both sides of (19) by (A − λI)(A − μI).  Comment. It follows from (19) that if λ is a regular point of A, then the
                                                  0

derivative of R with respect to λ at the point λ, i.e., the limit
                λ0





(in the sense of convergence with respect to the operator norm) exists and

          2
equals R.
        λ
        0


  Problem 10. Let A be a bounded self-adjoint operator mapping a complex

Hilbert space H into itself. Prove that the spectrum of A is a closed bounded

subset of the real line.


  Problem  11.  Prove  that  every  bounded  linear  operator  defined  on  a

complex Banach space with at least one nonzero element has a nonempty

spectrum.



24.Completely Continuous Operators


    24.1. Definitions and examples. We now discuss a class of operators

which closely resemble operators acting in a finite-dimensional space and at

the same time are very important from the standpoint of applications:

    DEFINITION. A linear operator A mapping a Banach space E into itself is

said  to  be completely  continuous if  it  maps  every  bounded  set  into  a

relatively compact set.


  Remark 1. If E is finite-dimensional, then every linear operator A mapping

E into E is completely continuous. In fact, A maps bounded sets into bounded

sets (recall Problem 1, p. 226) and hence maps bounded sets into relatively

compact sets (why?).


  Remark 2.  In  an  infinite-dimensional  space,  complete  continuity  of  an

operator  is  a  stronger  requirement  than  merely  being  continuous  (i.e.,

bounded). For example, the identity operator in an infinite-dimensional space

is continuous but not completely continuous (see Example 1 below).

    LEMMA. Let x, x, . . . be linearly independent vectors in a normed linear
                  12space E, and let E be the subspace generated by the vectors x, . . ., x. Then
                    n1n
                                                                  4
there are vectors y, y, . . . such that y ∈ E || y || and
                    12nnn





  Proof. Since the vectors x, x, . . . are linearly independent, we have x ∉
                                12n

E and hence
n-1


                                    ρ(E, x) α > 0
                                        n-1n


(recall Problem 5a, p. 141). Let x* be a vector in E such that
                                                          n−1


                                  || x – x* || > 2α.
                                      n


Then


                                ρ(E, x – x*) = α,
                                      n-1n


and the vectors





satisfy all the conditions of the lemma.


  Example 1.  The  identity  operator I  in  an  infinite-dimensional  Banach

space E is not completely continuous. In fact, we need only show that the

closed unit sphere S in E (which is obviously carried into itself by I) is not

compact. This follows at once from the lemma, since S contains a sequence

of vectors y, y, . . . such that
            12


                                    ρ(y, y) > ,
                                        n-1n


and such a sequence clearly cannot contain a convergent subsequence.


  Example  2.  Let A  be  a  continuous  linear  operator  on  an  infinite-

dimensional Banach space E, where A is “degenerate” in the sense that it

maps E  into  a  finite-dimensional  subspace  of E.  Then A  is  completelycontinuous, since it maps every bounded subset M ⊂ E into a bounded subset

of a finite-dimensional space, and hence into a relatively compact set.


  Turning to the space C of functions continuous on the interval [a, b],
                              [a,b]

we now establish conditions under which the “integral operator” A defined by





is completely continuous.


  THEOREM 1. Suppose the kernel K(x, y) is such that

    1)K(x, y) is bounded on the square a  x  b, a  y  b;

    2)The discontinuities (if any) of K(x, y) all lie on a finite number of

        curves


                              y = f(x)(k = 1, ..., n),
                                    k


        where the functions f are continuous.
                                k

Then (1) is a completely continuous operator mapping C into C.
                                                                  [a,b][a,b]


  Proof. First we note that the conditions 1) and 2) guarantee the existence

of the integral (1) for every x ∈ [a, b], so that ψ(x) is defined on [a, b]. Let R

be the square a  x  b, a  y  b, and let





Moreover, let G be the set of all points (x, y) ∈ R such that





for at least one integer k = 1, . . ., n, and let F = R − G. Since F is compact

(why?) and K(x, y) is continuous on F, given any ε > 0, there is a δ > 0 such

thatfor any two points (x', y),(x'', y) ∈ F satisfying the condition




(recall Theorem 1, p. 109).

    Now suppose (4) holds. Then





To estimate the integral on the right, we divide the interval a  y  b into the

set





and the complementary set Q = [a, b] − P. Using (2) and noting that P is a

union of intervals of total length no greater than ε/3M, we have





where, as usual,





On the other hand, it follows from (3) and (4) that





Comparing (5)–(7), we find that (4) implies




In particular, ψ is continuous on [a, b], so that the operator A defined by (1)

actually maps the space C into itself. Moreover, it follows from (8) and
                              [a,b]

from the estimate.that A carries any (uniformly) bounded set of functions Φ⊂ C into a
                                                                              [a, b]

(uniformly) bounded equicontinuous set Ψ ⊂ C (recall Definitions 3 and
                                                        [a, b]

4, p. 102). But then Ψ is relatively compact, by Arzelà’s theorem (Theorem 4,

p. 102), and hence A is completely continuous. 


  Remark 1. The requirement that the discontinuities of the kernel K(x, y) lie

on a finite number of curves, each intersecting the lines x = const in a single

point, is essential. For example, let K(x, y) be the function






defined on the square 0  x  1, 0  y  1. Then K(x, y) is discontinuous at

every point of the line segment x = , 0  y  1, and the operator (1) with this

kernel maps the function x(t) ≡ 1 into a discontinuous function.


  Remark 2. If K(x, y) = 0 for y > x, then (1) takes the form





Suppose K(x, y) is continuous for y < x. Then it follows from Theorem 1 that

the operator A, called a Volterra operator, is completely continuous.


  24.2. Basic properties of completely continuous operators. We begin

with

    THEOREM 2. Given a sequence {A} of completely continuous operators
                                            n

mapping a Banach space E into itself, suppose {A} converges in norm to an
                                                          n

operator A, i.e., suppose ∥A − A∥ → 0 as n → ∞. Then A is itself completely
                                    n

continuous.


  Proof. To prove that A is completely continuous, we need only show that

the  sequence  {Ax}  contains  a  convergent  subsequence  whenever  the
                    nsequence {x} of elements x ∈ E is bounded, i.e., such that
            nn




for some M > 0 and all n = 1, 2, . . . (why is A linear?). Since A is completely
                                                                          1

continuous, the sequence {Ax} contains a convergent subsequence. In other
                                1n
                                      (1)(1)
words, there is a subsequence {x} of the sequence {x} such that {Ax}
                                      nn1n

converges.  Similarly,  since A  is  completely  continuous,  the  sequence
                                    2
    (1)
{Ax}  in  turn  contains  a  convergent  subsequence.  Thus  there  is  a
  2n
                  (2)(1)(1)
subsequence {x} of the sequence {x} such that {Ax} converges.
                  nn1n
                        (2)
Then obviously {Ax} also converges. Continuing this argument, we find
                    1n
                      (3)(2)(3)(3)
a subsequence {x} of the sequence {x} such that {Ax}, {Ax},
                    nn1n2n
    (3)
{Ax} all converge, and so on. Consider the “diagonal sequence”
  3n




The clearly each of the operators A, A, . . ., A, . . . maps this sequence into
                                        12n

a convergent sequence.

  We  now  show  that  the  sequence   also  converges,  thereby

completing the proof. Since the space E is complete, it is enough to show that

 is a Cauchy sequence. Clearly






Given any ε > 0, first choose k such that





                                  (n)
Next, using the fact that {Ax} converges and hence is a Cauchy sequence,
                              kn

choose N such thatfor all n, n′ > N. Then it follows from (9)–(12) that





for all sufficiently large n and n′, i.e.,  is a Cauchy sequence.


  Not  only  is  the  set  of  completely  continuous  operators  closed

(algebraically) under operator multiplication, but we have the following much

stronger result:


  THEOREM 3. Let A be a completely continuous operator and B a bounded

operator mapping a Banach space E into itself. Then the operators AB and

BA are completely continuous.


  Proof. If the set M ⊂ E is bounded, then BM = {y : y = Bx, x ∈ M} is also

bounded. Therefore ABM is relatively compact, and hence AB is completely

continuous. Moreover, if M is bounded, then AM is relatively compact, and

hence BAM  is  also  relatively  compact  by  the  continuity  of B, i.e., BA  is

completely continuous.


    COROLLARY. A completely continuous operator A mapping a Banach space

E into itself cannot have a bounded inverse if E is infinite-dimensional.


              −1
  Proof. If A were bounded, then, by Theorem 3, the identity operator I =

−1
AA would be completely continuous. But this is impossible, by Example 1,

p. 240.


  THEOREM 4. Let A be a completely continuous operator mapping a Banach

space  E  into  itself.  Then  the  adjoint  operator  A* is  also  completely

continuous.


  Proof.  We  must  show  that A*  carries  every  bounded  subset  of  the

conjugate space E* into a relatively compact set. Since every bounded subset

of a normed linear space is contained in some closed sphere, it is enough to

show that A* maps every closed sphere into a relatively compact set. In fact,

by the linearity of A*, we need only show that the image A*S* of the closed

unit sphere S* ⊂ E* is relatively compact.    Now suppose we regard the elements of E* as functionals not on the

whole space E but only on the compactum [AS] equal to the closure of the

image  of  the  closed  unit  sphere  under  the  operator A.  Then  the  set  φ  of

functionals on [AS] corresponding to those in S* is uniformly bounded and

equicontinuous, since ∥φ∥  1 implies





and


                    |φ(x') – φ(x'')  || φ || ||x' – x'' ||  ||x' – x'' ||.


Hence, by Arzelà’s theorem (Theorem 4, p. 102), φ is relatively compact in

the space C of all continuous linear functionals on [AS]. But the set φ,
            [AS]

with the metric induced by the usual metric of C, is isometric to the set
                                                          [AS]

A*S*, with the metric induced by the norm of the space E*. In fact, if g, g
                                                                                      12

∈ S*, then







Being relatively compact, the set φ is totally bounded, by Theorem 3, p. 101.

Therefore the set A*S* isometric to φ is also totally bounded, and hence

relatively compact, by the same theorem.


  THEOREM 5. Let A be a completely continuous operator mapping a Banach

space  E  into  itself.  Then, given any  ρ  >  0, there  are  only  finitely  many

linearly  independent  eigenvectors  of  A  corresponding  to  eigenvalues  of

absolute value greater than ρ.


  Proof.  Given  nonzero  eigenvalue  λ  of A,  let E  be  the  subspace  of E
                                                              λ
                                                                  5
consisting of all eigenvectors of A corresponding to λ. Then E is finite-
                                                                              λ

dimensional, since otherwise A would fail to be completely continuous in E
                                                                                          λ

and hence in E itself, by virtually the same argument as in Example 1, p. 240.

Therefore,  to  complete  the  proof,  we  need  only  show  that  if  {λ}  is  any
                                                                                nsequence of distinct eigenvalues of A, then λ → 0 as n → ∞. This in turn will
                                                    n

be proved once we show that there is no infinite sequence {λ} of distinct
                                                                          n

eigenvalues of A such that the sequence {1/λ} is bounded.
                                                    n

    Thus, suppose there is a sequence {λ} of distinct eigenvalues of A such
                                                n

that {1/λ} is bounded, and let x be an eigenvector of A corresponding to the
        nn

eigenvalue λ. Then the vectors x, x, . . . are linearly independent, by the
              n12
                                                                        6
same argument as in the case where E is finite-dimensional. Let E be the
                                                                                  n

subspace generated by x, . . ., x, i.e., the set of all elements of the form
                          1n





    For every y ∈ E, we have
                      n





  so that





Let {y} be a sequence such that y ∈ E, ||y|| = 1 and
      nnnn





(such a sequence exists by the lemma on p. 240). Then {y/λ} is a bounded
                                                                    nn

sequence in E, since the numerical sequence {1/λ} is bounded. But at the
                                                            n

same time the sequence {A(y/λ)} cannot contain a convergent subsequence,
                                nn

contrary to the complete continuity of A, since






for all p > q, sinceThis contradiction proves the theorem.


    24.3. Completely continuous operators in Hilbert space. Specializing

to the case of completely continuous operators mapping a Hilbert space into

itself, we have


  THEOREM 6. Let A be a linear operator mapping a Hilbert space H into

itself. Then A is completely continuous if and only if

  1)A  maps  every  relatively  compact  set  in  the  weak  topology  into  a

        relatively compact set in the strong topology;

  2)A maps every weakly convergent sequence into a strongly convergent

        sequence.


  Proof. To prove 1), we merely note that H is the conjugate of a separable

space, since H = H*, and hence, by Corollary 2′, p. 205, a subset of H is

bounded if and only if it is relatively compact in the weak topology.

  To prove 2), suppose A maps every weakly convergent sequence into a

strongly convergent sequence, and let M be a bounded closed subset of H.

Then M contains a weakly convergent sequence and hence AM contains a

strongly convergent sequence, i.e., AM is relatively compact in the strong

topology.  It  follows  that A  is  completely  continuous.  Conversely,  if A is

completely continuous, let {x} be a weakly convergent sequence with weak
                                  n

limit x. Then {Ax} contains a strongly convergent subsequence. At the same
                  n

time, {Ax} converges weakly to Ax, by the continuity of A, so that {Ax}
          nn

cannot  have  more  than  one  limit  point.  Therefore  {Ax}  is  a  strongly
                                                                      n

convergent sequence.


  Let A be a self-adjoint operator in a finite-dimensional complex Euclidean

space, and suppose A has matrix ∥a∥ (recall Example 3, p. 222). Then it will
                                        ij

be recalled from linear algebra that ∥a∥ can be reduced to diagonal form
                                              ij
                                                  7
with respect to a suitable orthonormal basis. We now generalize this result to

the  case  of  a  completely  continuous  self-adjoint  operator  in  a  (real  or

complex)  Hilbert  space  (see Theorem  7  below),  after  first  proving  twopreliminary lemmas:

    LEMMA  1. Let  A  be  a  completely  continuous  self-adjoint  operator

mapping  a  Hilbert  space  H  into  itself, and let {x} be  a  sequence  in  H
                                                              n

converging weakly to x. Then




as n → ∞.

Proof. Clearly,


      |(Ax, x) – (Ax, x)|  |(Ax, x) – (Ax, x)| + |(Ax, x) – (Ax, x)|.
            nnnnnnn


But


                      |(Ax, x) – (Ax, x)| =  ||x|| ||A(x” x||,
                          nnnnn


and


              |(Ax, x)” (Ax, x)| = |(x, A(x – x))|  ||x|| ||A(x – x)||,
                      nnn


where the numbers ∥x∥, n = 1, 2, . . . are bounded, by Theorem 2, p. 196,
                        n

and ∥A(x − x)∥ → 0 by Theorem 6. Therefore
        n


                                |(Ax, x) – (Ax, x| → 0
                                    nn


as n → ∞, which is equivalent to (13).

    LEMMA 2. Given a bounded linear operator A mapping a Hilbert space H

into itself, let A be self-adjoint and suppose the least upper bound of the

functional


                                    |Q(x)| = |(Ax, x)|


on the closed unit sphere ∥x∥  1 is achieved at the point x = x. Then
                                                                          0




implies                                (Ax, y) = (x, Ay) = 0
                                    00


In particular, x is an eigenvector of A.
                0

    Proof. Obviously,




Let






where a is an arbitrary complex number. Then ∥x∥ = 1, because of (14) and

(15). Since





we have




for small |a|. But it is clear from (16) that if (Ax, y) ≠ 0, then a can be chosen
                                                      0

to make |Q(x)| > |Q(x)|, contrary to the assumption that the least upper bound
                      0

of |Q(x)| on the closed unit sphere is achieved at the point x = x. Therefore
                                                                            0

(Ax, y) = 0 as asserted, i.e., A is orthogonal to every vector orthogonal to x.
  00

It follows that Ax and x are proportional (why?), so that x is an eigenvector
                  000

of A. 


  THEOREM  7  (Hilbert-Schmidt). Let  A  be  a  completely  continuous  self-

adjoint  operator  mapping  a  Hilbert  space  H  into  itself.  Then  there  is  an

orthonormal system φ, φ, . . . of eigenvectors of A, with corresponding
                          12

nonzero eigenvalues λ, λ, . . ., such that every element x ∈ H has a unique
                        12
                              8
representation of the formwhere x′ satisfies the condition Ax′ = 0. Moreover




and





in the case where there are infinitely many nonzero eigenvalues.

    Proof. Let





and let {x} be a sequence of elements of H such that ∥x∥ = 1 and
          nn


                                  |(Ax, x)| → M
                                        nn1


as n → ∞. Since the closed unit sphere in H is weakly compact (recall

Corollary 2′, p. 205), we can find a subsequence of {x} which converges
                                                                  n

weakly to an element y ∈ H, where clearly ∥y∥  1. By Lemma 1,


                                    |(Ay, y)| = M,
                                                  1


and hence, by Lemma 2, y is an eigenvector of A. Moreover ∥y∥ = 1, since if

∥y∥ < 1, then choosing





we would have ∥y′∥ = 1 and


                                    |(Ay', y')| > M,
                                                    1


contrary to the meaning of M. We choose y as our first eigenvector φ. Let λ
                                111

be the corresponding eigenvalue, so that                                      Aφ = λφ.
                                          111


Then


                                |λ| = |(Aφ, φ)| = M.
                                  1111


  Next let E be the subspace of H consisting of all vectors of the form αφ,
              11

and let E′ = H  E be the orthogonal complement of E. Clearly E′ is again
          1111

a  Hilbert  space,  mapped  into  itself  by  the  operator A  (this  follows  from

Problem 5, p. 238 and the fact that A is self-adjoint). Let





Then, by the same argument as before, we can find an eigenvector φ of A
                                                                                    2

such that φ ∈ E' ||φ|| = 1. Let λ be the corresponding eigenvalue, so that
            2122


                                      Aφ = λφ.
                                          222


Then


                                |λ| = |(Aφ, φ)| = M,
                                  2222


and hence


                                      |λ|  |λ|,
                                        12


since H ⊃ E' implies
              1





By its very construction, φ is orthogonal to φ.
                              21

  To construct further eigenvectors of A, we argue inductively, replacing

(19) bywhere E′  = H  E  is  the  orthogonal  complement  of  the  subspace E
          nnn

generated by the previously constructed eigenvectors φ, φ, . . ., φ. Then E′
                                                                12nn

is again a Hilbert space mapped into itself by A, and there is an eigenvector

φ ∈ E' of unit norm, with corresponding eigenvalue λ satisfying the
n+1nn+1

inequality


                            |λ|  |λ|(n = 1, 2, ...).
                                nn+1


In this way, we construct an orthonormal system {φ} of eigenvectors of A.
                                                            n

    There are now just two possibilities, which we examine in turn:


  Case 1. Suppose the construction of the sequence {φ} terminates after a
                                                                  n

finite number of steps, i.e., suppose there is a positive integer n such that
                                                                              0

(Ax, x) ≡ 0 on E'. Then it follows from Lemma 2 that A maps the whole
                    n0

space E'  into  the  zero  vector.  According  to Theorem 14,  p.  158,  every
        n0

element x ∈ H has a unique representation of the form


                                      x = h + x'


where h ∈ E, x' ∈ E and hence of the form
              n0n0




where the sum is finite (consisting of n terms) and Ax′ = 0. Obviously we
                                              0

have




thereby completing the proof in this case.


  Case 2. Suppose the construction of the sequence {φ} never terminates,
                                                                  n

i.e., suppose (Ax, x) ≢ 0 on E′ for all n = 1, 2, . . . . We then have infinitely
                                  n

many nonzero eigenvalues λ, λ, . . ., λ, . . . . Clearly λ → 0 as n → ∞. In
                                12nn

fact,  the  sequence  {φ}  converges  weakly  to  zero,  like  any  sequence  of
                          n

orthonormal vectors (why?), and hence the sequence {Aφ} converges to zero
                                                                  n

in norm, so that ∥Aφ∥ → 0 and hence ∥λφ∥ = |λ| → 0. Let E be the
                        nnnn∞subspace of H generated by all the eigenvectors φ, φ, . . ., φ, . . ., i.e., the
                                                          12n

set of all linear combinations of the form





and let





If E′ = {0}, then H = E and x obviously has a representation of the form
    ∞∞

(17) with x′ = 0 (so that Ax′ = 0 trivially). If E′ ≠ 0, let x be any nonzero
                                                        ∞

element of E′. Then
              ∞

                                                      2
                                  |(Ax, x)|  |λ| ||x||
                                                n


for all n = 1, 2, . . ., and hence (Ax, x) ≡ 0 on E′. It follows from Lemma 2
                                                        ∞

that A maps the whole space E′ into the zero vector. The rest of the proof is
                                    ∞

the same as in Case 1, where (18) follows from (17) by the continuity of A.


    COROLLARY. Let  A  be  a  completely  continuous  self-adjoint  operator

mapping a Hilbert space H into itself. Then there is an orthonormal system

{ψ} of  eigenvectors  of  A  such  that  every  element x ∈ H has  a  unique
n

representation of the form





Moreover





where λ, λ, . . . are the eigenvalues corresponding to ψ, ψ, . . . .
        1212

    Proof.  Noting  that  every  element  of E'  is  an  eigenvector  of A
                                                        n0

corresponding to the eigenvalue λ = 0, let {ψ} consist of the ortho-normal
                                                      nsystem {φ} constructed in the proof of Theorem 7, together with an arbitrary
          n

orthonormal basis in E' or E′.
                          n0∞


  Problem 1. Prove that the projection operator of Example 4, p. 222 is

completely continuous if and only if the subspace H is finite-dimensional.
                                                            1


  Problem 2. Prove that the operator A mapping the point


                              x = (x, x,...,x,...)∈l
                                      12n2


into the point





is completely continuous. More generally, suppose


                            Ax = (ax, ax,...,ax,...).
                                      1122nn


Under what conditions on the sequence {a} is A completely continuous?
                                                n


  Hint. Since every bounded set in l is contained in some closed sphere, it
                                            2

is enough to show that the images of spheres are relatively compact. In fact,

by the linearity of A, it need only be shown that the image of the unit sphere

is compact. In this regard, recall Example 5, p. 98.


  Problem 3. Let A be the integral operator on C defined by
                                                          [−1, 1]





Prove that A maps the closed unit sphere in C into a noncompact set.
                                                        [−1, 1]

Reconcile this with Theorem 1.


  Hint. LetThen φ ∈ C, ||φ|| for all n, and
      n[-1, 1]n










The sequence {ψ} converges in C to the function
                  n[−1, 1]






which, having a discontinuous derivative, cannot be the image under A of any

function in C.
              [−1, 1]


  Problem 4. Let A be a completely continuous operator mapping a reflexive

Banach space E (e.g. a Hilbert space) into itself. Prove that A maps the closed

unit  sphere  in E  into  a  compact  set.  Reconcile  this  with  the  preceding

problem.


  Hint. Use Theorem 6, p. 205.


  Problem 5. Prove that

  a)A linear combination of completely continuous operators is itself a

        completely continuous operator;

    b)The set  (E, E) of all completely continuous operators mapping a

        Banach space E into itself is a closed subspace of the linear space 

        (E, E) of all bounded linear operators mapping E into E.  Problem 6. Let (E, E) and (E, E) be the same as in the preceding

problem. Prove that besides being a linear space, (E, E) is also a ring when

equipped  with  the  usual  operations  of  addition  and  multiplication  of

operators. Prove that (E, E) is a two-sided ideal in (E, E).


  Comment. By a two-sided ideal in a ring  is meant a subring  ⊂ 

such that α ∈ , r ∈  implies ∈ , rα ∈ .


  Problem 7. Let Φ and A*S* be the same as in the proof of Theorem 4.

Show that Φ is closed and hence compact. Deduce from this that A*S* is

compact, even though as shown in Problem 3, the image of the closed unit

sphere under a completely continuous operator need not be compact.


  Problem 8. Discuss the connection between Theorem 4 and the theory of

Sec. 20.4, in particular Corollary 1′, p. 204.


  Problem 9. Let A be a bounded linear operator mapping a Banach space E

into itself. Show that if A* is completely continuous, then so is A.


  Problem 10. Prove that a linear operator A mapping a Hilbert space H into

itself is completely continuous if and only if its adjoint (in the sense of Sec.

23.3) is completely continuous.


  Problem 11.  Give  an  example  of  a  completely  continuous  operator A

mapping  a  Hilbert  space H  into  itself,  such  that A  has  no  eigenvectors.

Reconcile this with Theorem 7.


  Hint. Let A be the operator in l such that
                                      2





Then Ax = λx implies





and hence x = 0.  Comment. This situation differs from the finite-dimensional case, where

every linear operator (self-adjoint or not) has at least one eigenvector.




  1
 As an exercise, state and prove this analogue.

  2
 Or a “conjugate-linear isomorphism” in the case where H is complex (see Problem 6, p. 194).

  3
 In talking about the spectrum of an operator, it will always be tacitly assumed that the operator is
defined on a complex space.

  4
 The quantity ρ(E, y) is, of course, just the distance between the set E and the point y
                    n−1nn−1n
(cf. Problem 9, p. 54).

  5
 Note that E is invariant under A in the sense that x ∈ E implies Ax ∈ E (cf. Problem 5, p.
              λλλ
238).

  6
 See e.g., G. E. Shilov, op. cit., Lemma 1, p. 182.

  7
 See e.g., V. I. Smirnov, Linear Algebra and Group Theory (translated by R. A. Silverman),
McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York (1961), Sec. 40. Dover reprint (1970).

  8
 As will appear in the course of the proof, the sums in (17) and (18) may be finite or infinite, and
x′ may vanish.                                          7



                                  MEASURE








  The concept of the measure μ(E) of a set E is a natural generalization of

such concepts as

    1)The length l(Δ) of a line segment Δ;

    2)The area A(F) of a plane figure F;

    3)The volume V(G) of a space figure G;

    4)The increment φ(b) − φ(a) of a nondecreasing function φ(t) over a

        half-open interval [a, b);

    5)The integral of a nonnegative function over a set on the line or over a

        region in the plane or in space.

Although the notion of measure first arose in the theory of functions of a real

variable,  it  was  subsequently  used  extensively  in  functional  analysis,

probability theory, the theory of dynamical systems, and other branches of

mathematics. In Sec. 25 we discuss the measure of plane sets, starting from

the notion of the area of a rectangle. Measure in general will then be studied

in Secs. 26 and 27. The reader will easily confirm that the considerations in

Sec. 25 are of a general nature and carry over to the case of the more abstract

theory without essential changes.



25. Measure in the Plane


  25.1. Measure of elementary sets. Consider the system  of sets in thexy-plane, each defined by one of the inequalities


                  a  x  b,a < x  b,a  x < b,a < x < b


and one of the inequalities


                c  y  d,c < y  d,c  y < d,c < y < d,


where a, b, c and d are arbitrary real numbers. The sets in  will be called

rectangles. The closed rectangle defined by the inequalities


                                a  x  b,c  y  d


is a rectangle in the usual sense (including its boundary) if a < b and c < d, a

line segment (including its end points) if a = b and c < d or if a < b and c =

d, a point if a = b, c = d, or even the empty set if a > b or c > d. The open

rectangle


                                a < x < b,c < y < d


is either a rectangle in the usual sense (without its boundary) if a < b and c <

d or the empty set if a > b or c > d. Each of the rectangles of the remaining

types will be called half-open and is an ordinary rectangle minus one, two or

three  sides,  a  line  segment  minus  one  or  two  end  points,  or  possibly  the

empty set.

  In keeping with the concept of area familiar from elementary geometry,

we now define the measure of each set in  as follows:

    1)The measure of the empty set equals 0;

    2)The measure of the nonempty rectangle (closed, open or half-open)

        specified by the numbers a, b, c, and d equals


                                    (b – a)(d – c).


Thus with each rectangle P ∈  we associate a number m(P), called its

measure, where clearly

    1)m(P) is real and nonnegative;

    2)m(P) is additive in the sense that if        then





Our problem is to define the concept of measure for sets more general than

rectangles,  while  preserving  these  two  properties.  The  first  step  in  this

direction is to define measure for elementary sets, where by an elementary set

we mean any set which can be represented in at least one way as a union of a

finite number of pairwise disjoint rectangles. First we prove


  THEOREM 1. The union, intersection, difference and symmetric difference

of two elementary sets are again elementary sets.

    Proof. If





are two elementary sets, then clearly





is also an elementary set, since each P ∩ Q is obviously either a rectangle
                                            k1

or  the  empty  set.  Moreover,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  difference  of  two

rectangles is an elementary set. Hence, subtracting an elementary set from a

rectangle gives another elementary set (as an intersection of elementary sets).

Suppose A and B are elementary sets, and let P be a rectangle containing both

of them (such a rectangle obviously exists). It follows from what has just

been proved that


                        A ∪ B = P – [(P – A) ∩ (P – B)]


is an elementary set. It is then an easy consequence of the formulas


                                A – B = A ∩ (P – B),


                            A Δ B = (A ∪ B) – (A ∩ B)


that the difference and symmetric difference of two elementary sets is againan elementary set.


  Remark. In other words, the system of all elementary sets is a ring , as

defined on p. 31.

  We now define measure for elementary sets:

    DEFINITION 1. Given an elementary set A, suppose





where the P are pairwise disjoint rectangles. Then by the measure of A,
            k

denoted by (A), is meant the number





where m(P) is the measure of the rectangle P.
          k


  Remark. Clearly, (A) is nonnegative and additive. Moreover, in defining 

(A), we have tacitly relied on the fact that the sum (1) does not depend on

how A is represented as a union of sets. To verify this, suppose





where P and Q are rectangles such that
        kl


                        P ∩ P = Ø,Q ∩ Q = Ø(i ≠ j).
                          ijij


Since the intersection P ∩Q of two rectangles is itself a rectangle, it follows
                          ki

from the additivity of the measure of rectangles that





  THEOREM 2. If A is an elementary set and {A} is a finite or countable
                                                          n

system of elementary sets such thatthen





    Proof. Given any ε > 0, there is a closed elementary set Ā contained in A

and satisfying the condition





In fact, to get Ā we need only replace each of the k rectangles P making up A
                                                                          j

by a closed rectangle contained in P of area no less than
                                        j





Moreover, for each A there is clearly an open elementary set Â containing
                        nn

A and satisfying the condition
n





Obviously,





Hence, by the Heine-Borel theorem (recall p. 92), there is a finite system Â,
                                                                                        n1

... ,Â, covering Ā, where
    n2





since otherwise Ā would be covered by a finite number of rectangles of total

area less than (Ā), which is impossible. Thereforewhich implies (2), since ε > 0 is arbitrary.


  25.2. Lebesgue measure of plane sets. Elementary sets are, of course, far

from being the most general plane sets considered in geometry and analysis.

Thus we naturally arrive at the problem of extending the concept of measure

(while preserving its basic properties) to sets more general than finite unions

of  rectangles  with  sides  parallel  to  the  coordinate  axes.  This  problem  is

solved in a definitive way by Lebesgue’s theory of measure, in which we

consider countably infinite unions of rectangles, as well as finite unions. To

avoid sets of “infinite measure,” we restrict our discussion to subsets of the

closed unit square E, defined by the inequalities


                              0  x  1,0  y  1


(this restriction is dropped in Remarks 2 and 3, p. 267).

    DEFINITION 2. By the outer measure of a set A ⊂ E is meant the number





where the greatest lower bound is taken over all coverings of A by a finite or

countable system of rectangles P.
                                    k


  DEFINITION 3. By the inner measure of a set A ⊂ E is meant the number


                                μ(A) = 1 – μ(E – A).
                                  **


  THEOREM 3. The inequality


                                    μ(A)  μ(A)
                                      **


holds for any set A ⊂ E.  Proof. Suppose


                                    μ(A) > μ(A),
                                      **


i.e.,


                                μ(A) + μ(E – A) < 1.
                                **


Then,  by  the  definition  of  a  greatest  lower  bound,  there  are  systems  of

rectangles {P} and {Q} covering A and E − A, respectively, such that
              jk





Let {R} denote the union of the systems {P} and {Q}. Then
      ljk





while





contrary to Theorem 2.


DEFINITION 4. A set A is said to be (Lebesgue) measurable if


                                    μ(A) = μ(A),
                                      **


i.e., if its inner and outer measures coincide.

    DEFINITION 5. If a set A is measurable, the number μ(A) equal to the

common value of μ(A) and μ*(A) is called the (Lebesgue) measure of A.
                    *


  For outer measure, we have the following analogue of Theorem 2:


  THEOREM 4. If A is any set and {A} is a finite or countable system of sets
                                          n

such thatthen




  Proof. Given any ε > 0, for each A there is a finite or countable system of
                                          n

rectangles {P} such that
              nk





and





by the definition of outer measure. Then





and





which implies (2′), since ε > 0 is arbitrary.

    COROLLARY. If A is any measurable set and {A} is a finite or countable
                                                            n

system of measurable sets such that





  then




  Proof. Merely replace μ* by μ in (2′). 


  Next we show that the Lebesgue measure of an elementary set coincides

with its measure as previously defined:  THEOREM 5. Every elementary set A ⊂ E is measurable, with Lebesgue

measure μ(A) equal to the measure (A) introduced in Definition 1.


  Proof. Suppose A is the union of the pairwise disjoint rectangles P, . . .,
                                                                                    1

P. Then
k





by Definition 1. Therefore, since the rectangles P, . . ., P obviously cover A,
                                                        1k





by Definition  2.  Moreover,  if  {Q}  is  any  finite  or  countable  system  of
                                        j

rectangles covering A, we have





by Theorem 2, and hence




by Definition 2 again. Comparing (3) and (4), we get


                                      (A) = μ*(A).


    Now E − A is also an elementary set, and hence


                                  (E – A) = μ*(E – A).


But


                                  (E – A) = 1 – (A),


while


                                μ*(E – A) = 1 – μ*(A),


It follows that                                      (A) = μ*(A),


and hence


                                (A) = μ*(A) = μ*(A).


    COROLLARY. Theorem 2 is a special case of Theorem 4.


  Proof. Merely replace μ* by  in (2′) or μ by  in (2″). 


  LEMMA. The inequality




holds for any two sets A and B.


  Proof. Since


                                  A ⊂ B ∪ (A Δ B)


it follows from Theorem 4 that




This implies (5) if μ*(A)  μ*(B). If μ*(A)  μ*(B), we deduce (5) from the

inequality


                            μ*(B)  μ*(A) + μ*(A Δ B)


obtained by interchanging the roles of A and B in (6).


  THEOREM 6. A set A is measurable if and only if, given any ε > 0, there is

an elementary set B such that





  Proof. Suppose that given any ε > 0, there is an elementary set B such that

(7) holds. Then, by the lemma,and similarly





since


                              (E – A) Δ (E – B) A Δ B.


Bearing in mind that


                              (B) + (E – B) = (E) = 1,


we deduce from (8) and (9) that


                            |μ*(A – |μ*(E – A) – 1| < 2ε,


and hence that




since ε > 0 is arbitrary. But then μ(A) = μ*(A), so that A is measurable.
                                      *

    Conversely,  suppose A  is  measurable,  i.e.,  suppose  (10)  holds.  Then,

given any ε > 0, there are systems of rectangles {B} and {C} covering A
                                                              nn

and E − A, respectively, such that








Moreover, since  < ∞, there is an N such that






We now show that (7) holds for the elementary setClearly, the set





contains A − B, while the set





contains B − A, and hence




Moreover,





To estimate μ*(Q), we note that





and hence





But (11) and (12) imply





Subtracting (15) from (16), we geti.e.,





Finally, comparing (13), (16) and (17), we find that


                μ*(A Δ B)  μ*(P ∪ Q)  μ*(P) + μ*(Q) < ε.


  THEOREM 7. The union and intersection of a finite number of measurable

sets are again measurable sets.


  Proof. It is enough to prove the theorem for two sets. Thus suppose A and
                                                                                    1

A are measurable sets. Then, by Theorem 6, there are elementary sets B and
21

B such that
2





Since


              (A ∪ A) Δ (B ∪ B) ⊂(A Δ B) ∪ (A Δ B),
                  12121122


we have


        μ*[(A ∪ A) Δ (B ∪ B)  μ*(A Δ B)+ μ*(A Δ B) < ε.
                12121122


But B ∪ B is an elementary set, and hence A ∪ A is measurable, by
      1212

Theorem 6 again. Moreover, a set A is measurable if and only if


                                μ*(A) + μ*(E – A) = 1,


and hence if A is measurable, so is E − A. Therefore the measurability of A
                                                                                          1

∩ A follows from that of A ∪ A and the formula
  212


                    A ∩ A = E – [(E – A) ∪ (E – A)].
                      1212


    COROLLARY. The difference and symmetric difference of two measurable

sets are again measurable sets.  Proof. An immediate consequence of Theorem 7 and the formulas


                              A – A = A ∩(E – A),
                                1212


                      A Δ A = (A – A) ∪ (A – A).
                          121221


  THEOREM 8. If A, . . ., A are pairwise disjoint measurable sets, then
                    1N





  Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 7, we need only consider the case n = 2.

By Theorem 6, given any ε > 0, there are elementary sets B and B such that
                                                                    12




Let


                          A = A ∪ A,B = B ∪ B.
                                  1212


Then A is measurable, by Theorem 7. Since A and A are disjoint, we have
                                                    12


                        B ∩ B ⊂ (A Δ B) ∪ (A Δ B),
                          121122


and hence





Moreover, it follows from (18) and the lemma on p. 260 that




Since measure is additive on elementary sets, it follows from (19) and (20)

that


          (B) = (B) + (B) – (B ∩ B)  β*(A) + β*(A) – 4ε.
                        121212


Noting also that                        A Δ B ⊂ (A Δ B) ∪ (A Δ B),
                                        1122


we have


      μ*(A)  (B) – μ*(A Δ B)  (B) – 2ε  μ*(A) + μ*(A) – 6ε.
                                                                12


Therefore




since ε > 0 can be made arbitrarily small. On the other hand, it follows from

A = A ∪ A and Theorem 4 that
    12




Comparing (21) and (22), we get


                                μ*(A) = μ*(A) μ*(A),
                                              12


where μ* can be replaced by μ, since A, A, and A are measurable.
                                            12


  THEOREM  9. The  union  and  intersection  of  a  countable  number  of

measurable sets are again measurable sets.


  Proof. Given a countable system of measurable sets {A}, let
                                                                    n





and let





Then the sets A′ are pairwise disjoint, and
                nBy Theorem 7 and its corollary, the sets A′ are all measurable. Moreover, by
                                                  n

Theorems 4 and 8,





for every N = 1, 2, . . . . Therefore the series





converges, and hence, given any ε > 0, there is an integer ν > 0 such that





Since the set





is measurable, being the union of a finite number of measurable sets, there is

an elementary set B such that





Moreover, since





it follows from (23) and (24) that


                                    μ*(A Δ B) < ε.


Therefore A is measurable, by Theorem 6. Finally, since complements of

measurable sets are themselves measurable, the intersectionis measurable.


  Theorem 9 generalizes Theorem 7 to the case of a countable number of

measurable sets. The corresponding generalization of Theorem 8 is given by


  THEOREM 10. If A, A, . . ., A, . . . are pairwise disjoint measurable sets,
                      12n

then





  Proof. Let





Then, since





for every N = 1, 2, . . ., it follows from Theorem 8 and the corollary to

Theorem 4 that





Taking the limit as N → ∞, we get





On the other hand, since obviouslyit follows from the same corollary that





Comparing (26) and (27), we get





or equivalently (25).


  The  key  property  of  the  measure  μ  expressed  by  (25)  is  described  by

saying that μ is countably additive or σ-additive.


  THEOREM  11. Let  {A} be  a  sequence  of  measurable  sets  which  is
                            n

decreasing in the sense that


                          A ⊃ A ⊃ . . . ⊃ A ⊃ . . . .
                            12n


Then





where





    Proof. We need only consider the case A = Ø, to which the general case

reduces if A is replaced by A − A. Clearly
            nn


                        A = (A – A) ∪ (A – A) ∪ . . . .
                          11223


and


                    A = (A – A) ∪ (A – A) ∪ . . . .
                      nnn+1n+1n+2


Therefore, by the σ-additivity of μ,and





Since the series (29) converges, its remainder (30) approaches 0 as n → ∞. It

follows that




    COROLLARY. Let  {A} be  a  sequence  of  measurable  sets  which  is
                            n

increasing in the sense that


                          A ⊂ A ⊂ . . . ⊂ A ⊂ . . . .
                            12n


Then





where





    Proof. Apply Theorem 11 to the complements of the sets A.
                                                                          n


  The property of the measure μ expressed by (28) and (28′) is described by

saying that μ is continuous.


  Remark 1. To recapitulate, starting from a measure m defined on the class 

m of all rectangles (with sides parallel to the coordinate axes), we have

succeeded in extending m first to a measure  defined on the larger class 

 of all elementary sets and then to a Lebesgue measure μ defined on the still

larger class   of  all  measurable  sets.  The  class   is  closed  under  the
                μμ

operations  of  taking  countable  unions  and  intersections.  Moreover,  themeasure μ is σ-additive on .
                                μ


  Remark 2. So far we have required all our sets to be subsets of the closed

unit square


                        E = {(x, y) : 0  x  1, 0  y  1}.


It is easy to get rid of this restriction. For example, representing the whole

plane as the union of the squares


                  E = {(x, y) : m  x  m + 1, n  y  n + 1},
                    mn


where m and n are arbitrary integers, we say that a plane set A is measurable

if its intersection A = A ∩ E with every square E is measurable as
                      mnmnmn

previously defined and if the series





converges. The measure of A is then defined as





All the properties of measure proved above carry over to this more general

case in a straightforward way (give the details).


  Remark 3.  We  might  go  still  further,  calling  a  set A  measurable  with

“infinite measure” if every A is measurable and if the series (31) diverges.
                                mn

Alternatively, we can regard the whole plane as the union of the squares


                      E = {(x, y) : –n  x  n, –n  y  n},
                        n


calling a plane set measurable, with (possibly infinite) measure





if  its  intersection A  = A  ∩ E  with  every  square E  is  measurable  as
                        nnn

previously defined. As an exercise, prove the consistency of (31) and (32).  Problem 1. Let E be the closed unit square. Prove that

    a)Every open subset of E is measurable;

    b)Every closed subset of E is measurable;

    c)Every set obtained from open and closed subsets of E by forming no

        more  than  a  countable  number  of  unions,  intersections  and

        complements is measurable.


  Comment. There are measurable subsets of E which are not of the type c).


  Problem 2. Construct a theory of Lebesgue measure for sets on the line,

starting from intervals (closed, open and half-open) instead of rectangles. Do

the same for

    a)Sets on the circumference of a circle;

    b)Three-dimensional sets;

                  n
    c)Sets in R.


  Problem  3.  Prove  that  the  set  of  all  rational  points  on  the  line  is

measurable, with measure zero.


  Problem 4. Prove that the Cantor set constructed in Example 4, p. 52 is

measurable, with measure zero.


  Problem 5. Prove that every set of positive measure in the interval [0, 1]

contains a pair of points whose distance apart is a rational number.


  Problem 6. Show that the power of the set of all measurable subsets of the

interval [0, 1] is greater than the power of the continuum.


  Problem 7. Let C be a circle of circumference 1, and let α be an irrational

number.  Let  all  points  of C  which  can  be  obtained  from  each  other  by

rotating C through an angle nαπ (where n is any integer, positive, negative or

zero)  be  assigned  to  the  same  class.  (Clearly,  each  such  class  contains

countably many points.) Let Φ be any set containing one point from each
                                    0

class. Prove that Φ is nonmeasurable.
                    0


  Hint. Let Φ be the set obtained by rotating Φ through the angle nαπ.
                n0

Thenand


                              Φ ∩ Φ = Ø(m ≠ n).
                                mn


If Φ were measurable, the congruent sets Φ would also be measurable. This
  0n

would imply





by the σ-additivity of μ. But congruent sets must have the same measure, i.e.,

if Φ were measurable, then
  0


                                    μ(Φ) = μ(Φ),
                                        n0


which contradicts (33).



26.General Measure Theory


    26.1. Measure on a semiring. In Sec. 25 we constructed a theory of

measure of plane sets, starting from a measure (area) m defined on the class 

m of all rectangles (with sides parallel to the coordinate axes) and then

extending m to a Lebesgue measure μ defined on the much larger class  of
                                                                                      μ

all measurable sets. The explicit formula for the area of a rectangle played no

role in this construction. In fact, a moment’s thought shows that we only used

the following properties of the set function m:

    1)The domain of definition  of m, i.e., the class of all rectangles, is a
                                          m
                  1
        semiring;

  2)m is real and nonnegative;

  3)m is additive in the sense that if P is a rectangle such that        where P, . . ., P are pairwise disjoint rectangles, then
                  1n





As will be shown in this section and the next, the construction given in Sec.

25 for the case of plane sets can be carried out in an abstract setting, whose

very generality greatly enhances its range of applicability.

    Guided by the above properties of m, we introduce


  DEFINITION 1. A set function μ(A) is called a measure if

    1)The domain of definition  of μ is a semiring;
                                        μ

  2)μ is real and nonnegative;

  3)μ is additive in the sense that if A is a set in  such that
                                                              μ





        where A, . . ., A are pairwise disjoint sets in , then
                  1nμ





    Remark. It follows from Ø = Ø ∪ Ø that


                                    μ(Ø) = 2μ(Ø),


and hence


                                        μ(Ø) = 0.


  THEOREM 1. Let μ be a measure on a semiring  and suppose the sets A,
                                                            μ

A, . . ., A, where A, . . ., A are disjoint subsets of A, all belong to . Then
1n1nμ





    Proof. By Lemma 1, p. 33, there is a finite expansionwith A, . . ., A as its first n terms, where
      1n


                        A ∈ ,A ∪ A = Ø(k ≠l)
                          kμki


for all k, l = 1, 2, . . . . Hence





since μ is nonnegative and additive.


  THEOREM 2. Let μ be a measure on a semiring , and suppose the sets A,
                                                            μ

A, . . ., A all belong to  and satisfy the condition
1nμ





Then





    Proof. According to Lemma 2, p. 33, there is a finite system of pairwise

disjoint sets B, . . ., B belonging to  such that each of the sets A, A, . . .,
              1tμ1

A has a finite expansion
n





with respect to certain of the sets B, where each index s ∈ M belongs to at
                                        s0

least one of the sets M (recall footnote 16, p. 33). Hence each term in the
                          k

sum





appears at least once in the double sumIt follows that





    COROLLARY. If A ⊂ A', then μ(A)  μ(A′).


  Proof. Choose n = 1.


  It will be recalled that the first step in constructing Lebesgue measure of

plane sets was to extend measure from rectangles to elementary sets, i.e., to

finite unions of disjoint rectangles. We now consider the abstract analogue of

this process:

    DEFINITION 2. A measure μ is called an extension of a measure m if 
                                                                                          m

⊂  and μ(A) = m(A) for every A ∈ .
    μm


  THEOREM  3. Any  measure  m  defined  on  a  semiring  has  a  unique
                                                                        m

extension μ defined on the ring (), i.e., the minimal ring generated by 
                                          m

m.

    Proof. By Theorem 3, p. 34, every set A ∈ () has a finite expansion
                                                            m





where the sets B, . . ., B are pairwise disjoint and belong to . Let
                  1nm





Then μ is obviously real, nonnegative and additive. Moreover, the quantity

μ(A) defined by (2) is independent of the expansion (1). In fact,

suppose A has another expansion of the formwhere the sets C, . . ., C are pairwise disjoint and belong to . Then, since
                  1lm

the intersections B ∩ C all belong to , it follows from the additivity of
                    klm

the measure m that





and hence





as  asserted.  This  proves  the  existence  of  the  extension  μ.  To  prove  the

uniqueness of μ, suppose m has another extension μ′, and let A be the set (1).

Then, by the additivity of μ′,





Hence, since every set A ∈ () has a representation of the form (1), the
                                        m

extensions μ and μ′ coincide.


  Remark.  As  already  noted,  the  proof  of Theorem  3  is  a  repetition  in

abstract language of the extension of measure from the semiring of rectangles

to the minimal ring generated by this semiring, i.e., the class of elementary

sets.


  26.2. Countably additive measures. Many problems in analysis involve

unions of countably many sets, as well as unions of only finitely many sets.

Correspondingly, the (finite) additivity imposed on measures in Definition 1

turns out to be inadequate, and it is natural to introduce a stronger kind of

additivity:


  DEFINITION 2. A measure μ with domain of definition  is said to be
                                                                        μ

countably additive or σ-additive iffor all sets A, A, ... ,A, ... ∈  satisfying the conditions
                1nμ





  Example. According to Theorem 10,  p.  265,  Lebesgue  measure  in  the

plane is σ-additive.


  THEOREM  4. Suppose  a  σ-additive  measure  m  on  a  semiring  is
                                                                                      m

extended to a measure μ on the ring (). Then μ is also σ-additive.
                                                m


  Proof. Suppose


                      A ∈ () B ∈ () (n = 1, 2, ...)
                                  mnm


and





where


                                B ∩ B = Ø(k ≠ l).
                                  kl


Then, by Theorem 3, p. 34, there exist finite expansions





where


                      A ∩ A = Ø,B ∩ B = Ø(k ≠ l).
                        klnknl


Let


                                    C = B ∩ A.
                                      nijnjjThen the sets C are pairwise disjoint and
                nij








Therefore







since m is σ-additive on , and moreover
                              m







by the definition of the measure μ. Comparing (3)–(6), we find that





(the sums over i and j are finite, while those over n are convergent).


Next we generalize Theorems 1 and 2 to the case of σ-additive measures:


  THEOREM  1′. Let  μ be  a  σ-additive  measure  on  a  semiring , and
                                                                                    μ

suppose the sets A, A, . . ., A, . . ., where A, . . ., A, . . . are pairwise
                        1k1k

disjoint subsets of A, all belong to . Then
                                          μ





    Proof. By Theorem 1,for all n = 1, 2, . . . . Taking the limit as n → ∞, we get (7).


  THEOREM 2′. Let μ be a σ-additive measure on a semiring  and suppose
                                                                          μ

the sets A, A, . . ., A, . . . all belong to  and satisfy the condition
            1kμ





Then





  Proof. By Theorem 4, we can assume that μ is defined on the ring (),
                                                                                        μ

instead  of  just  on  the  semiring .  In  fact,  if  μ  is  σ-additive,  so  is  its
                                          μ

extension on (), which we continue to denote by μ, and the validity of (8)
                    μ

on () obviously implies its validity on . The sets
        μμ





belong to () and clearly satisfy the conditions
                μ





Therefore





  Problem 1. Let X = {x, x, . . .} be any countable set, and let p, p, . . . be
                            1212

positive numbers such thatOn the set  of all subsets of X, define a measure μ by the formula
              μ





where the sum is over all n such that x ∈ A. Prove that μ is a σ-additive
                                              n

measure, with μ(X) = 1.

    Comment. This kind of measure arises quite naturally in many problems

of probability theory.


  Problem 2. Let X be the set of all rational points in the closed unit interval

[0, 1], and let  be the set of all intersections of the set X with arbitrary
                  μ

closed, open and half-open subintervals of [0, 1], including the degenerate

closed intervals consisting of a single point. Prove that  is a semiring.
                                                                        μ

Define a measure μ on  by the formula
                            μ


                                    μ(A) = b – a,
                                        ab


where A is the intersection of X with any of the intervals [a, b], (a, b), (a,
        ab

b], [a, b). Prove that μ is additive, but not σ-additive.


  Hint. Although μ(X) = 1, X is a countable union of single-element sets,

each of measure zero.


  Problem 3. Let μ be a measure which is additive, but not σ-additive. Prove

that

    a)Theorem 1′ continues to hold for μ;

    b)Theorem 2′ fails to hold for μ.


  Hint. Use Problem 2.


  Problem 4. Given a measure μ on a semiring , suppose
                                                          μwhenever  the  sets A, A,  .  .  ., A,  .  .  .  all  belong  to   and  satisfy  the
                            1kμ

condition





Prove that μ is σ-additive.


  Comment. It is often easier to verify that μ has this property than to prove

the σ-additivity of μ directly.



27.Extensions of Measures


  Any measure m defined on a semiring  can be extended to a measure
                                                    m

defined on the ring (), i.e., the minimal ring generated by . However,
                            mm

if m is σ-additive, we can extend m to a measure defined on a much larger

class  of  sets  than ().  This  is  done  by  the  abstract  analogue  of  the
                            m

procedure  used  in Sec. 25.2  to  construct  Lebesgue  measure  in  the  plane.

                                  2
Assuming that  has a unit, we begin with the analogues of Definitions
                    m

2–5, pp. 259–260.


  DEFINITION 1. Let m be a σ-additive measure on a semiring  with a unit
                                                                            m

E. Then by the outer measure of a set A ⊂ E is meant the number





where the greatest lower bound is taken over all coverings of A by a finite or

countable system of sets B ∈ .
                              km


  DEFINITION 2. By the inner measure of a set A ⊂ E is meant the number


                              μ(A) = m(E) – μ*(E – A).
                              *


Remark. By the exact analogue of Theorem 3, p. 258, it follows that


                                    μ(A)  μ*(A).
                                      *  DEFINTION 3. A set A is said to be (Lebesgue) measurable if


                                    μ(A) = μ*(A),
                                      *


i.e., if its inner and outer measures coincide.


  DEFINITION 4. If  a  set  A  is  measurable, the number μ(A) equal  to  the

                                                                                    3
common value of μ(A) and μ*(A) is called the Lebesgue measure of A.
                    *


  Remark. Clearly, a set A ⊂ E is measurable if and only if




In particular, it follows from (1) that if A is measurable, so is E − A.


  THEOREM 1. If A is any set and {A} is any finite or countable system of
                                            n

sets such that





then





  Proof. Exactly analogous to that of Theorem 4, p. 259. 

    THEOREM  2. Every  set A ∈ () is  measurable, with  Lebesgue
                                                m

measure equal to (A), where  is the extension of m from the semiring 
                                                                                          m

to the ring ().
                m


  Proof. Exactly analogous to that of Theorem 5, p. 259. 


  THEOREM 3. A set A is measurable if and only if, given any ε > 0, there is a

set B ∈ () such that
              m


                                    μ(A Δ B) < ε.
                                      *


  Proof. Exactly analogous to that of Theorem 6, p. 261.   THEOREM 4. The system  of all measurable sets is a ring.
                                μ


  Proof. Exactly analogous to that of Theorem 7, p. 262 and its corollary. 

    Remark. Obviously E is the unit of , so that  is an algebra of sets
                                                  μμ

(see p. 31).


  THEOREM 5. The set function μ(A) is additive on .
                                                              μ


  Proof. Exactly analogous to that of Theorem 8, p. 263. 


  THEOREM 6. The set function μ(A) is σ-additive on .
                                                                μ


  Proof. Exactly analogous to that of Theorem 10, p. 265. 


  Remark.  Thus  μ  is  a  σ-additive  measure  of  the  system   of  all
                                                                                μ

measurable sets. This measure is called the Lebesgue extension of the original

measure m.


  THEOREM 7. The system  of all measurable sets is a Borel algebra with
                                  μ

unit E.


  Proof.  Recall  from  p.  35  that  a  Borel  algebra  is  closed  under  the

operations  of  taking  countable  unions  and  intersections.  The  proof  is  the

exact analogue of that of Theorem 9, p. 264. 


  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  an  arbitrary  measurable  set  can  be

approximated to within a set of measure zero by a set of a very special kind:


  THEOREM 8. Given any set A ∈ , there are sets
                                          μ


                B ∈ ()(B ⊂ B ⊂ . . . ⊂ B ⊂ . . .)
                  nkmn1n2nk


and corresponding sets





such that    Proof. Given any n, we can cover A by a union





of sets Δ ∈  such that
        nrm





Let





so that, in particular, B ⊃ B ⊃ . . . ⊃ B ⊃ . . . . Then it is easy to see that
                          12n





where δ ∈  . Next let
        nsm





so that, in particular,





Then obviously B ∈ () and B ⊂ B ⊂  .  .  . ⊂ B ⊂  .  .  .  .
                      nkmn1n2nk

Moreover





since B is an intersection of sets containing A. It follows thatOn the other hand, B ⊂ B ⊂ C for every n, and therefore
                              nn





Taking the limit as n → ∞, we get


                                      μ(B)  μ(A),


which, together with (2), implies μ(A) = μ(B). 


  Our construction of the Lebesgue extension of a measure m defined on a

semiring  must be modified somewhat if  fails to have a unit. We
            mm

continue to use Definition 1 to define the outer measure μ*, but μ* is now

defined only on the system  of all sets with coverings
                                  μ*





such that




Since Definition 2 is meaningless in the absence of a unit, we now define

measurable sets by using the property figuring in Theorem 3:


  DEFINITION 3′. A set A is said to be (Lebesgue) measurable if, given any ε

> 0, there is a set B ∈ () such that μ*(A  B) < ε.
                                m


  DEFINITION 4′. If a set A is measurable, the number μ(A) equal to its outer

measure μ*(A) is called the (Lebesgue) measure of A.


  Remark. Note that Definitions 3′ and 4′ are equivalent to Definitions 3 and

4 if  has a unit.
      m


  In the case where  has no unit, Theorems 4–6 continue to hold, since
                          m

the proofs of Theorems 5 and 6 do not require  to have a unit, while the
                                                          mproof of Theorem 4 can easily be freed of this requirement (see Problem 4).

However, Theorem 7 now takes a new form (see Problem 5). As before, the

σ-additive measure μ on the system  of all measurable sets is called the
                                              μ

Lebesgue extension of the original measure m.


  Remark. There is an interesting analogy between the construction of the

Lebesgue  extension  of  a  measure m  defined  on  a  semiring   and  the
                                                                              m

process of completing a metric space. Let  be the extension of m from the

semiring  to the ring (), and suppose we regard (A  B) as the
            mm

distance between the elements A, B ∈ (). Then () becomes a metric
                                                  mm

space (in general, incomplete), whose completion, according to Theorem 3, is

just the system  of all Lebesgue-measurable sets. However, note that from
                    μ

a metric point of view, two sets A, B ∈  are indistinguishable if μ(A  B)
                                                  μ

= 0.


  Problem 1. Let m be a σ-additive measure on a semiring  with a unit E,
                                                                        m

let μ be the Lebesgue extension of m, and let  be an arbitrary σ-additive

extension of m. Prove that (A) = μ(A) for every measurable set A on which 

 is defined.


  Hint. First show that μ(A)  (A)  μ*(A).
                            *


  Problem 2. Let m be the same as in the preceding problem, and let  be

the extension of m to a measure defined on ().  Prove  that  the  outer
                                                            m

measure of a set A ⊂ E is given by





where the greatest lower bound is taken over all coverings of A by a finite or

countable system of sets B ∈ ().
                              km


  Problem 3. State and prove the analogues of Theorem 11, p. 266 and its

corollary for an arbitrary σ-additive measure μ defined on a Borel algebra 
                                                                                          μ

with unit E.  Problem 4. Give a proof of Theorem 7 valid in the case where  fails to
                                                                                μ

have a unit.


  Hint. Suppose A, A ∈ . Then A ∪ A ∈ , by the same proof as
                      12μ12μ

before (cf. p. 262). Moreover, there are sets B, B ∈ () such that
                                                    12m





  But


                (A – A) Δ (B – B) ⊂(A Δ B) ∪(A Δ B),
                    12121122


and hence μ*(A  B) < ε where B = B – B ∈ (). Therefore A – ∈ .
                                            12m1μ

To prove A ∩ A that and A  A belong to , use the formulas
            1212μ


                              A ∩ A = A – (A – A),
                                12112


                          A Δ A = (A – A) ∪ (A – A).
                              121221


  Problem 5. Given a measure m on a semiring  with no unit, let μ be the
                                                            m

Lebesgue extension of m and  the corresponding system of all measurable
                                    μ

sets. Prove that

  a) is a δ-ring (see p. 35);
          μ

    b)The set





        belongs to  if and only if there is a constant C > 0 such that
                        μ





        for all n = 1, 2, . . .


  Comment.  The  necessity  of  the  condition  (3)  is  obvious,  since  our

measures are always finite.  Problem 6. Let μ and  be the same as in the preceding problem. Prove
                                μ

that the system of all sets B ∈  which are subsets of a fixed set A ∈  is
                                      μμ

a Borel algebra with unit A.


  Problem 7. A measure μ is said to be complete if every subset of a set of

measure zero is measurable, i.e., if A' ⊂ A, μ(A) = 0 implies A' ∈ . (If A'
                                                                                  μ

∈ , then obviously μ(A′) = 0.) Prove that the Lebesgue extension of any
    μ

measure m is complete.


  Hint. If A' ⊂ A and μ(A) = 0, then μ*(A′) = 0. But Ø ∈ () and μ*(A′ 
                                                                            m

 Ø) = μ*(A′) = 0.


  Problem 8. Let  be a measure defined on a ring . For example,  might

be the extension of a measure m originally defined on a semiring  to a
                                                                                    m

measure defined on the minimal ring  = () generated by . Then a set
                                                      mm

A is said to be Jordan measurable if, given any ε > 0, there are sets A',A'' ∈ 

 such that


                          A' ⊂ A ⊂ A'',(A'' A') < ε.


Prove that the system * of all Jordan-measurable sets is a ring containing .

    Problem 9. Let ,  and * be the same as in the preceding problem,

and  let   be  the  system  of  all  sets A  such  that  there  is  a  set B ∈ 

containing A. Given any set A ∈ , let








(since Ø ⊂ A always contains a set in ). Prove that

    a)(A)  (A);

    b)The ring * coincides with the system of all sets A ∈  for which 

        (A) = (A);

  c)If        where A, A, . . ., A all belong to , then
                    1n





  d)If A, . . ., A are pairwise disjoint sets contained in a set A, then
            1n





  By the Jordan measure of a set A ∈ *, we mean the number μ(A) equal

to the common value of (A) and (A). Prove that μ is a measure on * = 

μ.


  Comment. The measure μ is called the Jordan extension of the measure .

If  is itself an extension of a measure m originally defined on a semiring 

m, we write * = *(m) and call μ the Jordan extension of the measure m,

as well as of the “intermediate” measure .


  Problem 10. Given two measures  and  defined on rings  and ,
                                              1212

let μ and μ be their Jordan extensions onto the larger rings  =  and 
    12μ1

 = . Prove that μ and μ coincide if and only if
        μ212


                      1 ⊂ μ2, 1(A) = μ2(A) for all A ∈ 1,


                      2 ⊂ μ1, 2(A) = μ1(A) for all A ∈ 2,


  Problem 11. Let  be the measure defined in Sec. 25.1 on the ring  of all

elementary sets (i.e., all finite unions of disjoint rectangles with sides parallel

to the coordinate axes), and let μ be the Jordan extension of . Prove that μ

does  not  depend  on  the  particular  choice  of  the  underlying  rectangular

coordinate system. In other words, prove that μ (as well as the corresponding

ring * = ) does not change if all the sets in  are subjected to the same
            μ

shift and rigid rotation.  Problem 12. We say that a set A is a set of uniqueness for a measure m if

    1)There is an extension of m defined on A;

  2)If μ and μ are two such extensions, then μ(A) = μ(A).
            1212

Prove that the system of sets of uniqueness of a measure m defined on a

semiring  coincides with the ring * = *() of sets which are Jordan
            mm

measurable  (with  respect  to m).  In  other  words,  prove  that  the  Jordan

extension of a measure m originally defined on a semiring  is the unique
                                                                        m

extension of m to a measure defined on * = *(), but that the extension
                                                            m

of m to a larger system is no longer unique.


  Problem 13. Prove that if a set A is Jordan measurable, then

  a)A is Lebesgue measurable;

    b)The Jordan and Lebesgue measures of A coincide.

Prove that every Jordan extension of a σ-additive measure is σ-additive.


  Problem 14. Give an example of a set which is Lebesgue measurable, but

not Jordan measurable.


  Problem 15. We say that a set A is a set of σ-uniqueness for a σ-additive

measure m if

    1)There is a σ-additive extension of m defined on A;

  2)If μ and μ are two such extensions, then μ(A) = μ(A).
            1212

Prove  that  the  system  of  sets  of  σ-uniqueness  of  a  σ-additive  measure m

defined  on  a  semiring   coincides  with  the  system  of  sets  which  are
                              m

Lebesgue measurable (with respect to m).


  Hint.  To  show  that  every  Lebesgue-measurable  set A  is  a  set  of  σ-

uniqueness for m, choose any ε > 0. Then there is a set B ∈  = ()
                                                                                m

such that μ*(A  B) < ε. If μ is any extension of m defined on A (and on ),

then μ(B) = (B), where  is the unique extension of m onto . Moreover,

μ(A  B)  μ*(A  B)  ε, and hence |μ(A) − (B)| < ε. Therefore |μ(A) −
                                                                                    1

μ(A)| < 2ε if μ and μ are two σ-additive extensions of m defined on A (and
212on ). Hence μ(A) = μ(A), by the arbitrariness of ε.
                12


  Problem 16. Let m be a σ-additive measure defined on a semiring , and
                                                                                    m

let  be the domain of the Lebesgue extension of m. Let m′ be a σ-additive

extension of m to a semiring  such that
                                    m′


                                    m ⊂ m ⊂ ,


  and let ′ be the domain of the Lebesgue extension of m′. Prove that ′ =

.




  1
 We now draw freely from the material in Sec. 4, on systems of sets.

  2
 The case where  fails to have a unit will be discussed later (after Theorem 7).
                    m

  3
 It turns out, of course, that μ is a measure as defined in Sec. 26.1 (see Theorem 5, where the
additivity of μ is proved). In particular, this justifies the use of the notation  for the system of all
                                                                      μ
measurable sets.                                          8



                              INTEGRATION









28. Measurable Functions


    28.1. Basic properties of measurable functions. Given any two sets X

and Y, let  be a system of subsets of X and ′ a system of subsets of Y.

Then an abstract function y = f(x) defined on X and taking values in Y is said

                                                      −1
to be (, ′)-measurable if A ∈ ′ implies f(A) ∈ .


                                                              1
  Example. Let X and Y  both  be  the  real  line R,  so  that y  =  f(x)  is  a

“function of a real variable.” Moreover, let  and ′ both be the system of

                                        1
all  open  (or  closed)  subsets  of R.  Then  our  definition  of  measurability

reduces to that of continuity (recall Sec. 9.6). On the other hand, if we choose

                                        1
both  and ′ to be the system  of all Borel sets on the real line (recall p.

36),  our  definition  becomes  that  of  a Borel-measurable  (or  simply B-

measurable) function.


  In what follows, we will be primarily concerned with the notion of real

functions measurable with respect to some underlying measure μ, this being

the case of greatest interest from the standpoint of integration theory. More

                                                      1
exactly, let X be any set and Y the real line R, with  =  the domain of
                                                                        μ
                                                                          1
definition of some σ-additive measure μ and ′ the system  of all Borel

            1
sets B ⊂ R. For simplicity, we assume that  has a unit equal to X itself.
                                                        μ

Moreover, since any σ-additive measure can be extended onto a Borel algebra(by Theorem 7, p. 277), we might as well assume from the outset that  is a
                                                                                    μ

Borel algebra. These considerations suggest


  DEFINITION 1. Given a σ-additive measure μ defined on a Borel algebra 

μ of subsets of a set X, where X is the unit of μ, let y = f(x) be a real
                                    1
function defined on X, and let  be the set of all Borel sets on the real line.

                                                                        −1
Then the function f is said to be μ-measurable (on X) if if f(A) ∈  for
                                                                                      μ
              1−11
every A ∈ , or equivalently if f() ⊂ .
                                                      μ


  THEOREM 1. A function f is μ-measurable if and only if the set {x:f(x) < c}

is μ-measurable (i.e., belongs to ) for every real c.
                                        μ


  Proof. If f is μ-measurable, then obviously so is {x:f(x) < c}, since (− ∞, c)

is a Borel set. Conversely, let Σ be the system of all semi-infinite intervals (−

                      −1
∞, c), and suppose f(Σ) ⊂ . Since (Σ), the Borel closure of Σ (see p.
                                    μ
                                        1
36), coincides with the system  of all Borel sets on the line (why?), we

have

                      −1−−
                    f() = f((Σ)) = (f(Σ)) ⊂ ()
                                                                  μ


(recall Problem 3e, p. 36). But () = , since  is a Borel algebra, and
                                          μμμ

hence


                                    −11
                                  f() ⊂ . 
                                                  μ


  THEOREM 2. Let {f} be a sequence of μ-measurable functions on X, and
                        n

let f be a function on X such that




for every x ∈ X. Then f is itself μ-measurable.


  Proof. First we verify thatIn fact, if f(x) < c, there is an integer k > 0 such that





and then for this k, there is an integer n > 0 so large that





for all m > n. Therefore every x belonging to the left-hand side of (1) also

belongs to the right-hand side. Conversely, if x belongs to the right-hand side

of (1), there is a k such that (2) holds for all sufficiently large m. But then f(x)

< c, i.e., x belongs to the left-hand side of (1).

    Now, since the functions f are μ-measurable, the sets
                                  m






all belong to , and hence so does the right-hand side of (1), since  is a
                μμ

Borel algebra. Therefore {x:f(x)< c} ∈ . But then f is μ-measurable, by
                                                  μ

Theorem 1. 


  THEOREM 3. A B-measurable function of a μ-measurable function is itself

μ-measurable.


  Proof. Let f(x) = φ[ψ(x)], where φ is B-measurable and ψ is μ-measurable.

          1−1
If A ⊂ R is any B-measurable  set,  then  its  preimage A′ = φ(A)  is B-

                                                  −1
measurable, and hence the preimage A″ = ψ(A′) is μ-measurable. But A″ = f

−1
(A), and hence f is μ-measurable. 


    COROLLARY. A continuous function of a μ-measurable function is itself μ-

measurable.


  Proof. A continuous function is clearly B-measurable. 


    28.2.  Simple  functions.  Algebraic  operations  on  measurablefunctions. A function f is said to be simple if it is μ-measurable and takes no

more than countably many distinct values. This notion clearly depends on the

choice of the measure μ.


  The structure of simple functions is clarified by


  THEOREM 4. A function f taking no more than countably many distinct

values y, y, . . . is μ-measurable if and only if the sets
        12


                      A = {x: f(x) = y}(n = 1, 2, . . .)
                        nn


are μ-measurable.


  Proof. Since each single-element set {y} is a Borel set, the set A, being
                                                  nn
                                                                1
the preimage of {y}, is measurable if f is measurable. Conversely, suppose
                    n
                                                          −1
the sets A are all measurable. Then the preimage f(B) of any Borel set B ⊂
          n
1
R is measurable, being a union





of  no  more  than  countably  many  measurable  sets A.  But  then f  is
                                                                    n

measurable. 


The relation between measurable functions and simple functions is shown by


  THEOREM  5. A  function  f  is  μ-measurable  if  and  only  if  it  can  be

represented  as  the  limit  of  a  uniformly  convergent  sequence  of  simple

functions.


  Proof.  If f  is  the  (uniform)  limit  of  a  convergent  sequence  of  simple

functions, then f is μ-measurable by Theorem 2, since simple functions are μ-

measurable by definition. Conversely, given any μ-measurable function f, let





where m and n are positive integers. Then the functions f are simple and
                                                                      nmoreover converge uniformly to f as n → ∞, since





  The  next  few  theorems  show  that  the  class  of  measurable  functions  is

closed under the usual algebraic operations.


  THEOREM 6. If f and g are measurable, then so is f + g.


  Proof. First let f and g be simple functions, taking value y, y, . . . and z,
                                                                        121

z, . . ., respectively. Then the sum h = f + g can only take the values c = y +
2iji

z, where each such value is taken on a set of the form
j





There are no more than countably many values w of the function h = f + g,

and moreover each set {x:h(x) = c} is measurable, since the right-hand side
                                        ij

of (3) is clearly measurable. Therefore h = f + g is a simple function.

    Now let f and g be arbitrary measurable functions, and let {f} and {g}
                                                                              nn

be  sequences  of  simple  functions  converging  uniformly  to f  and g,

respectively, as in the proof of Theorem 5.  Then  the  sequence  of  simple

functions  {f  + g}  converges  uniformly  to f  +  g,  and  hence f  +  g  is
            nn

measurable, by Theorem 5. 


  THEOREM 7. If  f  is  measurable, then  so  is  cf, where  c  is  an  arbitrary

constant.


  Proof. Obviously, the product of a simple function and a constant is again

simple. But if {f} is a sequence of simple functions converging uniformly to
                  n

f,  then  {cf}  converges  uniformly  to cf,  and  hence cf  is  measurable,  by
          n

Theorem 5. 


  THEOREM 8. If f and g are measurable, then so is f − g.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of Theorems 6 and 7.   THEOREM 9. If f and g are measurable, then so is fg.


  Proof. Clearly,





But the expression on the right is a measurable function, by Theorems 6–8

and  the  fact  that  the  square  of  a  measurable  function  is  measurable  (this

follows from the corollary to Theorem 3). 


  THEOREM 10. If f is measurable, then so is 1/f, provided f does not vanish.


  Proof. We have





if c > 0,





if c < 0, and





if c = 0. But in each case the set on the right is measurable. 


    COROLLARY. If f and g are measurable, then so is f/g, provided g does not

vanish.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of Theorems 9 and 10. 


    28.3.  Equivalent  functions.  The  values  of  a  function  can  often  be

neglected on a set of measure zero. This suggests


  DEFINITION 2. Two functions f and g defined on the same set are said to beequivalent (with respect to a measure μ) if


                                  μ{x:f(x) ≠ g(x) } = 0


  A property is said to hold almost everywhere (on E) if it holds at all points

(of E) except possibly on a set of measure zero. Thus two functions f and g

are said to be equivalent (written f ∼ g) if they coincide almost everywhere.


  THEOREM 11. Given two functions f and g continuous on an interval E,

suppose f and g are equivalent (with respect to Lebesgue measure μ on the

line). Then f and g coincide.


  Proof. Suppose f(x) ≠ g(x) at some point x ⊂ E, so that f(x) − g(x) ≠
                        00000

0. Since f − g is continuous, there is a neighborhood of x (possibly one-
                                                                        0

sided) in which f − g is nonzero. This neighborhood has positive measure,

and hence


                                  μ{x:f(x) ≠ g(x) } > 0


  i.e., f and g cannot be equivalent, contrary to hypothesis. 


  Remark. Thus two continuous functions cannot be equivalent if they differ

at even a single point. However, discontinuous functions can obviously be

equivalent without being identical. For example, the Dirichlet function






  is equivalent to the function g(x) ≡ 0 (recall Problem 3, p. 268).


  THEOREM 12. A function f equivalent to a measurable function g is itself

measurable.


  Proof. It follows from Definition 2 that the sets {x:f(x) < c} and {x:g(x) <

c}  can  differ  only  by  a  set  of  measure  zero.  Hence  if  the  second  set  is

measurable, so is the first set. The proof is now an immediate consequence of

Theorem 1.     28.4.  Convergence  almost  everywhere.  Since  the  behavior  of

measurable  functions  on  sets  of  measure  zero  is  often  unimportant,  it  is

natural to introduce the following generalization of the ordinary notion of

convergence of a sequence of functions:


  DEFINITION 3. A sequence of functions {f(x)} defined on a space X is said
                                                  n

to converge almost everywhere to a function f(x) if




  for almost all x ∈X, i.e., if the set of points for which (4) fails to hold is of

measure zero.


                                                    n
  Example. The sequence {f(x)} = {(−x)}  defined  on  [0,  1]  converges
                                  n

almost everywhere to the function f(x) ≡ 0, in fact everywhere except at the

point x = 1.


  Theorem 2 now has the following generalization:


  THEOREM 2′. Let {f} be a sequence of μ-measurable functions on X, and
                        n

let f be a function on X such that





  almost  everywhere  on  X.  Then  f  is  itself μ-measurable, provided  μ is

          2
complete.


  Proof. If A is the set on which (5) holds, then μ(X − A) = 0. The function f

is measurable on A, by Theorem 2, and also on X − A, since every function is

measurable on a set of measure zero if μ is complete (why?). Hence f is

measurable on the whole set X = A ∪ (X − A). 


    28.5. Egorov’s theorem. The following important theorem shows the

relation  between  the  concepts  of  convergence  almost  everywhere  and

uniform convergence:


  THEOREM 12 (Egorov). Let {f} be a sequence of measurable functions
                                      nconverging almost everywhere on a measurable set E to a function f. Then,

given any δ > 0, there exists a measurable set E ⊂ E such that
                                                      δ

  1) μ(E) > μ(E) − δ;
          δ

  2) {f} converges uniformly to f on E.
        nδ


  Proof. The function f is measurable, by Theorem 2′. Let





Thus, for fixed m and n  is the set of all points x such that





holds for all i > n. Moreover, let





It follows from (6) that




                                                          3
and hence, by the corollary to Theorem 11, p. 267, given any m and any δ >

0, there is an n(m) such that
                0





Let





Then E  satisfies  the  two  conditions  of  the  theorem.  The  fact  that  the
        δ

sequence {f} is uniformly convergent on E is almost obvious, since if x ∈
            nδ

E, then, given any m = 1, 2, . . . ,
δfor every i > n(m).
                0

  To verify condition 2), we now estimate the measure of the set E − E,
                                                                                          δ
                          mm
noting first that μ(E − E) = 0 for every m. In fact, if x ∈ E − E, then there
                                                                0

are arbitrarily large values of i such that





which means that the sequence {f} cannot converge to f at the point x.
                                        n0
                      m
Therefore  μ(E  −  E)  =  0,  as  asserted,  since  {f}  converges  to f  almost
                                                            n

everywhere, by hypothesis. It follows from (7) that





Therefore








and hence μ(E) > μ(E) − δ. 
              δ


  Problem 1. Prove that the Dirichlet function






is measurable on every interval [a, b].


  Problem 2. Do the same for the function                                                                          f(x)
  Problem 3. Suppose f(x) is measurable on [a, b]. Is g(x) = e measurable

on [a, b]?


  Problem 4. Prove that if f is measurable, then so is |f|.


  Problem 5. Let {f} be a sequence of measurable functions converging
                        n

almost  everywhere  to  a  function f.  Prove  that  {f}  converges  almost
                                                                n

everywhere to a function g if and only if f and g are equivalent.


  Problem 6. A sequence {f} of μ-measurable functions is said to converge
                                n

in measure to a function f if




                                                        n
for  every  δ  >  0.  Prove  that  if  a  sequence  {f}  of  measurable  functions

converges to f almost everywhere, then it converges to f in measure.

Hint. Let A be the set (of measure zero) on which {f} fails to converge to f,
                                                              n

and let










Then the sets (8) are all measurable (why?), and μ(R(δ)) → μ(M) as n → ∞,
                                                              n

since R(δ) ⊃ R(δ) ⊃. Prove that M ⊂ A and hence that μ(M) = 0 (as
      12

always, we assume that μ is complete). It follows that μ(R(δ)) → 0 as n →
                                                                      n

∞. Now use the fact that E(δ) ⊂ R(δ).
                              nn  Problem 7. Let {f} be a sequence of measurable functions converging in
                      n

measure to a function f. Prove that {f} converges in measure to a function g
                                          n

if and only if f and g are equivalent.


  Problem 8. Given any positive integer k, consider the function







defined on the half-open interval (0, 1]. Show that the sequence




converges in measure to zero, but does not converge at any point whatsoever.


  Comment.  Thus  the  converse  of  the  proposition  in Problem 6  is  false.

Instead we have the weaker proposition considered in the next problem.


  Problem 9. Prove that if a sequence {f} of functions converges to f in
                                                  n

measure,  then  it  contains  a  subsequence  {f}  converging  to f  almost
                                                        n
                                                        k

everywhere.


  Hint. Let {δ} be a sequence of positive numbers such that
                n





and let {ε} be a sequence of positive numbers such that
          n





Let {n} be a sequence of positive integers such that n > n and
      kkk−1


                      μ{x|f(x)| > δ)} < ε(k = 1, 2, . . .).
                            nk
                            kMoreover, let





Then μ(R) → μ(Q) as i → ∞, since R ⊃ R ⊃ · · · . On the other hand,
          i12





and hence μ(R) → 0, so that μ(Q) = 0. Now show that {f} converges to f on
              in
                                                                    k

E − Q.


  Problem 10. Prove that a function f defined on a closed interval [a, b] is μ-

measurable if and only if, given any ε > 0, there is a continuous function φ on

[a, b] such that μ{x:f(x) ≠ φ(x)} < ε.


  Hint. Use Egorov’s theorem.


  Comment. This result, known as Luzin’s theorem, shows that a measurable

function “can be made continuous by altering it on a set of arbitrarily small

measure.”



29. The Lebesgue Integral


  The concept of the Riemann integral, familiar from calculus, applies only

to functions which are either continuous or else do not have “too many”

points of discontinuity. Hence we cannot form the Riemann integral of a

general measurable function f. In fact, f may be discontinuous everywhere, or

it may even be meaningless to talk about the continuity of f in the case where

f  is  defined  on  an  abstract  set.  For  such  functions,  there  is  another  fully

developed notion of the integral, due to Lebesgue, which is more flexible that

the notion of the Riemann integral.

  Let f be a function defined on a closed interval [a, b] of the x-axis. Then

to form the Riemann integral of f, we divide [a, b] into many subintervals,

thereby  grouping  together  neighboring  points  of  the x-axis.  On  the  other

hand, as we will see below, the Lebesgue integral is formed by groupingtogether points of the x-axis at which the function f takes neighboring values.

In  other  words,  the  key  idea  of  the  theory  of  Lebesgue integration  is  to

partition the range of the function f rather than its domain. This immediately

makes it possible to extend the notion of integral to a very large class of

functions.

    Another advantage of the Lebesgue integral is that it is constructed in

exactly the same way for functions defined on an abstract “measure space”

(an arbitrary set X equipped with a measure) as for functions defined on the

real line. This is to be contrasted with the situation for the Riemann integral,

which  is  first  introduced  for  functions  of  a  single  real  variable  and  then

extended, with suitable modifications, to the case of functions of several real

variables,  but  fails  to  make  any  sense  at  all  for  functions  defined  on  an

abstract measure space.

  In what follows, unless the contrary is explicitly stated, we will consider

a σ-additive measure μ defined on a Borel algebra of subsets of a set X, with

X  as  the  unit.  We  will  assume  that  all  sets  under  consideration  are  μ-

measurable, and that all functions under consideration are defined and μ-

measurable on X.


    29.1. Definition and basic properties of the Lebesgue integral. Let f

be  a  simple  function,  i.e.,  a  μ-measurable  function  taking  no  more  than

countably many distinct values




Then by the (Lebesgue) integral of f over the set A, denoted by





we mean the quantity





where


                            A = {x:x ∈ A, f(x) = y},
                              nnprovided the series (2) is absolutely convergent. If the Lebesgue integral of f

exists, we say that f is integrable or summable (with respect to the measure μ)

on the set A.


  Example. Obviously,





  We now get rid of the restriction that the numbers (1) be distinct:


  LEMMA. Given a simple function f defined on a set A, suppose A is a union





of pairwise disjoint sets B such that f takes only one value c on B. Then f is
                            kkk

integrable on A if and only if the series





is absolutely convergent, in which case





  Proof. Each set


                              A = {x:x ∈ A, f(x) = y}
                                nn


                                                              4
is the union of the sets B for which c = y. Therefore
                            kkn





Moreover, since μ is nonnegative, we haveso that the series (2) is absolutely convergent if and only if the series (3) is

absolutely convergent. 


  THEOREM 1. Let f and g be simple functions integrable on a set A, and let k

be any constant. Then f + g and kf are integrable over A, and








  Proof. Suppose f takes distinct values y on sets F ⊂ A, while g takes
                                                  ii

distinct values z on sets G ⊂ A, where i, j = 1, 2, . . . . Then
                jj








Clearly, f + g takes the values c = y + z (not necessarily distinct) on the
                                      ijij

pairwise disjoint sets B = F ∪ G. It follows from
                          ijij





and the absolute convergence of the series (6) and (7) that the series





is absolutely convergent. Hence, by the lemma, f + g is integrable on A and







Comparing (6)–(8), we get (4). The proof of (5) is trivial. 


  THEOREM 2. Let f be a bounded simple function on A, where |f(x)|  M if x∈ A. Then f is integrable on A and





  Proof. If f takes values y on sets A ⊂ A (n = 1, 2, . . .), then
                              nn





where we have incidentally proved the integrability of f on A (how?). 


  Next we remove the restriction that f be a simple function:


    DEFINITION. A  measurable  function  f  is  said  to  be integrable  (or

summable) on a set A if there exists a sequence {f} of integrable simple
                                                              n

functions converging uniformly to f on A. The limit





is then called the (Lebesgue) integral of f over the set A, denoted by





This definition relies tacitly on the following conditions being met:

1)The limit (9) exists (and is finite) for any uniformly convergent sequence

  of integrable simple functions on A;

2)For any given f, this limit is independent of the choice of the sequence

  {f};
    n

3)For simple functions, the definitions of integrability and of the integral

  reduce to those given on p. 294.

All  these  conditions  are  indeed  satisfied.  Condition  1)  is  an  immediate

consequence of the estimateimplied by Theorem 1 and 2. To prove 2), suppose the sequences {f} and 
                                                                                  n

 both converge uniformly to f, but





Let {φ} be the sequence
      n




Then {φ} converges uniformly to f, but
        n





fails to exist, contrary to condition 1). Finally, to prove 3), if f is simple, we

need only consider the trivial sequence {f} with general term f = f.
                                                nn


  THEOREM  1′. Theorem  1  continues  to  hold  if  f  and  g  are  arbitrary

measurable functions integrable on A.


  Proof.  An  immediate  consequence  of Theorem 1,  after  taking  suitable

uniform limits of integrable simple functions. 


  THEOREM 3. If φ is nonnegative and integrable on A and if |f(x)|  φ(x)

almost everywhere on A, then f is also integrable on A and





  Proof. If f and φ are simple functions, then, by subtracting a set of measure

zero from A, we get a set A′ which can be represented as a finite or countable

unionof subsets A ⊂ A′ such that
            n


                                f(x) = a, φ(x) = b
                                        nn


for all x ∈ A and
              n


                            |a|  b(n = 1, 2, . . .).
                              nn


Since φ is integrable on A, we have





(see Problem 3b). Therefore f is also integrable on A, and





Comparing (11) and (12), we get (10).

  In the case where f and φ are arbitrary measurable functions, let {f} and
                                                                                    n

{φ}  be  sequences  of  simple  functions  converging  uniformly  to f  and  φ,
n

respectively, constructed in the same way as in the proof of Theorem 5, p.

286. Then clearly


                          |f(x)|  φ(x)(n = 1, 2, . . .)
                            nn


on A′. Moreover each φ is integrable, since φ is integrable by hypothesis. It
                          n

follows that each f and hence f itself is integrable, where
                    n





Taking the limit as n → ∞, we again get (10). 


    COROLLARY. If f is bounded and measurable on A, then f is integrable on

A.  Proof. Choose φ(x) = M, where




    29.2. Some key theorems. We now prove some important properties of

the Lebesgue integral, regarded as a set function





defined on a system of measurable sets (with the integrand f held fixed).


  THEOREM 4. Let





be a finite or countable union of pairwise disjoint sets A, and suppose f is
                                                                    n

integrable on A. Then f is integrable on each A and
                                                      n





where the series on the right is absolutely convergent.


  Proof. First let f be a simple function, taking the values y, y, . . ., and let
                                                                      12


          B = {x:x ∈ A, f(x) = y},B = {x:x ∈ A, f(x) = y}
            kknknk


Then








Since f is integrable on A, the series yμ(B) converges absolutely, and
                                                  kk

hence so do the other series in (15). (Here we use the nonnegativity of the

measure μ.) In particular, f is integrable on each set A.
                                                              n    Next let f be an arbitrary measurable function integrable on A. Then,

given any ε > 0, there is a simple function g integrable on A such that




For g we have






as just shown, where g is integrable on each A and the series converges
                                                          n

absolutely. Hence, by (16), f is also integrable on each A and
                                                                  n








which, together with (17), implies the absolute convergence of the series





and the estimate





But (18) implies (14), since ε > 0 is arbitrary. 


    COROLLARY. If  f  is  integrable  on  A, then  f  is  integrable  on  every

measurable subset A′ ⊂ A.


  Proof. Think of A as the union of the disjoint sets A′ and A − A′. 


  Remark. A succinct way of expressing the property (14) is to say that the

set function (13) is σ-additive.  THEOREM 5 (Chebyshev’s inequality). If f is nonnegative and integrable

on A, then





  Proof. If


                              A′ = {x:x ∈ A, f(x)  c},


then





(see Problem 4a). 

    COROLLARY. If





then f(x) = 0 almost everywhere.

    Proof. By Chebyshev’s inequality,





for all n = 1, 2, . . . . Therefore





    THEOREM 6. If f is integrable on a set A, then, given any ε > 0, there is a δ

> 0 such that





for every measurable set E ⊂ A of measure less than δ.

    Proof. The proof is immediate if f is bounded, since then(see Problem 4c). In the general case, let








Then, by Theorem 4,





Let N be such that





and let





    Then μ(E) < δ implies








    Remark. The property figuring in Theorem 6 is expressed by saying that

the set function (13) is absolutely continuous with respect to the measure μ.


  Problem 1. Prove that the Dirichlet functionfails  to  have  a  Riemann  integral  over  any  interval  [a, b].  Prove  that  the

Lebesgue integral of f over any measurable set A exists and equals zero.


  Problem 2. Find the Lebesgue integral of the function







over the interval [a, b].


  Problem 3. Prove that

  a)If f is integrable on a set Z of measure zero, then





  b)If f is integrable on A, then





  for every subset A′ ⊂ A such that μ(A − A′) = 0.


  Comment. We can regard a) as a limiting case of Theorem 6.


  Problem 4. Prove that

  a)If f is nonnegative and integrable on A, then





  b)If f and g are integrable on A and f(x)  g(x) almost everywhere, then





  c)If f is integrable on A and m  f(x)  M almost everywhere, then    Problem 5. Prove that the existence of either of the integrals





implies the existence of the other.


  Problem 6. Let





be a finite or countable union of pairwise disjoint sets A, and suppose f is
                                                                    n

integrable on each A and satisfies the condition
                      n





Prove that f is integrable on A.


  Hint. If f is simple, with values y, y, . . ., let the sets B and B be the
                                          12knk

same as in the proof of Theorem 4. Then





The absolute convergence of (19) implies the convergence of





and hence the integrability of f on A. In the general case, let g be a simple

function approximating f, and show that (19) implies the convergence





so that g, and hence f, is integrable on A.  Comment. This is essentially the converse of Theorem 4.


  Problem 7. Let μ be a σ-additive measure defined on a Borel algebra 
                                                                                          μ

of subsets of a given set X, and let f be nonnegative and integrable on X (with

respect to μ). Prove that the set function





is  itself  a  σ-additive  measure  on ,  with  the  property  that F(A)  =  0
                                            μ

whenever μ(A) = 0.


  Problem 8. Suppose f is integrable on sets A, A, . . ., A, . . . such that
                                                      12n


                          A ⊃ A ⊃ . . . ⊃ A ⊃ . . . ,
                            12n


and let





Does





converge to






30. Further Properties of the Lebesgue Integral


    30.1. Passage to the limit in Lebesgue integrals. The problem of taking

limits behind the integral sign, or equivalently of integrating a convergent

series term by term, is often encountered in analysis. In the classical theory of

integration, it is proved that a sufficient condition for taking such a limit is

that the series (or sequence) in question be uniformly convergent. We now

examine the corresponding theorems for Lebesgue integrals, which constitutea rather far-reaching generalization of their classical counterparts.


  THEOREM 1 (Lebesgue’s bounded convergence theorem). Let {f} be a
                                                                                  n

sequence of functions converging to a limit f on A, and suppose


                      |f(x)|  φ(x)(x ∈ A, n = 1, 2, . . .),
                      n


where φ is integrable on A. Then f is integrable on A and





    Proof. Clearly |f(x)|  φ(x), and hence f is integrable, by Theorem 3, p.

297. Let






By Theorem 4, p. 298,





where the series on the right is absolutely convergent. By the same token,





Given any ε > 0, there is an integer m such that





since the series (1) converges. Moreover, φ(x) < m on A − B. By Egorov’s
                                                                        m

theorem (Theorem 12, p. 290), A − B can be represented in the form
                                          m


                                  A – B = C ∪ D,
                                        mwhere {f} converges uniformly to f on C and
        n





Let N be such that





on C if n > N. Then








and hence














which implies (1), since ε > 0 is arbitrary. 


    COROLLARY. If |f(x)|  M and f → f, then
                    nn





    Proof. Choose φ(x) = M, noting that every constant is integrable on A. 


  Remark. The values taken by a function on a set of measure zero have noeffect on its integral. Hence in Theorem 1 we need only assume that {f}
                                                                                        n

converges to f almost everywhere and that the inequality |f(x)|  φ(x) holds
                                                                      n

almost everywhere.


  THEOREM 2 (Levi). Suppose


                          f(x)  f(x)  . . .  f(x)  . . .
                          12n


on a set A, where the functions f are all integrable and
                                    n





for some constant M. Then the limit




                                                    5
exists (and is finite) almost everywhere on A. Moreover, f is integrable and





    Proof. It can be assumed that f(x)  0, since otherwise we need only
                                          1

replace the f by f − f. Let
            nn1


                            Ω = {x:x ∈ A, f(x) → ∞}.
                                                n


Then clearly





where




It follows from (2) and Chebyshev’s inequality (Theorem 5, p. 299) thatMoreover





since




But





for any r, and hence





Since r can be arbitrarily large, this implies


                                        μ(Ω) = 0,


thereby showing that the sequence {f(x)} has a finite limit f(x) for almost all
                                          n

x ∈ A.

    Now let


                              A = {x:r – 1  f (x) < r},
                                r


and let φ be the simple function such that


                        φ(x) = r if x ∈ A(r = 1, 2, . . .).
                                            r


Moreover, letSince the functions f and f are bounded on B and since
                      ns


                                    φ(x)  f (x) + 1,


we have








where we use the corollary to Theorem 1. But





and hence





for all s = 1, 2, . . . . Therefore





i.e., φ is integrable on A, with integral





Since f(x)  φ(x), the validity of (3) is now an immediate consequence of
      n

Lebesgue’s bounded convergence theorem (Theorem 1). 


    COROLLARY. If φ(x)  0and
                      kthen the series





converges almost everywhere on A and





    Proof. Apply Theorem 2 to the functions





    THEOREM 3 (Fatou). Let {f} be a sequence of nonnegative functions
                                      n

integrable on a set A, such that





Suppose {f} converges almost everywhere on A to a function f. Then f is
            n

integrable on A and





    Proof. Let





Then φ is measurable, since
      n





Moreover


                                  0  φ(x)  f(x),
                                        nnand hence φ is integrable, by Theorem 3, p. 297, with
            n





Clearly


                        φ(x)  φ(x)  . . .  φ(x)  . . .,
                          12n


and





almost everywhere. Applying Theorem 2 to the sequence {φ}, we find that f
                                                                      n

is integrable and





  30.2. The Lebesgue integral over a set of infinite measure. So far all

our  measures  have  been  finite  (except  for  Remark  3,  p.  267),  and  hence

everything said about the Lebesgue integral and its properties has been tacitly

understood to apply only to the case of functions defined on sets of finite

measure.  However,  one  often  deals  with  functions  defined  on  a  set X  of

infinite measure, for example, the real line equipped with ordinary Lebesgue

measure. We will confine ourselves to the case of greatest practical interest,

where X can be represented as a union





of countably many sets X, each of finite measure with respect to some σ-
                              n

additive measure μ defined on a σ-ring of subsets of X (the sets of finite

measure). Such a measure is called σ-finite. For example, Lebesgue measure

on  the  line,  in  the  plane,  or  more  generally  in n-space  is  σ-finite.  For

simplicity, and without loss of generality (why?), we will assume that the

sequence {X} is increasing, i.e., that
            nA  sequence  {X}  satisfying  the  conditions  (3)  and  (4)  will  be  called
                  n

exhaustive.  For  example,  the  sequence  {E}  in  Remark  3,  p.  267  is  an
                                                    n

exhaustive  sequence  (with  respect  to  ordinary  Lebesgue  measure),  whose

union is the whole plane.

                                                    6
    Now let f be a measurable function on X. Then f is said to be integrable

(or summable) on X if it is integrable on every measurable subset A ⊂ X and

if the limit





exists (and is finite) for every exhaustive sequence {X}. The limit (5) is then
                                                              n

called the (Lebesgue) integral of f over the set X, denoted by





    Remark 1. The limit (5) is independent of the choice of the exhaustive

sequence {X}. In fact, suppose
            n





where } is another exhaustive sequence. Define a new sequence {Ω}
                                                                                        n

such that

                        Ω = X,
                            11


                        Ω is any set of } containing Ω,
                            2k2k–1


                        Ω is any set of {X} containing Ω
                            2k+1n2k


(why do such sets exist?). Then {Ω} is exhaustive, but
                                        nfails to exist, contrary to hypothesis.


  Remark 2. The integral of a simple function is defined in the same way as

on  p.  294.  It  is  clear  that  a  necessary  (but  not  sufficient)  condition  for

integrability of a simple function f is that f take every nonzero value on a set

of finite measure.


    30.3.  The  Lebesgue  integral  vs.  the  Riemann  integral.  Finally  we

examine the relation between the Lebesgue integral and the Riemann integral,

restricting ourselves to the case of ordinary Lebesgue measure on the line:


  THEOREM 4. If the Riemann integral





exists, then f is Lebesgue integrable on [a, b] and





    Proof. Introducing the points of subdivision





                          n
we partition [a, b] into 2 subintervals. Let









be the corresponding Darboux sums, where M is the least upper bound and
                                                      nk

m the greatest lower bound on f on the subinterval x  x  x. By the
nkk−1k

definition of the Riemann integral,Consider the functions








Then clearly





Moreover,






and hence







Using (7) and Theorem 2, we find that








(see also Problem 2). Thereforeand hence




almost everywhere, by the corollary on p. 300. In other words,




almost everywhere. Comparing (8) and (9), we get (6). 


  Problem 1. Prove that





if the sequence {f} satisfies the conditions of Theorem 1 (as stated more
                    n

generally in the remark on p. 305) and if g is essentially bounded on A in the

sense that there is a constant M > 0 such that |g(x)|  M almost everywhere on

A.

    Comment. If g is essentially bounded on A, then the quantity






called the essential supremum of g on A, is finite.


  Problem 2. Prove that Theorem 2 remains valid if


                          f(x)  f(x)  . . .  f(x)  . . .
                          12n


and if (2) is replaced by the condition





  Problem 3. Consider the system  of all subsets of the real line containing

only  finitely  many  points,  and  let  the  measure  μ(A)  of  a  set A ∈  be

defined as the number of points in A. Prove that  a) is a ring without a unit;

  b)μ is not σ-finite.


  Problem 4. Why do we talk about a σ-ring rather than a σ-algebra on p.

308?


  Problem 5.  Prove  that  if  a  function f  vanishes  outside  a  set  of  finite

measure, then its Lebesgue integral as defined on p. 308 coincides with its

Lebesgue integral as previously defined.


  Problem 6. Show that the analogue of the definition on p. 296 cannot be

used  to  define  the  Lebesgue  integral  in  the  case  where A  is  of  infinite

measure.


  Hint.  Give  an  example  of  a  uniformly  convergent  sequence  {f}  of
                                                                                    n

integrable simple functions such that





fails to exist.


  Problem  7.  Which  of  the  theorems  of Sec.  29  continue  to  hold  for

integrals over sets of infinite measure?


  Hint. The corollary on p. 298 fails if A is of infinite measure.


  Problem 8. Verify that Theorems 1−3 of Sec. 30.1 continue to hold for

integrals over sets of infinite measure.


  Problem 9. Given a nonnegative function f, suppose the Riemann integral





exists for every ε > 0 and approaches a finite limit as ε → 0+, so that the

improper Riemann integralexists. Prove that f is Lebesgue integrable on [a, b] and





    Comment. On the other hand, if f is of variable sign and if





then the Lebesgue integral of f over [a, b] fails to exist, even if the improper

Riemann integral (10) exists. In fact, by Problem 5, p. 302, summability of f

would imply that of |f|.


  Problem 10. Prove that the integral





exists as an improper Riemann integral, but not as a Lebesgue integral.


  Problem 11. Suppose f  is  Riemann  integrable  over  an  infinite  interval

(such  an  integral  can  exist  only  in  the  improper  sense).  Prove  that f  is

Lebesgue  integrable  over  the  same  interval  if  and  only  if  the  improper

integral converges absolutely.


  Comment. For example, the function





is not Lebesgue integrable over (− ∞, ∞), sinceOn the other hand, f has an improper Riemann integral equal to








  1
 For simplicity, we often say “measurable” instead of “μ-measurable,” omitting explicit reference
to the underlying measure μ.

  2
 See Problem 7, p. 280.

  3
 See also Problem 3, p. 280.

  4
 The notation  calls for the sum over all k such that c = y.
                                                        kn

  5
 The function f can be defined in an arbitrary way on the set E where the limit (2) fails to exist, for
example, by setting f(x) = 0 on E.

  6−1
 A real function y = f(x) is now said to be measurable if the set f(A) ∩ X is measurable for
                                                                          n
every X and every Borel set A (this being the obvious slight generalization of Definition 1, p. 284).
      n                                          9



                          DIFFERENTIATION








  Let f be a summable function defined on a space X, equipped with a σ-

additive measure μ. Then the (Lebesgue) integral





exists for every measurable E ⊂ X, thereby defining a set function on the

system  of all measurable subsets of X. If X is the real line, equipped with
          μ

ordinary Lebesgue measure μ, and if E = [a, b] is a closed interval, we write

(1) simply as





or equivalently as





in  terms  of  the  new  dummy  variable  of  integration t  (here  we  anticipate

subsequent  notational  convenience).  Then  (2)  is  clearly  a  function  of  the

lower limit of integration a and the upper limit of integration b. Suppose we

fix a, but leave b variable, indicating this by replacing b by the symbol x.

Then (2) reduces to the “indefinite Lebesgue integral”with its upper limit of integration variable.

    Now let f be continuous, and let F have a continuous derivative. Then it

will be recalled from elementary calculus that the connection between the

operations  of  differentiation  and  integration  is  expressed  by  the  familiar

formulas








This immediately suggests two questions:

    1)Does (3) continue to hold for an arbitrary summable function f?

    2)What is the largest class of functions for which (4) holds?

These questions will be answered in Secs. 31–33. The study of the general set

function (1) will be resumed in Sec. 34.



31. Differentiation of the Indefinite Lebesgue Integral


    31.1. Basic properties of monotonic functions. We begin our study of

the indefinite Lebesgue integral





as  a  function  of  its  upper  limit  by  making  the  following  obvious  but

important  observation.  If f  is  nonnegative,  then  (1)  is  a  nondecreasing

function. Moreover, since every summable function f(t) is the difference


                                  f(t) = f(t) – f(t)
                                          +−


of  two  nonnegative  summable  functions  (which?),  the  integral  (1)  is  the

difference  between  two  nondecreasing  functions.  Hence,  the  study  of  the

Lebesgue integral as a function of its upper limit is closely related to thestudy of monotonic functions. Monotonic functions are interesting in their

own right, and have a number of simple and important properties which we

now discuss. Here all functions will be regarded as defined on some fixed

interval [a, b] unless the contrary is explicitly stated.


  DEFINITION 1, A function f is said to be nondecreasing if x  x implies
                                                                          12

f(x)  f(x) and nonincreasing if  x  x implies  f(x)  f(x). By  a
  121212

monotonic function is meant a function which is either nondecreasing or

nonincreasing.


  DEFINITION 2. Given any function f, the limit





(provided it exists) is called the right-hand limit of f at the point x, denoted
                                                                              0

by


                                        f(x + 0).
                                          0


Similarly, the limit





is called the left-hand limit of f at x, denoted by
                                        0


                                        f(x + 0).
                                          0


    Remark. If


                                f(x + 0) = f(x – 0).
                                    00


then clearly f is either continuous at x or has a removable discontinuity at x.
                                          00


  DEFINITION 3. A function f is said to be continuous from the right at x if
                                                                                      0                                    f(x = f(x + 0)
                                        00


and continuous from the left at x if
                                      0


                                    f(x = f(x – 0)
                                        00


    DEFINITION 4. By a discontinuity point of the first kind of a function f is

meant a point x at which the limits f(x + 0) and f(x − 0) exist but are
                  000

unequal. The difference


                                  f(x + 0) – f(x – 0)
                                    00


is then called the jump of f at x.
                                  0


  Example. Given no more than countably many points


                                  x x, . . ., x, . . .
                                    12n


in the interval [a, b], let


                                  h h, . . ., h, . . .
                                    12n


be corresponding positive numbers such that





Then the function





where the sum is over all n such that x < x, is obviously nondecreasing. A
                                              n

monotonic function of this particularly simple type is called a jump function.

A jump function such that


                              x < x < . . . < x < . . . ,
                                12nis called a step function. For an example of a jump function which is not a

step function, see Problem 1.


  We  now  establish  the  basic  properties  of  monotonic  functions.  To  be

explicit, we will talk about nondecreasing functions, but clearly everything

carries over automatically to the case of nonincreasing functions.


  THEOREM 1. Every nondecreasing function f on [a, b] is measurable and

                                    1
bounded, and hence summable.


  Proof. Since f(x)  f(b) for all x ∈ [a, b], f is obviously bounded. Consider

the set


                                  E = {x:f(x) < C}.
                                    c


If E is empty, then E is (trivially) measurable. If E is nonempty, let d be the
  ccc

least upper bound of all x ∈ E. Then E is either the closed interval [c, d], if
                                  cc

d ∈ E,  or  the  half-open  interval  [a, d)  if d ∉ E.  In  either  case, E  is
      ccc

measurable. 


  THEOREM 2. Every discontinuity point of a nondecreasing function is of the

first kind.


  Proof. Let x be any point of [a b], and let {x} be any sequence such that
                                                        n

x < x, x → x. Then {f(x)} is a nondecreasing sequence bounded from
n0n0n

above,  e.g.,  by  the  number f(x). Therefore   exists  for  any  such
                                    0

sequence, i.e., f(x − 0) exists. The existence of f(x + 0) is proved in the same
                  00

way. 


  Obviously, a nondecreasing function need not be continuous. However,

we have


  THEOREM 3. A nondecreasing function can have no more than countably

many points of discontinuity.


  Proof. The sum of the jumps of f on the interval [a, b] cannot exceed f(b) −f(a). Let J be the set of all jumps greater than 1/n, and let J be the set of all
          n

jumps regardless of size. Then obviously





where each J is a finite set. Hence J has no more than countably many
              n

elements. 


  THEOREM 4. The jump function (2) is continuous from the left. Moreover,

all the discontinuity points off are of the first kind, with the jump at x equal
                                                                                  n

to h.
  n

    Proof. Clearly,





But if x < x, then x < x − ε for sufficiently small ε > 0. Therefore
      nn





and hence


                                    f(x – 0) = f(x).


If x coincides with one of the points x, say with X, then
                                          nn
                                                            0





which implies




    THEOREM 5. If f is continuous from the left and nondecreasing, then f is

the sum of a continuous nondecreasing function φ and a jump function ψ.  Proof. If x, x, . . . are the discontinuity points of f, with corresponding
              12

jumps h, h, . . ., let
        12





                                  φ(x) = f(x) – ψ(x).


Then


                  φ(x″) – φ(x′) = [f(x″) – f(x′] – [ψ(x″) – ψ(x′)],


where  the  expression  on  the  right  is  the  difference  between  the  total

increment of f on the interval [x′, x″] and the sum of its jumps on [x′, x″], i.e.,

φ(x″) − φ(x′) is the measure of the set of values taken by f at its continuity

points  in  [x′, x″].  This  quantity  is  clearly  nonnegative,  and  hence  φ  is

nondecreasing. Moreover, given any point x ∈ [a, b], we have








and hence


                φ(x + 0) – φ(x – 0) = f(x + 0) – f(x – 0) – h = 0,


where h is the jump of ψ at x. It follows that φ is continuous at every point x

∈ [a, b]. 


  31.2. Differentiation of a monotonic function. The key result of this

section (see Theorem 6 below) will be to show that a monotonic function f

defined on an interval [a, b] has a finite derivative almost everywhere on [a,

b]. Before proving this proposition, due to Lebesgue, we must first introduce

some further definitions and then establish three preliminary lemmas.

  The derivative of a function f at a point x is defined in the familiar way
                                                      0

as the limit of the ratioas x → x. Even if this limit fails to exist, the following four quantities (which
        0

may take infinite values) always exist:

    1)The lower limit of (3) as x → x from the left, denoted by λ;
                                            0L
                                                                                  2
    2)The upper limit of (3) as x → x from the left, denoted by Λ;
                                            0L

    3)The lower limit of (3) as x → x from the right, denoted by λ;
                                            0R

    4)The upper limit of (3) as x → x from the right, denoted by Λ.
                                            0R

These four quantities, with the geometric meaning shown in Figure 17, are

                                          3
called the derived numbers of f at x. It is clear that the inequalities
                                        0




always hold. If λ and Λ exist and are equal, their common value is just the
                  LL

left-hand derivative of f at x. Similarly, if λ and Λ exist and are equal, their
                                0RR

common value is just the right-hand derivative of f at x. Moreover, f has a
                                                                  0

derivative at x if and only if all four derived numbers λ, Λ
              0LL


















                                        FIGURE 17

λ and Λ exist and are equal at x. Hence the italicized assertion at the
RR0beginning of this section can be restated as follows: For a monotonic function

defined on an interval [a, b], the formula


                          − ∞ < λ = Λ = λ = Λ < + ∞
                                    LLRR


holds almost everywhere on [a, b].


  DEFINITION 5. Let f be a continuous function defined on an interval [a, b].

Then a point x ∈ [a, b] [a, b] is said to be invisible from the right (with
                0

respect to f) if there is a point ξ such that x < ξ  b and f(x) < f(ξ), and
                                                    00

invisible from the left if there is a point ξ such that a  ξ < x and f(x) < f(ξ).
                                                                      00


  Example. In Figure 18, the points belonging to the intervals [a, b) and
                                                                                11

(a, b) are invisible from the right (interpret the word “invisible”).
22


  LEMMA 1 (F. Riesz). The set of all points invisible from the right with

respect to a function f continuous on [a, b] is the union of no more than

                                                                  4
countably many pairwise disjoint open intervals (a, b), such that
                                                          kk




    Proof. If x is invisible from the right with respect to f, then the same is
                0

true of any point sufficiently close to x, by the continuity of f. Hence the set
                                            0

of  all  points  invisible  from  the  right  is  an  open  set G.  It  follows  from

Theorem 6,  p.  51  that G  is  the  union  of  a  finite  or  countable  system  of

pairwise disjoint open intervals. Let (a, b) be one of these intervals, and
                                              kk

suppose                                        FIGURE 18

Then there is an (interior) point x ∈ (a, b) such that f(x) > f(b). Of the
                                        0kk0k

points x ∈ (a, b)  such  that f(x) = f(x),  let x*  be  the  one  with  largest
                kk0

abscissa (x* may coincide with x). Since x* belongs to (a, b) and hence is
                                      0kk

invisible from the right, there is a point ξ > x* such that f(ξ) > f(x*). Clearly ξ

cannot belong to (a, b), since x* is the point x with largest abscissa for
                      kk

which f(x) = f(x), while f(b) < f(x), so that ξ ∈ (a, b) would imply the
                  0k0kk

existence of a point x > x* such that f(x) = f(x). On the other hand, the
                                                          0

inequality ξ > b is also impossible, since it would imply f(b) < f(x) < f(ξ)
                  kk0

despite the fact that b is not invisible from the right. Thus (6) leads to a
                          k

contradiction (obviously ξ ≠ b). It follows that f(a)  f(b). 
                                  kkk


  LEMMA 1′. The set of all points invisible from the left with respect to a

function f continuous on [a, b] is the union of no more than countably many

pairwise disjoint open intervals (a, b), such that
                                      kk


                          f(a)  f(b)(k = 1, 2, . . .).
                              kk


    Proof. Virtually the same as that of Lemma 1. 


  LEMMA 2. Let f be a continuous nondecreasing function on [a, b], with λ
                                                                                          L

and Λ as two of its derived numbers. Given any numbers c, C and ρ such
      R

that





let E be the set
    ρ


                              E = {x:λ < c, ̷ > C}.
                                ρLR


Then


                          μ{x:x ∈ E ∩ (α, β)}  ρ(β − α)for every open interval (α β) ⊂ [a, b].


  Proof. Let x be a point of (α, β) for which λ < c. Then there is a point ξ <
                0L

x such that






i.e., such that


                                f(ξ) – c > f(x) – cx.
                                                00


Therefore x is invisible from the left with respect to the function f(x) − cx.
            0

Hence, by Lemma 1′, the set of all such x is the union of no more than
                                                    0

countably many pairwise disjoint open intervals (α, β) ⊂ (α, β), where
                                                          kk


                                  f(α) – cα  f (β),
                                    kkk


or equivalently




Let G be the set of points in (α, β) for which Λ > C. Then, by virtually the
    kkkR

same argument together with Lemma 1, G is the union of no more than
                                                    k

countably many pairwise disjoint open intervals (α, β), where
                                                          knkn





(why?). Clearly E ∩ (α, β) is covered by the system of intervals (α, β).
                    ρknkn

Moreover, it follows from (7) and (8) thatWe are now in a position to prove


  THEOREM 6 (Lebesgue). A monotonic function f defined on an interval [a,

b] has a finite derivative almost everywhere on [a, b].


  Proof. There is no loss of generality in assuming that f is non-decreasing,

since if f is nonincreasing, then obviously −f is nondecreasing. But if −f has a

derivative  almost  everywhere,  then  so  does f.  We  also  assume  that f  is

continuous, dropping this restriction at the end of the proof. It will be enough

to show that the two inequalities




and




hold almost everywhere on [a, b], for any continuous nondecreasing function.

In fact, setting f*(x) = −f(−x), we see that f* is continuous and nondecreasing,

like f itself. Moreover, it is easily verified that




where λ and Λ are the indicated derived numbers of f*. Therefore,

applying (10) to f*, we get




or




Combining the inequalities (10) and (11), we obtain


                              Λ  λ  λ  λ  λ,
                                RLLRR


                                                                                5
after using (4). Thus if (9) and (10) hold almost everywhere, we have


                          – ∞ < λ = Λ = λ = Λ < + ∞
                                    LLRRalmost everywhere, and the theorem is proved.

  To prove that Λ < + ∞ almost everywhere, we argue as follows: If Λ =
                      RR

+ ∞ at some point x, then, given any constant C > 0, there is a point ξ > x
                      00

such that






i.e.,


                                f(ξ) – f(x) > C(ξ – x),
                                          00


or equivalently


                              f(ξ) – C ξ > f(x) – Cx.
                                                00


Thus x is invisible from the right with respect to the function f(x) − Cx.
      0

Hence, by Lemma 1, the set of all points x at which Λ = + ∞ is the union of
                                                0R

no  more  than  countably  many  open  intervals  (a, b),  whose  end  points
                                                            kk

satisfy the inequalities


                              f(a) – Ca  f(b) – Cb
                                  kkkk


or


                              f(b) – f(a)  C(b – a).
                                  kkkk


Dividing by C and summing over all the intervals (a, b), we get
                                                            kk





But C can be made arbitrarily large. Hence the set of points where Λ = + ∞
                                                                                  R

can  be  covered  by  a  collection  of  intervals  the  sum  of  whose  lengths  is

arbitrarily small. It follows that this set is of measure zero, i.e., that Λ < + ∞
                                                                                  Ralmost everywhere.

  To prove that λ  Λ almost everywhere, let the numbers c, C, ρ and the
                      LR

set E be the same as in Lemma 2. It will then follow that λ  Λ almost
    ρLR

everywhere if we succeed in showing that μ(E) = 0, since the set of points
                                                      ρ

where λ < Λ  can  clearly  be  represented  as  the  union  of  no  more  than
        LR

countably many sets of the form E (why?). Let μ(E) = t. Then, given any ε
                                        ρρ

> 0, there is an open set G, equal to the union of no more than countably

many open intervals (a, b) such that E ⊂ G and
                          kkρ





(this follows from the very definition of Lebesgue measure on the line). If


                                t = μ[E ∩ (a, b)],
                                  kρkk


then





But t  ρ(b − a), by Lemma 2. Hence
    kkk





which implies t  ρt, since ε > 0 is arbitrary. This in turn implies t = 0, since

0 < ρ < 1. Therefore λ  Λ almost everywhere, as asserted.
                        LR

    Finally,  to  drop  the  requirement  that f  be  continuous,  we  need  only

generalize Lemmas 1 and 1′ in the way indicated in Problem 6, noting that

                                                        6
the proof continues to go through (check details). 


  Remark. Despite its apparent complexity, the proof of Theorem 6 is based

on simple intuitive ideas. For example, the finiteness of Λ (and Λ) almost
                                                                      RL

everywhere  is  easily  made  plausible.  In  fact,  let f  be  continuous  and

nondecreasing on [a, b]. Then f maps [a, b] into the interval [f(a), f(b)], at the

same  time  subjecting  a  small  interval  [x,  ξ]  at x  to  a  “magnification”

approximately equal toBut the interval [f(a), f(b)] is finite, and hence γ(x) cannot be infinite on a set

of positive measure. As for the part of the proof based on Lemma 2, it merely

says that if the intersection of a subset A ⊂ [a, b]with every interval (α, β)

has measure no greater than ρ(β − α) for some fixed number ρ < 1, then A

cannot have positive measure.


    31.3. Differentiation of an integral with respect to its upper limit.

Returning to the problem of differentiating the indefinite Lebesgue integral,

we have

    THEOREM 7. Let f be any function summable on [a, b]. Then





exists and is finite for almost all x.


  Proof. As noted at the beginning of Sec. 31.1


                                  f(t) = f(t) – f(t),
                                          +−


where f and f are nonnegative summable functions, so that
      +−





is the difference between two nondecreasing functions F and F. But F and
                                                                  121

F have finite derivatives almost everywhere, by Theorem 6, and hence so
2

does F. 


  We now evaluate the derivative (12), thereby giving an affirmative answer

to the first of the two questions posed on p. 314:


  THEOREM 8. Let f be any function summable on [a, b]. Thenalmost everywhere.


  Proof. Let





Then it will be enough to show that




almost everywhere for any summable function. In fact, changing f(x) to −f(x)

in (13), we get


                                    –f(x)  –F′(x)


and hence




But (13) and (14) together imply the desired result





(almost everywhere).

  To prove (13), we observe that if


                                      f(x) < F′(x),


then there are rational numbers α and β such that




Let E be the set of all x satisfying (15). Then, as we now show, μ(E) = 0.
    αβαβ

Since the number of sets E is countable, this will imply
                              αβ                                μ{x:f(x) < F′(x)} = 0


and hence that (13) holds almost everywhere.

  To prove that μ(E) = 0, we first note that, given any ε > 0, there is a δ >
                        αβ

0 such that μ(E) < δ implies






(the existence of such a number δ follows from the absolute continuity of the

                                                        7
Lebesgue integral, proved in Theorem 6, p. 300). Let G ⊂ [a, b] be an open

set, made up of no more than countably many pairwise disjoint open intervals

(a, b), such that
kk


                        (i)E ⊂ G, μ(G) < μ(E) + δ
                            αβαβ


and let x be any point in G E ∩ (a, b). Then
        0kαβkk





for any point ξ > x sufficiently close to x. Writing (16) in the form
                    00


                              F(ξ) – βξ > F(x) – βx,
                                                00


we  see  that  the  point x  is  invisible  from  the  right  with  respect  to  the
                            0

continuous function F(x) − βx. It follows from Lemma 1 that G is the union
                                                                          k

of no more than countably many pairwise disjoint open intervals (a, b),
                                                                                    kk

where


                          F(a) – β(a  F(a) + β(a,
                              kkkk
                                nnnn


i.e.,


                          F(b) – F(a)  β(b) – β(a,
                              kkkk
                                nnnnor equivalently





If






then clearly


                        E ⊂ S ⊂μ(S) < μ(E) + δ
                            αααα


Summing (17) over all the intervals (a, b), we get
                                            kk
                                            nn





On the other hand,







Comparing (17) and (18), we get


                              αμ(S) + |α| δ + ε > βμ(S)


or





Therefore E is contained in an open set of arbitrarily small measure (it can
            αβ

be assumed that |α| δ < ε). It follows that μ(E) = 0. 
                                                    αβ  Problem 1. Let x, x, . . ., x, . . . be the set of all rational points in [a, b],
                      12n
                                              n
enumerated in any way, and let h = 1/2. Prove that the jump function
                                      n





is discontinuous at every rational point and continuous at every irrational

point.


  Problem 2. Suppose we define a jump function by the formula





rather than by the formula (2). Prove that f is continuous from the right, rather

than from the left as in Theorem 4.


  Problem 3. Find the derived numbers of the function







at the point x = 0.


  Problem 4. Find the points invisible from the left in Figure 18, p. 319.


  Problem 5. In Lemma 1, show that f(a) = f(b) if a ≠ a.
                                                kkk


  Problem 6. Prove that the requirement that f be continuous on [a, b] can be

dropped in Lemma 1, provided that

    1)The discontinuity points of f are all of the first kind;

  2)A point x ∈ [a, b] is said to be invisible from the right (with respect
                  0

        to f) if there is a point ξ such that x < ξ  b and
                                                  0


                      max {f(x – 0), f(x, f(x + 0)} < f(ξ);
                                  000  3) The inequality (5) is replaced by


                    f(a + 0)  max {f(b – 0), fb, f(b + 0)}
                        kkkk


State and prove the corresponding generalization of Lemma 1′.


  Problem 7. Let





be  an  everywhere  convergent  series,  whose  general  term  φ(x)  is
                                                                                  n

nondecreasing (alternatively, nonincreasing) on [a, b]. Prove that (20) can be

differentiated term by term almost everywhere, i.e., that





almost everywhere.


  Problem 8. Prove that every jump function has a zero derivative almost

everywhere.

    Hint. Use Problem 7.


  Problem 9. Prove that the assumption that f be continuous from the left in

Theorem 5 can be dropped if we define a jump function as a sum of a “left

jump function” like (2) and a “right jump function” like (19). Use this fact

and Problem 8  to  complete  the  proof  of Theorem  6  without  recourse  to

Problem 6.

    Hint. Use Problem 8 and Theorem 5.


  Problem 10. Following van der Waerden, let






and continue φ by periodicity, with period 1, over the whole x-axis. Then let
                0Prove that

    a)The function f is continuous everywhere;

    b)The derivative of f fails to exist at every point x ∈ (− ∞, ∞).
                                                                0


  Hint. Consider the increments









32. Functions of Bounded Variation


  The problem of differentiating a Lebesgue integral with respect to its

upper  limit  has  led  us  to  consider  functions  that  can  be  represented  as

differences  between  two  monotonic  functions.  We  now  give  a  different

description of such functions (independent of the notion of monotonicity),

afterwards studying some of their properties.


  DEFINITION 1. A function f defined on an interval [a, b] is said to be of

bounded variation if there is a constant C > 0 such that





for every partition




of [a, b] by points of subdivision x, x, . . ., x.
                                      01n


  Example. Every monotonic function is of bounded variation, since theleft-hand side of (1) equals |f(b) − f(a)| regardless of the choice of partition.


  DEFINITION 2. Let f be a function of bounded variation. Then by the total

variation of f on [a, b], denoted by V(f), is meant the quantity





where the least upper bound is taken over all (finite) partitions (2) of the

interval [a, b].


  Remark 1. A function f defined on the whole real line (− ∞, ∞) is said to be

of bounded variation if there is a constant C > 0 such that




for every pair of real numbers a and b (a < b). The quantity





is then called the total variation of f on (− ∞, ∞), denoted by V(f).


  Remark 2. It is an immediate consequence of (3) that




for any constant α.

    THEOREM 1. If f and g are functions of bounded variation on [a, b], then

so is f + g and




    Proof. For any partition of the interval [a, b], we haveTaking the least upper bound of both sides over all partitions of [a, b], and

noting that


        sup {x + y:x ∈ A, y ∈ B}  sup {x:x ∈ A} + sup {y:y ∈ B},


we immediately get (5). 


  It follows from (4) and (5) that any linear combination of functions of

bounded variation is itself a function of bounded variation. In other words,

the set of all functions of bounded variation on a given interval is a linear

space (unlike the set of all monotonic functions).


  THEOREM 2. If a < b < c, then




    Proof. First we consider a partition of the interval [a, c] such that b is one

of the points of subdivision, say x = b. Then
                                      r








Now consider an arbitrary partition of [a, c]. It is clear that adding an extra

point of subdivision to this partition can never decrease the sum





Therefore (7) holds for any subdivision of [a, c], and hence




On the other hand, given any ε > 0, there are partitions of the intervals [a, b]

and [b, c], respectively, such thatCombining all points of subdivision , we get a partition of the interval

[a, c], with points of subdivision x, such that
                                      k






Since ε > 0 is arbitrary, it follows that




Comparing (8) and (9), we get (6). 


    COROLLARY. The function




is nondecreasing.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of (6), since the total variation of any

function of bounded variation on any interval is nonnegative. 


  THEOREM 3. Let f be a function of bounded variation on [a, b], and let v be

the function (10). Then if f is continuous from the left at a point x*, so is v.


  Proof. Given any ε > 0, use the fact that f is continuous from the left to

choose a δ > 0 such that





whenever x* − x < δ. Then choose a partition                            a = x < x < . . . < x = x*
                                  01n


such that





Here it can be assumed that


                                    x* – x < δ,
                                            n−1


since otherwise we need only add an extra point of subdivision which can

never increase the left-hand side of (12). It follows from (11) and (12) that





and hence




a fortiori, i.e.,


                                  υ(x*) – υ(x) < ε.
                                                −


But then, since v is nondecreasing,


                                    υ(x*) – υ(x) < ε


for all x such that x  x  x*. In other words, v is continuous from the left
                      n−1

at x*, 


  Remark. Virtually the same argument shows that if f is continuous from

the right at x*, then so is v. Together with Theorem 3, this shows that if f is

continuous at x*, or on the whole interval [a, b], then so is v.


  THEOREM 4. If f is of bounded variation on [a, b], then f can be represented

as the difference between two nondecreasing functions on [a, b].  Proof. Let




and consider the function


                                        g = υ – f.


Then g is nondecreasing. In fact, if x′  x″, then




But


                              |f(x″) – f(x′)|  υ(x″) υ(x′),


by  the  very  definition  of v,  and  hence  the  right-hand  side  of  (13)  is

nonnegative. Writing


                                      f = υ – g,


we  get  the  desired  representation  of f  as  the  difference  between  two

nondecreasing functions. 


  COROLLARY 1. Every function of bounded variation has a finite derivative

almost everywhere.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of Theorem 6, p. 321. 


  COROLLARY 2. If f is summable on [a, b], then the indefinite integral





is a function of bounded variation on [a, b].


  Proof. Recall the remarks at the beginning of Sec. 9.1. 


  Problem 1. Prove that V(f) = 0 if and only if f(x) ≡ const on [a, b].  Problem 2. Prove that the function







is of bounded variation on [0, 1] if α > β but not if α  β.


  Problem 3. Suppose f has a bounded derivative on [a, b], so that f′(x)

exists and satisfies an inequality |f′(x)|  C at every point x ∈ [a, b]. Prove

that f is of bounded variation and




  Problem 4. Prove that if f and g are functions of bounded variation on [a,

b], then so is fg and





  Problem 5. Let f be a function of bounded variation on [a, b] such that


                                      f(x)  c > 0.


Prove that 1/f is also a function of bounded variation and





  Problem 6. Prove the converse of Theorem 4.


  Problem 7. Prove that a curve


                                y = f(x)(a x  b)


is rectifiable, i.e., has finite length, as defined in Problem 3, p. 114, if and

only if f is of bounded variation on [a, b].


  Problem 8. Let f be a function of bounded variation on [a, b]. Prove thathas all the properties of a norm (cf. p. 138) if we impose the extra condition

f(a) = 0.


  Comment. Thus the space  of all functions of bounded variation on

[a, b] equipped with this norm and vanishing at x = a is a normed linear

space (addition of functions and multiplication of functions by numbers being

defined in the usual way).


  Problem 9. Prove that the space  defined in the preceding comment is

complete.


  Problem  10.  Does  there  exist  a  continuous  function  which  is  not  of

bounded variation on any interval?


  Hint. Recall Problem 10, p. 327 and Corollary 1 above.



33. Reconstruction of a Function from Its Derivative


    33.1.  Statement  of  the  problem.  We  now  address  ourselves  to  the

second of the problems posed on p. 314, i.e., we look for the largest class of

functions F such that





or equivalently





(As  we  know  from  calculus,  these  formulas  hold  if F  is  continuously

differentiable.) From the outset, we must restrict ourselves to functions F

which are differentiable (i.e., have a finite derivative) almost everywhere,

since  otherwise  (2)  would  be  meaningless.  Every  function  of  bounded

variation has this property (see Corollary 1, p. 331). Moreover, the right-hand

side of (2) is a function of bounded variation (see Corollary 2, p. 331). Itfollows that the largest class of functions satisfying (2) must be some subset

of  the  class  of  functions  of  bounded  variation.  Since  every  function  of

bounded variation is the difference between two nondecreasing functions (see

Theorem 4, p. 331), we begin by studying nondecreasing functions from the

standpoint of formula (1).


  THEOREM  1. Let  F  be  a  nondecreasing  function  on  [a, b]. Then  the

derivative F′ is summable on [a, b] and





  Proof. Let





where, to make Φ(t) meaningful for all t ∈ [a, b], we get F(t) = F(b) for b <
                  n
                          8
t  b + 1, by definition. Clearly









almost everywhere on [a, b]. Since F is summable on [a, b], by Theorem

1, p. 316, so is every Φ. Integrating Φ, we get
                          nn








where  in  the  last  step  we  use  the  fact  that F  is  nondecreasing.  The

summability of F′ and the inequality (3) now follow at once from Fatou’s

theorem (Theorem 3, p. 307).   Example 1. It is easy to find nondecreasing functions F for which (3)

becomes a strict inequality, i.e., such that





For example, let






Then





    Example  2  (The  Cantor  function).  In  the  preceding  example, F  is

discontinuous. However, it is also possible to find continuous nondecreasing

functions satisfying the strict inequality (4). To this end, let




be the middle third of the interval [0, 1], let




be the middle thirds of the intervals remaining after deleting  from

[0, 1], let






be  the  middle  thirds  of  the  intervals  remaining  after  deleting , 

 and  from [0, 1], and so on, with




            n−1
being the 2 intervals deleted at the nth stage. Note that the complement ofunion of all the intervals , is the set of all “points of the second

kind” of the Cantor set constructed in Example 4, p. 52, i.e., all points of the

Cantor set except the end points




of the deleted intervals (together with the points 0 and 1).

    Now define a function





so that















and  so  on,  as  shown  schematically  in Figure  19.  Then F  is  defined

everywhere on [0, 1] except at points of the second kind of the Cantor set.

Given any such point t*, let {t} be an increasing sequence of points of the
                                    n

type (5) converging to t*, and let {t′} be a decreasing sequence of points of
                                          n

the same type converging to t* (why do such sequences exist?). Then let





(justify the equality of the limits). Completing the definition of F in this way,

we obtain a continuous nondecreasing function on the whole interval [0, 1],

known as the Cantor function. (Fill in some missing details.) The derivative

F′ obviously vanishes at every interior point of the intervals , and                                        FIGURE 19

hence  vanishes  almost  everywhere,  since  the  sum  of  the  lengths  of  these

intervals equals




(the Cantor set is of measure zero). It follows that





    33.2. Absolutely continuous functions. We have just given examples of

functions  for  which  formula  (1)  does  not  hold.  To  describe  the  class  of

functions satisfying (1), or equivalently (2), we will need the following


    DEFINITION. A  function  f  defined  on  an  interval  [a, b] is  said  to  be

absolutely continuous on [a, b] if, given any ε > 0, there is a δ > 0 such that





for every finite system of pairwise disjoint subintervals


                        (a, b) ⊂ [a, b](K = 1, . . ., n)
                          kk


of total lengthless than δ.


  Remark  1.  Clearly  every  absolutely  continuous  function  is  uniformly

continuous, as we see by choosing a single subinterval (a, b) ⊂ [a, b].
                                                                        11

However, a uniformly continuous function need not be absolutely continuous.

For  example,  the  Cantor  function F  constructed  in Example  2  of  the

preceding section is continuous (and hence uniformly continuous) on [0, 1],

but not absolutely continuous on [0, 1]. In fact, the Cantor set can be covered

by a finite system of subintervals (a, b) of arbitrarily small total length
                                            kk

(why?). But obviously





for every such system. The same example shows that a function of bounded

variation need not be absolutely continuous. On the other hand, an absolutely

continuous function is necessarily of bounded variation (see Theorem 2).


  Remark  2.  In  the  definition,  we  can  change  “finite”  to  “finite  or

countable.” In fact, suppose that given any ε > 0, there is a δ > 0 such that





for every finite system of pairwise disjoint intervals (a, b) ⊂ [a, b] of total
                                                                kk

length less than δ, and consider any countable system of pairwise disjoint

intervals (α, β) ⊂ [a, b] of total length less than δ. Then obviously
            kk





for every n. Hence, taking the limit as n → ∞, we get  THEOREM 2. If f is absolutely continuous on [a, b], then f is of bounded

variation on [a, b].


  Proof. Given any ε > 0, there is a δ > 0 such that





for every system of pairwise disjoint intervals (a, b) ⊂ [a, b] such that
                                                        kk





Hence if [α, β] is any interval of length less than δ, we have




Let


                              a = x < x < . . . < x = b
                                    01n


be a partition of [a, b] into N subintervals [x, x] all of length less than δ.
                                                    k−1k

Then, by Theorem 2, p. 329,




  THEOREM 3. If f is absolutely continuous on [a, b], then so is αf, where α is

any constant. Moreover, if f and g are absolutely continuous on [a, b], then

so is f + g.


  Proof. An immediate consequence of the definition of absolute continuity

and obvious properties of the absolute value. 


  It follows from Theorems 2 and 3 (together with Remark 1) that the set of

all absolutely continuous functions on [a, b] is a proper subspace of the linear

space of all functions of bounded variation on [a, b].


  THEOREM  4. If  f  is  absolutely  continuous  on  [a, b], then  f  can  berepresented  as  the  difference  between  two  absolutely  continuous

nondecreasing functions on [a, b].


  Proof. By Theorem 2, f is of bounded variation on [a, b], and hence can be

represented in the form


                                      f = υ – g,


where




are  the  same  nondecreasing  functions  as  in Theorem 4,  p.  331.  We  now

verify that v and g are absolutely continuous. Given any ε > 0, let δ > 0 be

such that





for every finite system of pairwise disjoint subintervals (a, b) ⊂ [a, b] of
                                                                      kk

total length less than δ. Consider the sum





equal to the least upper bound of the sums





taken over all possible finite partitions









of the intervals (a, b), . . ., (a, b). The total length of all the intervals (x
                    11nnk,l−1, xk,l) figuring in (6) is clearly less than δ, and hence the sum (6) is less than

ε′, by the absolute continuity of f. Therefore





i.e., v is absolutely continuous on [a, b]. It follows from Theorem 3 that g = v

− f is also absolutely continuous on [a, b]. 


  We now study the close connection between absolute continuity and the

indefinite Lebesgue integral:


  THEOREM 5. The indefinite integral





of a summable function f is absolutely continuous.


  Proof. Given any finite collection of pairwise disjoint intervals (a, b), we
                                                                                kk

have






But the last expression on the right approaches zero as the total length of the

intervals (a, b) approaches zero, by the absolute continuity of the Lebesgue
            kk

integral (Theorem 6, p. 300). 


  LEMMA. Let f be an absolutely continuous nondecreasing function on [a, b]

such that f′(x) = 0 almost everywhere. Then f(x) = const.


  Proof. Since f is continuous and nondecreasing, its range is the closed

interval [f(a), f(b)]. We will show that the length of this interval is zero if f′(x)

= 0 almost everywhere, thereby proving the lemma. Let E be the set of points

x ∈ [a, b] such that f′(x) = 0, and let Z = [a, b] − E, where μ(Z) = 0, by

hypothesis. Given any ε > 0, we find δ > 0 such thatfor any finite or countable system of pairwise disjoint intervals (a, b) ⊂ [a,
                                                                              kk

b] of length less than δ (recall Remark 2, p. 336), and then cover Z by an

open set of measure less than δ (this is possible, since Z is of measure zero).

In other words, we cover Z by a finite or countable system of intervals (a, b)
                                                                                      kk

of total length less than δ. It then follows from (7) that the whole system of

intervals, and hence (a fortiori) the set





is mapped into a set of measure less than ε. But then μ[f(Z)] = 0, since ε > 0 is

arbitrary.

    Next consider the set E = [a, b] − Z, and let x ∈ E. Then, since f′(x) = 0,
                                                                                    0

we have






for all x > x sufficiently near x, i.e.,
            00


                                f(x) – f(x) < ε(x – x)
                                          00


or


                                εx – f(x) < εx – f(x).
                                  00


Therefore the point x is invisible from the right with respect to the function
                        0

εx − f(x). It follows from Lemma 1, p. 319 that E is the union of no more than

countably many pairwise disjoint intervals (α, β), with end points satisfying
                                                    kk

the inequalities


                              εα – f(α)  εβ – f(β)
                                  kkkk


or                              fβ – f(α)  ε(β – α).
                                  kkkk


But then





In other words, f maps E into a set covered by a system of intervals of total

length less than ε(b − a). Therefore μ[f(E)] = 0, since ε > 0 is arbitrary.

  We have just shown that the sets f(Z) and f(E) are both of measure zero.

But the interval [f(a), f(b)] is the union of f(Z) and f(E). It follows that [f(a),

f(b)] is of length zero, i.e., that f(x) ≡ const. 


We are now in a position to prove


  THEOREM 6 (Lebesgue). If F is absolutely continuous on [a, b], then the

derivative F′ is summable on [a, b] and





  Proof. We need only consider the case of nondecreasing F (why?). Then F

′ is summable, by Theorem 1, and the function





is also nondecreasing. In fact, if x″ > x′, then





where we again use Theorem 1. Moreover, Φ is absolutely continuous, being

the difference between two absolutely continuous functions (recall Theorems

3 and 5), and Φ′(x) = 0 almost everywhere, by Theorem 8, p. 324. It follows

from the lemma that Φ(x) ≡ const. Setting x = a, we find that this constant

equals F(a). Replacing Φ(x) by F(a) in (9), we get (8). 


  Remark. Combining Theorems 5  and 6,  we  can  now  give  a  definitive

answer to the second of the questions posed on p. 314 (see also p. 333): Theformula





or equivalently,





holds for all x ∈ [a, b] if and only if F is absolutely continuous on [a, b].


  33.3.  The  Lebesgue  decomposition.  Let f  be  a  function  of  bounded

variation on [a, b]. Then it follows from Theorem 4, p. 331 and Problem 9, p.

327 that f can (in general) be represented as a sum




where  φ  is  a  continuous  function  of  bounded  variation  and  ψ  is  a  jump

        9
function. Now let





Then  φ  is  absolutely  continuous,  while  φ  is  a  continuous  function  of
        12

bounded variation such that





almost everywhere. A continuous function of bounded variation is said to be

singular  if  its  derivative  vanishes  almost  everywhere.  For  example,  the

Cantor function F constructed in Example 2, p. 334 is singular. Combining

(10) and (11), we find that a function f of bounded variation can (in general)

be represented as a sum




of an absolutely continuous function φ, a singular function φ and a jump
                                              12function ψ. Formula (12) is known as the Lebesgue decomposition.


  Remark. Differentiating (12), we get




almost  everywhere.  Thus  integration  of  the  derivative  of  a  function  of

bounded variation does not restore the function itself, but only its absolutely

continuous “component,” while the other two components, i.e., the singular

function and the jump function, “disappear without a trace.”


  Problem 1. Prove that a function f is absolutely continuous on [a, b] if and

only if it is a continuous function of bounded variation mapping every subset

Z⊂[a, b] of measure zero into a set of measure zero.

    Problem 2. Verify directly from the definition on p. 336 that the function







fails to be absolutely continuous on any interval [a, b] containing the point x

= 0.


  Problem 3. Prove that if a function f satisfies a Lipschitz condition


                              |f(x′) – f(x″)|  K |x′ – x″


for all x′, x″ ∈ [a, b] then f is absolutely continuous on [a, b].


  Problem 4. Prove that each of the terms φ, φ and ψ in the Lebesgue
                                                        12

decomposition (12) is unique to within an additive constant.


  Comment. The stipulation “to within an additive constant” can be dropped

if we require the function f and its “components” to vanish at x = a, say, or if

we agree to regard all functions differing by a constant as equivalent.


  Problem 5. Let  be the space of all absolutely continuous functions f

defined on [a, b], satisfying the condition f(a) = 0. Prove that  is aclosed subspace of the space  of all functions of bounded variation on

[a, b] satisfying the same condition, equipped with the norm .


  Comment. There is no need for the condition f(a) = 0 if we regard all

functions differing by a constant as equivalent. We then have ∥f∥ = 0 if and

only if f = const.


  Problem 6. Starting from a locally summable function f, i.e., a function

summable  on  every  finite  interval,  defined  the  corresponding  generalized

function f and generalized derivative f′ by the formulas








as in Sec. 21.2. (Here φ is any test function, i.e., any infinitely differentiable

function of finite support.) Prove that the generalized derivative f′ determines

f to within an additive constant. Apply this to the case of the function







where F is the Cantor function constructed in Example 2, p. 334.


  Hint. See Theorem 1, p. 213.


  Problem 7. Let f and f′ be the same as in the preceding problem, and

suppose f  is  of  bounded  variation  on  (−∞,  ∞).  Then f  has  an  ordinary

derivative  almost  everywhere.  Let f  be  the  generalized  function
                                                1

corresponding to df/dx, so that





    Prove that  a)In general, f does not equal the generalized derivative f′;
                      1

  b)If f is absolutely continuous, then f = f′;
                                                  1
                                                                                          10
  c)If f = f′, then f is equivalent to an absolutely continuous function
            1

        and, in particular, is absolutely continuous if it is continuous.


  Hint. In a), consider the function






    Comment. Problems 6 and 7 further illustrate the situation discussed on

pp.  206–207.  To  carry  out  the  operations  of  analysis  (in  this  case,

reconstruction of a function from its derivative), we can either restrict the

class of admissible functions (by requiring them to be absolutely continuous)

or else extend the notion of function itself (at the same time, extending the

notion of a derivative).



34. The Lebesgue Integral as a Set Function


    34.1. Charges. The Hahn and Jordan decompositions. As we now

show, the theory developed in Secs. 31–33 for functions defined on the real

line (−∞, ∞) continues to make sense in a much more general setting. Let X

be a space (i.e., some “master set”) equipped with a measure μ, and let f be a

μ-summable function defined on X. Then f is summable on every measurable

subset E ⊂ X, so that the integral





(for fixed f) defines a set function on the system  of all μ-measurable
                                                                μ

subsets of X. By Theorem 4, p. 298, Φ is σ-additive, i.e., if a measurable set E

is a finite or countable union





  of pairwise disjoint measurable sets E, then
                                                nIn other words, the set function (1) has all the properties of a σ-additive

measure except that it may not be nonnegative in the case where f takes

negative values. These considerations suggest


  DEFINITION  1. A  σ-additive  set  function  Φ defined  on  a  σ-ring  (in

particular, a σ-algebra) of subsets of a space X and in general taking values

of both signs is called a signed measure or charge (on X).


  Remark.  Thus  the  notion  of  a  measure  is  equivalent  to  that  of  a  non-

negative charge.


  In the case of electrical charge distributed on a surface, we can divide the

surface into two regions, one carrying positive charge (i.e., such that every

part of the region is positively charged) and one carrying negative charge. We

will establish the mathematical equivalent of this fact in a moment, after first

introducing


  DEFINITION 2. Let Φ be a charge defined on a σ-algebra  of subsets of a

space X. Then a set A ⊂ X is said to be negative with respect to Φ if E ∩ A 

 and Φ(E ∩ A)  for every E ∈ . Similarly, A is said to be positive with

respect to Φ if E ∩ A ∈  and Φ(E ∩ A)  for every E ∈ .


                                                                                          −
  THEOREM 1. Given a charge Φ on a space X, there is a measurable set A

                  −+−
⊂ X such that A is negative and A = X − A is positive with respect to Φ.


  Proof. Let


                                      a = inf Φ(A)


where the greatest lower bound is taken over all measurable negative sets A.

Let {A} be a sequence of measurable negative sets such that
      n





Thenis a measurable negative set such that


                                            −
                                      Φ(A = a)


                          −+
(why?). To show that A is the required set, we must now prove that A = X −

−++
A is positive. Suppose A is not positive. Then A contains a measurable

subset B such that Φ(B) < 0. However, B cannot be negative, since if it
        000
                    −
were, the set Ã = A ∪ B would be a negative set such that Φ(Ã) < a, which
                            0

is impossible. Hence there is a least positive integer k such that B contains a
                                                              10

subset B satisfying the condition
        1





Obviously B ≠ B. Applying the same argument to the set B − B, we find a
              1001

least positive integer k such that B − B contains a subset B satisfying the
                          2012

inequality





(explain why k > k), a least positive integer k such that (B − B) − B
                213012

contains a subset B satisfying the inequality
                    3





and so on. Now let





Clearly F  is  nonempty,  since  Φ(B)  <  0  while  Φ(B)  >  0  for  all n   1.
                                          0n

Moreover, F is negative by construction (think things through). Hence the set      −
Ã  = A ∪  is  again  negative  and  Φ(Ã)  < a,  which  is  impossible.  This

                              +−
contradiction shows that A = X − A must be positive. 


Thus we can represent X as a union




                                        +−+−
of two disjoint measurable sets A and A, where A is positive and A is

negative with respect to the charge Φ. The representation (2) is called the

Hahn decomposition of X, and may not be unique. However, if




are two distinct Hahn decompositions of X, then




for every E ∈ . In fact,




and at the same time




But (4) implies




while (5) implies




Therefore




and similarlyIt follows from (6) and (7) that






which proves the first of the formulas (3). The second formula is proved in

exactly the same way.

    Thus a charge Φ on a space X uniquely determines two nonnegative set

functions, namely


                    ++−−
                  Φ(E) = Φ(E ∩ A),Φ(E) = –Φ(E ∩ A),


called the positive variation and negative variation of Φ, respectively. It is

clear that

                +−
  1)Φ = Φ − Φ;

          +−
  2)Φ and Φ are nonnegative σ-additive set functions, i.e., measures;

                                    +−
    3)The set function |Φ| = Φ + Φ, called the total variation of Φ, is also

        a measure.

The representation


                                            +−
                                    Φ = Φ – Φ


a charge Φ as the difference between its positive and negative variations is

called the Jordan decomposition of Φ.


    34.2.  Classification  of  charges.  The  Radon-Nikodým  theorem.  We

now classify charges on a space X equipped with a measure:


  DEFINITION 3. Let μ be a σ-additive measure on a σ-algebra  of (μ-
                                                                                  μ

measurable) subsets of a space X, and let Φ be a charge defined on . Then
                                                                                  μ

Φ is  said  to  be concentrated on  a  set A ∈  if  Φ(E)  =  0 for  every
                                                            μ

measurable set E ⊂ X − A.


  DEFINITION 4. Let μ, , X and Φ be the same as in Definition 3. Then Φ is
                            μ

said to be    1)Continuous if  Φ(E)  =  0 for  every  single-element  set E ⊂ X of

        measure zero;

    2)Singular if Φ is concentrated on a set of measure zero;

    3)Discrete if Φ is concentrated on a finite or countable set of measure

        zero;

    4)Absolutely continuous (with  respect  to  μ) if  Φ(E)  =  0 for  every

          measurable set E such that μ(E) = 0.

Clearly, the Lebesgue integral





  of a fixed summable function φ is absolutely continuous with respect to

the measure μ. As we will see in a moment, every absolutely continuous

charge can be represented in this form. But first we need the following


  LEMMA. Let μ be a σ-additive  measure  defined  on  a σ-algebra  of
                                                                                      μ

subsets of a space X, and let Φ be another such measure defined on .
                                                                                          μ

Suppose Φ is absolutely continuous with respect to μ and is not identically

zero. Then there is a positive integer n and a set A ∈  such that μ(A) > 0
                                                                  μ

and A is positive with respect to the charge Φ − (1/n)μ.


  Proof. Let




be the Hahn decomposition corresponding to the charge Φ − (1/n)μ, and let





Then





for all n = 1, 2, . . ., i.e., Φ = 0, and hence Φ > 0 since X =  ∪ 

and Φ is not identically zero. But then μ  > 0, by the absolute continuity ofΨ. Hence there is an n such that μ > 0 (why?). This n and the set A = 

satisfy the conditions of the lemma.


  THEOREM 2 (Radon-Nikodým). Let μ be a σ-additive measure defined on a

σ-algebra  of subsets of a space X, and let Φ be a charge defined on .
              μμ

Suppose Φ is absolutely continuous with respect to μ. Then there is a μ-

summable function φ on X such that





for every E ∈ . The function φ is unique to within its values on a set of μ-
                  μ

measure zero.

    Proof. We can assume that Φ is not identically zero, since otherwise we

need  only  choose  φ  to  be  any  function  equal  to  zero  almost  everywhere

(discuss the uniqueness of φ in this case). Let K be the set of all μ-summable

functions on X such that





for every E ∈ , and let
                  μ





Moreover, let {f} be a sequence of functions in K such that
                n





and let


                          gn(x) = max {f(x), . . ., f(x)}.
                                            1n


Then clearly


                        g(x)  g(x)  . . .  g(x)  . . ..
                          12nMoreover,





for every E ∈ . In fact, E can be written in the form
                  μ





where the sets E, . . ., E are pairwise disjoint and g(x) = f(x) on E, and
                  1nnkk

hence





In particular, it follows from (10) that g(x) = f(x), so that
                                              nk





But then





since otherwise





contrary to (10). Writing





we find thatand hence, by Levi’s theorem (Theorem 2, p. 305),





    Next  we  show  that  φ  is  the  required  function,  figuring  in  the

representation (8). By construction, the set function





is nonnegative and in fact is a σ-additive measure. If λ(E) ≢ 0, then, by the

lemma, there is an ε > 0 and a set A ∈  such that μ(A) > 0 and
                                                μ


                                εμ(E ∩ A)  λ(E ∩ A)


for every E ∈ . Let
                  μ


                                h(x) = φ(x) + ε(x),
                                                  X
                                                    A

      11
where






Then








so that h belongs to the set K introduced at the beginning of the proof. On the

other hand, it follows from (11) that





contrary to the definition of M. Therefore λ(E) ≡ 0, which is equivalent to (8).    Finally, to prove that φ is unique to within its values on a set of measure

zero, suppose





for all E ∈ . Then, by Chebyshev’s inequality (Theorem 5, p. 299), we
                μ

have





for every set





and similarly


                                        μ(B) = 0
                                            n


for every set





But






and hence


                                μ{x:φ(x) ≠ φ*(x)} = 0,


i.e., φ(x) = φ*(x) almost everywhere. 


  Remark 1. The function φ figuring in the representation (8) is called the

Radon-Nikodým  derivative  (or  simply  the density)  of  the  charge  Φ  withrespect to the measure μ, and is denoted





Clearly, Theorem  2  is  the  natural  generalization  of  Lebesgue’s  theorem

(Theorem 6, p. 340), which states that an absolutely continuous function F is

the integral of its own derivative F′. However, in the case of a function F

defined  on  the  real  line  there  is  an  explicit  procedure  for  finding  the

derivative of F at a point x, namely evaluation of the limit
                              0





whereas the Radon-Nikodým theorem only establishes the existence of the

derivative dΦ/dμ,  without  telling  how  to  find  it.  However,  an  explicit

procedure can be given for evaluating dΦ/dμ at a point x ∈ X by calculating
                                                                  0

the limit





where {A} is a system of sets “converging to the point x” as ε → 0, in a
          ε0
                          12
suitably defined sense.

                                        13
    Remark 2. It can also be shown that an arbitrary charge Φ has a unique

representation as the sum


                            Φ(E) = A(E) + S(E) + D(E)


of  an  absolutely  continuous  charge A,  a  singular  charge S  and  a  discrete

charge D. This is the exact analogue of the Lebesgue decomposition on p.

341.


  Problem 1. Given any charge Φ defined on a σ-algebra , prove that there

is a constant M > 0 such that |Φ(E)|  M for all E ∈ .


  Problem 2. Give an example of two distinct Hahn decompositions of aspace X.


  Problem  3.  Prove  that  a  charge  Φ  vanishes  identically  if  it  is  both

absolutely continuous and singular with respect to a measure μ.


  Problem 4. Prove that if a charge Φ is concentrated on a set A, then so are
                                                                            0

its positive, negative and total variations.


  Problem 5. Prove that

    a)Every absolutely continuous charge is continuous;

    b)Every discrete charge is singular.


  Problem 6. Prove that if a charge Φ is absolutely continuous (with respect

to a measure μ), then so are its positive, negative and total variations.


  Problem 7. Prove that if a charge Φ is discrete, then there are no more

than  countably  many  points x, x,  .  .  ., x,  .  .  .  and  corresponding  real
                                    12n

numbers h, h, . . ., h, . . . such that μ({x}) = 0 and
          12nn





Write expressions for the positive, negative and total variations of Φ.


  Problem 8. Let X be the square 0  x  1, 0  y  1 equipped with

ordinary two-dimensional Lebesgue measure μ, and let Φ(E) be the ordinary

one-dimensional Lebesgue measure of the intersection of E with the interval

0  x   1.  Prove  that  Φ  is  continuous  and  singular,  but  not  absolutely

continuous.




  1
 See the corollary on p. 298.

  2
 Upper and lower limits are defined on p. 111.

  3
 To distinguish these quantities further, we can call λ the left-hand lower derived number, Λ
                                                    LR
the right-hand upper derived number, and so on.

  4
 However, if a = a (say), then in some cases (a, b) should be replaced by the half-open
                  111interval [a, b), as in Figure 18. This is permissible, since [a, b) is open relative to [a, b].
        1111

  5
 Note that Λ cannot equal − ∞, since the difference quotient (3) is inherently non-negative if f is
              R
nondecreasing.

  6
 For an alternative proof, see Problems 7–9.

  7
 In particular, F(x) is continuous. In fact,


  8
 Verify that this does not affect the validity of the proof.

  9
 Generalizing Problem 9, p. 327, by a jump function, we now mean a function of the form


  where the numbers h, . . ., h, . . . and h′, . . ., h′, . . . corresponding to the discontinuity points
                      1n1n
x, . . ., x, . . . and x′, . . ., x′, . . . satisfy the conditions
1n1n


  (we now allow negative h, h′).
                          nn

  10
 I.e., coincides almost everywhere with an absolutely continuous function.

  11
 χ is called the characteristic function of the set A.
      A

  12
 For the details, see G. E.. Shilov and B. L. Gurevich, Integral, Measure and Derivative: A
Unified Approach (translated by R. A. Silverman), Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J. (1966),
Chap. 10.

  13
 G. E. Shilov and B. L. Gurevich, op. cit., Chap. 9                                          10                    MORE ON INTEGRATION









35. Product Measures. Fubini’s Theorem


  The  problem  of  reducing  double  (or  multiple)  integrals  to  iterated

integrals plays an important role in classical analysis. In the Lebesgue theory,

the key result along these lines is Fubini’s theorem, proved in Sec. 35.3. En

route to Fubini’s theorem we will need the preliminary topics treated in Secs.

35.1 and 35.2, which are also of interest in their own right.


  35.1. Direct products of sets and measures. By the direct (or Cartesian)

product of two sets X and Y, denoted by X × Y, we mean the set of all ordered

pairs (x, y) where x ∈ X, y ∈ Y. Similarly, by the direct product of n sets X,
                                                                                          1

X, . . ., X, denoted by
2n




we mean the set of all ordered n-tuples (x, x, . . ., x), where x ∈ X, x ∈
                                                12n112

X, . . ., x ∈ X. In particular, if
2nn


                              X = X = . . . = X = X,
                                12n

                          n
we write (1) simply as X, the “nth power of X.”


                                    n1
  Example 1.  Real n-space R  is  the nth  power  of  the  real  line R,  as

anticipated by the notation.


                                    nn
  Example 2. The unit cube I in n-space, i.e., the set of all elements of R

with coordinates satisfying the inequalities


                          0  x  1(k = 1, 2, . . ., n),
                                k                                                  1
is the nth power of the closed unit interval I = [0, 1].

    Now let , , . . .,  be systems of subsets of the sets X, X, . . ., X,
                12n12n

respectively. Then by


 =  ×  × . . . × 
                                      12n


we  mean  the  system  of  subsets  of  the  direct  product (1)  which  can  be

represented in the form


                              A = A × A × . . . × A,
                                      12n


where


                          A ∈ (k = 1, 2, . . ., n).
                            kk


If


                                1 = 2 = . . . = n = ,


then  is the “nth power of ,” written

                                                n
 = .

                                                                                  n
For example, the system of all closed rectangular parallelepipeds in R is the

                                                          1
nth power of the system of all closed intervals in R.


  THEOREM 1. If , , . . .,  are semirings, then so is the set  =  × 
                      12n1

2 × . . . × n.


                                                                                    1
  Proof. By the definition of a semiring (see p. 32), we must show that


        a)If A, B ∈ , then A ∩ B ∈ ;

        b)If A, B ∈  and B ⊂ A, then A can be represented as a finite

              union





                                k(1)
  of pairwise disjoint sets C ∈ , with B = C.It is clearly enough to prove these assertions for the case n = 2. Thus suppose

A ∈  × , B ⊂  × . Then
        1212






and hence


            A ∩ B = (A × A) ∩ (B × B) = (A ∩ A) × (A ∩ B).
                          12121222


But A ∩ B ∈ , A ∩ B ∈ , since  and  are semirings. It
      11122212

follows that A ∩ B ∈  × . This proves a).
                            12

  To prove b), suppose that


                                B ⊂ A,B ⊂ A,
                                  1122


in addition to (2). Then, since  and   are  semirings,  there  are  finite
                                        12

expansions

                                          (1)(i)
                          A = B ∪ B ∪ . . . ∪ B,
                            1111

                                          (1)(j)
                          A = B ∪ B ∪ . . . ∪ B,
                            2222

                        (1)(i)
where the sets B, B, . . ., B are pairwise disjoint and belong to ,
                  1111
                        (1)(j)
while the sets B, B, . . ., B are pairwise disjoint and belong to .
                  2222

Therefore







is the desired finite expansion of A × A, where B × B is the first term and
                                        1212

the other terms are pairwise disjoint and belong to  =  × . 
                                                                  12

    Now let , , . . .,  be n semirings, equipped with measures
                12nand let μ be the measure on the semiring  =  ×  × . . . ×  defined by
                                                        12n

the formula


                          μ(A) = μ(A)μ(A) . . . μ(A)
                                      112nn


for every A = A × A × · · · × A. Then μ is called the direct (or Cartesian)
                  12n
      2
product of the measures (3), and is denoted by


                              μ = μ × μ × . . . × μ.
                                      12n


To confirm that μ is indeed a measure, we now show that μ is additive (μ is

obviously real and nonnegative). It will again be enough to consider the case

n = 2. Suppose





where




and

                                    (k)(k)(k)
                                  B = B × B
                                            12


According to Lemma 2, p. 33, there are finite expansions





                                                                (k)
each involving pairwise disjoint sets, such that each B is a finite union
                                                              1




                                (m)(k)
  of certain of the sets C, while each B is a finite union
                              12                          (n)
of certain of the sets C (here M denotes some subset of the set {1, 2, . . .,
                          2k

r} and N some subset of the set {1, 2, . . ., s}). But then, by the additivity of
        k

μ and μ, we have
12










which, when compared with (4), shows the additivity of μ = μ × μ.
                                                                        12


  Example 3. Thus the additivity of area of rectangles in the plane follows

from the additivity of length of intervals on the line.


  THEOREM 2. If the measures μ, μ, . . ., μ are σ-additive, then so is the
                                      12n

measure μ = μ × μ × . . . × μ.
                12n


  Proof. Again we need only consider the case n = 2. Let λ denote the
                                                                            1

Lebesgue extension of the measure μ, and suppose
                                          1





where the sets C are pairwise disjoint and the sets C, C belong to  × ,
                  nn12

i.e.,


                        C = A × B(A ∈ , B ∈ ),
                                                  12


                      C = A × B(A ∈ , B ∈ ),
                        nnnn1n2


Moreover, letWe then have





and hence, by the corollary on p. 307,







But





Substituting (6) into (5), we get





    Again let , , . . .,  be n semirings, this time equipped with σ-
                  12n
                                                                                    3
additive measures (3). Then it follows from Theorem 2 that the measure




is σ-additive on the semiring


 =  ×  . . . × .
                                      12n


Therefore, as in Sec. 27, m has a Lebesgue extension μ defined on a σ-ring 

μ ⊃ . This measure μ is called the product measure of the measures (3), and

is denoted by




The distinction between the meaning of the symbols × and ⊗ in (7) and (8) is

crucial.


  Example 4. Let                                                        1
                              μ = μ = . . . = μ = μ,
                                12n

        1
where μ is ordinary Lebesgue measure on the line. Then the product measure

(8) is ordinary Lebesgue measure in n-space.


  35.2. Evaluation of a product measure. Let G be a region in the xy-plane

bounded by the vertical lines x = a, x = b (a < b) and the curves y = f(x), y =

g(x), where f(x)  g(x). Then it will be recalled from calculus that the area of

G is given by the integral




where the difference g(x) − f(x) is just the length of the segment in which
                            00

the vertical line x = x intersects the region G. As we now show, the natural
                        0

generalization of this method can be used to evaluate an arbitrary product

measure:

    THEOREM 3. Let μ be the product measure




of two measures μ and μ such that
                    xy

  1)μ is σ-additive on a Borel algebra  of subsets of a set X;
          xμx

  2)μ is σ-additive on a Borel algebra  of subsets of a set Y;
          yμy

  3)μ and μ are complete, in the sense that B ⊂ A and μ(A)  =  0
          xyx

        implies that B is measurable (with measure zero), and similarly for

          4
        μ.
          y

Then





                                          5
for every μ-measurable set A, where


                        A = {y:(x, y) ∈ A}(x fixed),
                          x


                          A = {x:(x, y) ∈ A}(yfixed).
                          y  Proof. We note in passing that the integral over X in (9) reduces to an

integral over the set of the form




outside which μ(A) vanishes (and similarly for the integral over Y). It will
                  yx

be enough to prove that





where


                                    φ(x) = μ(A),
                                      Ayx


since the other part of (9) is proved in exactly the same way. Observe that

implicit in the theorem is the conclusion that the set A is μ-measurable for
                                                                xx

almost all x (in the sense of the measure μ) and that the function φ(x) is μ-
                                                xAx

measurable, since otherwise (10) would be meaningless.

  The measure μ is the Lebesgue extension of the measure


                                      m = μ × μ
                                            xy


defined on the semiring  of all sets of the form
                              m


                            A = A × A(A ∈ )
                                    yxμ
                                    00

where  is the Borel algebra of μ-measurable subsets of X × Y. But (10)
        μ

obviously holds for all such sets, since for them






Moreover, (10) carries over at once to the ring () generated by , since
                                                            mm

() is just the system of all sets which can be represented as finite unions
    m

of pairwise disjoint sets of  (recall Theorem 3, p. 34).
                                m

  To prove (10) for an arbitrary set A ∈ , we recall from Theorem 8, p.
                                                    μ277 that there are sets




and corresponding sets




such that






Clearly,







                                          6
Hence we can invoke Levi’s theorem to extend (10) from the ring () to
                                                                                      m

the system of all sets B ∈  of the form
                                μ





Moreover if μ(A) = 0, then μ(B) = 0, because of (11), and hence


                                  φ(x) = μ(B) = 0
                                    Bxx


almost everywhere. Therefore A is measurable and
                                    x


                                  φ(x) = μ(A) = 0
                                    Ayx


for almost all x, since A ⊂ B. But then
                          xx




In other words, (10) holds for all sets of measure zero, as well as for all setsof the form (12). But, according to (11), an arbitrary set A ∈  can be
                                                                                μ

represented as


                                      A = B – Z,


where B is of the form (12) and Z is of measure zero. Therefore


                            B = A ∪ Z(A ∩ Z = ∅).


It follows that








i.e., (10) holds for every A ∈ . 
                                    μ


  Example 1. Let M be any μ-measurable set, and let f be an integrable
                                    x

nonnegative function. Moreover, let Y be the y-axis, and let μ be ordinary
                                                                          y

Lebesgue measure on the line. Consider the set




Then






and hence, by Theorem 3,





This allows us to interpret the Lebesgue integral of a nonnegative function

over a set M ⊂ X in terms of the μ-measure of the set (13), where μ = μ ⊗ μ.
                                                                                    xy


  Example 2. In the preceding example, let X be the x-axis and let M be a

closed  interval  [a, b].  Moreover,  suppose f  is  nonnegative  and  Riemann-integrable on [a, b]. Then (14) reduces to the familiar formula




for the area under the graph of the function y = f(x) between x = a and x = b.


  35.3.  Fubini’s  theorem.  The  next  theorem  is  basic  in  the  theory  of

multiple integration:


  THEOREM 4 (Fubini). Let μ and μ be the same as in Theorem 3, let μ be
                                  xy

the product measure μ ⊗ μ, and let f(x, y) be μ-integrable on the set A ⊂ X
                        xy

× Y. Then





  Proof. Note that implicit in the theorem is the conclusion that the “inner

integrals” in parentheses exist for almost all values of the variable over which

they  are  integrated  (x  in  the  first  case, y  in  the  second).  We  begin  by

assuming temporarily that f(x, y)  0. Consider the triple Cartesian product


                                    U = X × Y × Z,


where Z is the real line, equipped with the product measure

                                      111
                    μ = μ ⊗ μ ⊗ μ = μ ⊗ μ = μ ⊗ (μ ⊗ μ)
                      uxyxy

                                1
(see Problem  3),  where  μ  is  ordinary  Lebesgue  measure  on  the  line.

Moreover, consider the set W ⊂ U defined by


                W = {(x, y, z):x ∈ A, y ∈ A, 0  z  f(x, y)}.
                                        yx


By (14),





On the other hand, by Theorem 3,where





Using (14) again, we obtain





Comparing (16)–(18),  we  get  part  of (15).  The  rest  of (15)  is  proved  in

exactly the same way. To remove the restriction that f(x, y) be nonnegative,

we merely note that

                                        +
                              f(x, y) = f(x, y) – f(x, y),
                                                    –


where the functions








are both nonnegative. 


  Remark. Thus Fubini’s theorem asserts that if the “double integral”





exists, then so do the “iterated integrals”





and moreover I = I = I.
                    xyyx                                                    2
  Problem 1. Give an example of a set in R which is not a direct product of

                  1
any two sets in R.


  Problem 2. Prove that the direct product of two rings (or σ-rings) need not

be a ring (or σ-ring).


  Problem 3. Given three spaces X, Y and Z, equipped with measures μ, μ
                                                                                      xy

and μ, respectively, prove that (μ ⊗ μ) ⊗ μ and μ ⊗ (μ ⊗ μ) are identical
      zxyzxyz

measures on X × Y × Z.


  Problem 4. Let A = [−1, 1] × [−1, 1] and





Prove that

        a)The iterated integrals (20) exist and are equal;

        b)The double integral (19) fails to exist.

        Hint. Since




we have





On the other hand, the double integral fails to exist, since





after transforming to polar coordinates.


  Problem 5. Let A = [0, 1] × [0, 1] andProve that the iterated integrals (20) exist but are unequal.





  Problem 6. The preceding two problems show that the existence of the

iterated  integrals (20)  does  not  imply  either  the  existence  of  the  double

integral (19)  or  the  validity  of  formula (15).  However,  show  that  the

existence of either of the integrals





implies both the existence of (19) and the validity of (15).


  Hint.  Suppose  the  first  of  the  integrals (21)  exists  and  equals M. The

function


                              f(x, y) = min {|f(x, y)|, n}
                              n


is measurable and bounded, and hence summable on A. By Fubini’s theorem,





Moreover, {f(x, y)} is a nondecreasing sequence of functions converging to
              n

|f(x, y)|. Use Levi’s theorem to deduce the summability of |f(x, y)| and hence

that of f(x, y) on A.


  Problem 7. Show that Fubini’s theorem continues to hold for the case of

σ-finite measures (cf. Sec. 30.2).36. The Stieltjes Integral


  36.1. Stieltjes measures. Let F be a nondecreasing function defined on a

closed interval [a, b], and suppose F is continuous from the left at every point

of (a, b]. Let  be the semiring of all subintervals (open, closed or half-open)

                                                                            7
of [a, b), and let m be the measure on  defined by the formulas









Finally, let μ be the Lebesgue extension of m, defined on the σ-algebra 
              FμF

of μ-measurable sets. In particular,  contains all subintervals of [a, b)
    FμF

and  hence  all  Borel  subsets  of  [a, b).  Then  μ  is  called  the  (Lebesgue-)
                                                        F

Stieltjes measure corresponding to the function F, and the function F itself is

called the generating function of μ.
                                        F


  Example  1.  The  Stieltjes  measure  corresponding  to  the  generating

function F(x) = x is just ordinary Lebesgue measure on the line.


  Example 2. Let F be a jump function, with discontinuity points x, x, . . . .
                                                                                12

x, . . . and corresponding jumps h, h, . . ., h, . . . . Then every subset A ⊂
n12n

[a, b] is μ-measurable, with measure
          F





In fact, according to (1), every single-element set {x} has measure h, and
                                                              nn

moreover it is clear that the measure of the complement of the set {x, x, . . .,
                                                                                12

x, . . .} is zero. But then (2) holds, by the σ-additivity of μ. A Stieltjes
nF

measure μ of this type, generated by a jump function, is said to be discrete.
          F


  Example 3. Let F be an absolutely continuous nondecreasing function on

[a, b), with derivative f = F′. Then the Stieltjes measure μ is defined on all
                                                                    FLebesgue-measurable subsets A ⊂ [a, b) and





In fact, by Theorem 6, p. 340,





for  every  open  interval  (α,  β).  But  then (3)  holds  for  every  Lebesgue-

measurable  set A ⊂  [a,  b)  since  a  Lebesgue  extension  of  a  σ-additive

                                                                                      8
measure is uniquely determined by its values on the original semiring. A

Stieltjes measure μ of this type, with an absolutely continuous generating
                      F

function, is itself said to be absolutely continuous.


  Example 4. Let F be singular (and continuous) as on p. 341. Then the

corresponding Stieltjes measure μ is concentrated on the set of Lebesgue
                                        F

measure zero where the derivative F′ is nonzero or fails to exist. A Stieltjes

measure of this type is said to be singular.


  Example  5.  By  the  Lebesgue  decomposition  (p.  341),  an  arbitrary

generating function F can be represented as a sum




of a jump function D, an absolutely continuous function A and a singular

function S  (verify  that D, A  and S  are  themselves  generating  functions).

Moreover, each of the “components” D, A and S is uniquely determined to

within an additive constant (see Problem 4, p. 342). But clearly


                                  μ = μ + μ + μ.
                                    FDAS


It follows that an arbitrary Lebesgue-Stieltjes measure can be represented as a

sum of a discrete measure μ, an absolutely continuous measure μ and a
                                  DA

singular measure μ. Moreover, this representation is unique (why?).
                    S


  Remark.  We  can  easily  extend  the  notion  of  a  Stieltjes  measure  on  a

(finite) interval [a, b) to that of a Stieltjes measure on the whole line (− ∞, ∞).Let F be a bounded nondecreasing function on (− ∞, ∞), so that


                          m  F(x)  M(− ∞ < x < ∞).


Using the formulas (1) to define the measure of arbitrary intervals (open,

closed or half-open), not just subintervals of a fixed interval [a, b), we get a

finite measure μ on the whole line, called a (Lebesgue-) Stieltjes measure, as
                F

before. In particular, we have


                            μ(− ∞, ∞) = F(∞) − F(− ∞)


for the measure of the whole line, where




(the  existence  of  the  limits  follows  from  the  fact  that F  is  bounded  and

monotonic).


  36.2. The Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral. Let μ be a Stieltjes measure on
                                                          F

the interval [a, b), corresponding to the generating function F, and let f be a

μ-summable  function.  Then  by  the Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral  of f  (with
F

respect to F), denoted by





we simply mean the Lebesgue integral





  Example 1. Let F be the jump function




so that μ is a discrete measure. Then (6) reduces to the sum
        F  Example 2. If F is absolutely continuous, then





where  the  right-hand  side  is  the  integral  of fF′  with  respect  to  ordinary

Lebesgue  measure  on  the  line.  In  the  case  where f(x)  ≡  const,  this  is  an

immediate consequence of (4). Moreover, by the σ-additivity of integrals, (7)

can be extended to the case of any simple function f which is μ-summable.
                                                                            F

More generally, let {f} be a sequence of such simple functions converging
                        n

uniformly to f, so that {fF′} converges uniformly to fF′. It can be assumed
                            n

without loss of generality that


                          f(x)  f(x)  . . . f(x)  . . .,
                            12


and hence that


                f(x)F(x)  . . . f(x)F(x)  . . .  f(x)F(x)  . . ..
                12n


Therefore, applying Levi’s theorem (Theorem 2, p. 305) to both sequences

{f} and {fF′}, we get
nn





  Example 3. Suppose


                                  F(x) = D(x) + A(x),


where D is the jump function




and A is absolutely continuous. Then it follows from Examples 1 and 2 that





In the case where F also contains a singular component, as in (5), there is no

such  representation  of  the  Lebesgue-Stieltjes  integral (6)  as  the  sum  of  aseries and an ordinary Lebesgue integral.


  Remark. We can easily extend the notion of a Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral

with respect to a nondecreasing function F to that of a Lebesgue-Stieltjes

integral with respect to an arbitrary function of bounded variation φ. In fact,

as in Theorem 4, p. 331, let


                                      Φ = v − g,


where v, the total variation of Φ on the interval [a, x], and g = v − Φ are both

nondecreasing. We then set





by definition (see Problem 2).


  36.3. Applications to probability theory. The Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral

is widely used in mathematical analysis and its applications. The concept

plays  a  particularly  important  role  in  probability  theory.  Given  a  random

          9
variable ξ, let


                                  F(x) = P{ξ < x},


i.e., let F(x) be the probability that ξ takes a value less than x. Then F is

clearly nondecreasing and continuous from the left. Moreover, F satisfies the

conditions


                              F(− ∞) = 0,F(∞) = 1


(why?).  Conversely,  every  such  function f  can  be  represented  as  the

probability distribution of some random variable ξ.

    Two  basic  numerical  characteristics  of  a  random  variable  ξ  are  its

mathematical expectation or mean (value)





and variance(however, see Problem 5).


  Example 1. A random variable ξ is said to be discrete if it can take no

more than countably many values x, x, . . ., x, . . . . For example, the
                                            12n

number  of  calls  received  on  a  given  telephone  line  during  a  given  time

interval is a discrete random variable. Let


                          p = P{ξ = x}(n = 1, 2, ...)
                            nn


be the probability of the random variable ξ taking the value x. Then the
                                                                            n

distribution function of ξ is just the jump function




In this case, the integrals (9) and (10) for the mean and variance of ξ reduce

to the sums







  Example 2. A random variable ξ is said to be continuous if its distribution

function F is absolutely continuous. The derivative


                                      p(x) = F′(x)


of  the  distribution  function  is  then  called  the probability density  of  ξ.  It

follows from Example 2, p. 364 that in this case the integrals (9) and (10) for

the mean and variance of ξ reduce to the following integrals with respect to

ordinary Lebesgue measure on the line:  36.4.  The  Riemann-Stieltjes  integral.  Besides  the  Lebesgue-Stieltjes

integral introduced in Sec. 36.2 (which is in effect nothing but the difference

between two ordinary Lebesgue integrals with respect to two measures on the

        10
real line), we can also introduce the Riemann-Stieltjes integral, defined as a

limit of certain approximating sums, analogous to those used to define the

ordinary Riemann integral. To this end, let f and φ be two functions on [a, b],

where φ is of bounded variation and continuous from the left, and let


                            a = x < x < x < . . . < x = b
                                      12n


be a partition of the interval [a, b] by points of subdivision x, x, x, . . ., x.
                                                                        012n

Choosing an arbitrary point ξ in each subinterval [x, x], we form the sum
                                  kk−1k





Suppose that as the partition is “refined,” i.e., as the quantity




(equal to the maximum length of the subintervals) approaches zero, the sum

(11)  approaches  a  limit  independent  of  the  choice  of  both  the  points  of

subdivision x and the “intermediate points” ξ. Then this limit is called the
              kk

Riemann-Stieltjes integral of f with respect to Φ, and is denoted by




(just as in the case of the Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral).


  Remark. If Φ = Φ + Φ, then
                      12





(provided the integrals on the right exist). In fact, we need only write the

identityand then pass to the limit as the quantity (12) approaches zero.


  THEOREM 1. If f is continuous on [a, b], then its Riemann-Stieltjes integral

exists and coincides with its Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral.


  Proof. The sum (11) can be regarded as the Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral of

the step function


                f(x) = ξifx  x < x(k = 1, . . ., n).
                nkk–1k


As the partition of [a, b] is refined, the sequence {f} converges uniformly to
                                                            n

f (why?). Hence, by the very definition of the Lebesgue integral (recall p.

294),





where I is the Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral of f over [a, b). But then





where the limit on the left is the Riemann-Stieltjes integral of f over [a, b]. 


  THEOREM 2. If f is continuous on [a, b], then





where  is the total variation of Φ on [a, b].


  Proof. The inequalityholds for any partition of the interval [a, b]. Taking the limit of the left-hand

side as max {x − x, . . ., x − x} → 0, we get (14). 
                10nn−1


  Remark. If Φ(x) = x, (14) reduces to the familiar estimate





for the ordinary Riemann integral.


  THEOREM 3. Let Φ be a function of bounded variation on [a, b], different

from zero at no more than countably many points c, c, . . ., c, . . . in (a, b).
                                                            12n

Then





for any function f continuous on [a, b].


  Proof. The assertion is obvious if Φ is nonzero at only a single point c ∈
                                                                                      1

(a, b), since then





for an “arbitrarily fine” partition


                            a = x < x < . . . < x = b,
                                    01n


i.e., a partition for which the quantity (12) is arbitrarily small, provided we

                                                                                          11
make sure that c is not one of the points of subdivision x, x, . . ., x.
                  101n

Hence, by (13), the assertion is also true if Φ is nonzero at only finitely many

points in (a, b). Now suppose Φ is different from zero at countably many

points                                  c, c,. . ., c, . . .
                                    12n


in (a, b), and let


                                      y = Φ(c).
                                        nn


Then





since Φ is of bounded variation. Given any ε > 0, we choose N such that





and write Φ in the form




where Φ takes the values y, . . ., y at the points c, . . ., c and is zero
        N1N1N

elsewhere, while ∈* takes the values y, y, . . . at the points c, c, .
                                              N+1N+2N+1N+2

. . and is zero elsewhere. Then, as just shown,





Moreover





where




orafter taking the limit as m → ∞. This in turn implies





since ε > 0 is arbitrary. Formula (15) now follows at once from (13) and

(16)–(18). 


  36.5. Helly’s theorems. In Sec. 30.1 we found conditions insuring the

validity of passing to the limit in Lebesgue integrals, i.e., conditions under

which





where {f} is a sequence of functions converging (almost everywhere) to a
        n

function f and the integrals are all with respect to a fixed measure μ. In the

case  of  Stieltjes  integrals,  we  now  ask  a  closely  related  but  somewhat

different question: Under what conditions does the formula





hold, where f is continuous and {Φ} is a sequence of functions of bounded
                                        n

variation converging (everywhere) to a function Φ? (Note that here, unlike

(19), the function f is fixed, and it is the function Φ, or the corresponding
                                                              n

Stieltjes measure, which varies.) The answer to this question is given by


  THEOREM 4 (Helly’s convergence theorem). Let {Φ} be a sequence of
                                                                  n

functions of bounded variation on [a, b], converging to a function Φ at every

point of [a, b]. Suppose the sequence of total variations  is bounded,

so that




for some constant C > 0. Then Φ is also of bounded variation on [a, b], and

(20) holds for every function f continuous on [a, b].

Proof. Let                              a = x < x < ... < x = b
                                    01m


be any partition of the interval [a, b] by points of subdivision x, x, . . ., x.
                                                                          01m

Then





and hence




i.e., Φ is of bounded variation on [a, b], as asserted.

    Next we show that (20) holds if f is a step function. Suppose


                            f(x) = hif x  x < x.
                                      kk−1k


Then





  12
and





where obviously (23) approaches (24) as n → ∞. Now let f be continuous on

[a, b]. Given any ε > 0, choose a step function f such that
                                                      ε





(why is this possible?). Then





whereBy the inequality (14), which clearly holds for Lebesgue-Stieltjes integrals as

well as for Riemann-Stieltjes integrals (why?), we have








after using (21), (22) and (25). Moreover, as just shown,





for sufficiently large n. It follows from (26)–(28) that





which implies (20), since ε > 0 is arbitrary. 


  Theorem  1  gives  conditions  under  which  we  can  take  the  limit  of  a

sequence {Φ} of functions of bounded variation inside a Stieltjes integral.
              n

The next theorem gives conditions guaranteeing the existence of a sequence

{Φ} meeting the requirements of Theorem 4.
  n


  THEOREM 5 (Helly’s selection principle). Let Φ be a family of functions

defined on an interval [a, b] and satisfying the conditions





for suitable C and M. Then Φ contains a sequence which converges for everyx ∈ [a, b].


  Proof. It is enough to prove the theorem for nondecreasing functions. In

fact, let


                                      φ = v − g,


where v  is  the  total  variation  of  φ  on  [a, x].  Then  the  functions v

corresponding to all φ ∈ Φ are nondecreasing and satisfy the conditions of

the theorem, since




Assuming that the theorem holds for nondecreasing functions, we choose a

sequence {φ} from Φ such that v converges to a limit v* on [a, b]. Then the
            nn

functions


                                      g = v − φ
                                        nnn


are  also  nondecreasing  and  satisfy  the  conditions  of  the  theorem  (why?).

Therefore {φ} contains a subsequence {φ} such that {g} converges to a
              nnn
                                                  kk

limit g* on [a, b]. But then




where




    Thus we now proceed to prove the theorem for nondecreasing functions.

Let r, r, . . ., r, . . . be the rational points of [a, b]. It follows from (29) that
    12n

the set of numbers


                                  φ(r)(φ ∈ Φ)
                                      1


is bounded. Hence there is a sequence of functions  converging at the

point r. Similarly,  contains a subsequence  converging at the
      1

point r as well as at  contains a subsequence  converging at the
      2point r as well as at r and r, and so on. The “diagonal sequence”
      312




will then converge at every rational point of [a, b]. The limit of this sequence

is a nondecreasing function , defined only at the points r, r, . . ., r, . . . .
                                                                    12n

We complete the definition of  at the remaining points of [a, b] by setting





The resulting function  is then the limit of {} at every continuity point of 
                                                    n

. In fact, let x* be such a point. Then, given any ε > 0, there is a δ > 0 such

that





if


                                      |x* − x| < δ.


Let r and r′ be rational numbers such that


                          x* − δ < r′ < x* < r″ < x* + δ,


and let n be so large that





It follows from (30) and (31) that





Since  is a nondecreasing function, we have
      n




and henceTherefore




since ε > 0 is arbitrary.

    Thus we have constructed a sequence {} of functions in φ converging
                                                    n

to a limit function  everywhere except possibly at discontinuity points of .

Since there are no more than countably many such points (why?), we can

again  use  the  “diagonal  process”  to  find  a  subsequence  of  {}  which
                                                                                n

converges at these points as well, and hence converges everywhere on [a, b]. 



  36.6. The Riesz representation theorem. Next we show how Stieltjes

integrals can be used to represent the general linear functional on the space

C of all functions continuous on the interval [a, b]:
[a,b]


  THEOREM 6 (F. Riesz). Every continuous linear functional φ on the space

C can be represented in the form
[a,b]





where Φ is a function of bounded variation on [a, b], and moreover




    Proof. The space C can be regarded as a subspace of the space M
                            [a,b][a,b]

of all bounded functions on [a, b], with the same norm




as in C. Let φ be a continuous linear functional on C. By the Hahn-
        [a,b][a,b]

Banach theorem (Theorem 5, p. 180), φ can be extended without changing its

norm from C onto the whole space M. In particular, this extended
                [a,b][a,b]functional will be defined on all functions of the form






Let




Then Φ is of bounded variation on [a, b]. In fact, given any partition




of [a, b], let


                  α = sgn [Φ(x) − Φ(x)](k = 1, . . ., n),
                    kkk−1


where








Then










But the function





can only take the values 0, ±1, and hence its norm equals 1. ThereforeSince this is true for any partition of [a, b], we have





i.e., Φ is of bounded variation on [a, b], as asserted.

  We now show that the functional φ can be represented in the form of a

Stieltjes integral with respect to the function Φ just constructed. Let f be any

function continuous on [a, b]. Given any ε > 0, let δ > 0 be such that |x′ − x″|

< δ implies |f(x′) − f(x″)| < ε. Suppose the partition (36) is such that each

subinterval [x, x] is of length less than δ, and consider the step function
              k−1k


                  f(ε)(x) = f(x) if x  x < x(k = 1, . . ., n),
                                kk−1k


which can obviously be written in the form





where f is the function defined by (34). Clearly,
      τ

                                            (ε)
                                  |f(x) − f(x)| < ε

                  13
for all x ∈ [a, b], i.e.,




It follows from (35) and (38) that





      (ε)
i.e., φ(f) is an “approximating sum” of the Riemann-Stieltjes integral




Thereforefor a “sufficiently fine” partition of the interval [a, b]. On the other hand,




because of (39). But then





which  implies (32),  since  ε  >  0  is  arbitrary.  To  prove (33),  we  merely

combine (37) with the opposite inequality




which is an immediate consequence of Theorem 2  and  the  representation

(32). 


  Problem 1. Let μ be an arbitrary finite σ-additive measure on the real line

(−∞,  ∞).  Represent  μ  as  the  Stieltjes  measure  corresponding  to  some

generating function F.


  Hint. Let F(x) = μ(−∞, x).


  Comment. Thus the term “Stieltjes measure” does not refer to a special

kind of measure, but rather to a special way of constructing a measure (by

using a generating function).


  Problem 2. Let Φ be a function of bounded variation with two distinct

representations Φ = v − g, Φ = v* − g* in terms of nondecreasing functions v,

g, v* and g* (give an example). Prove that




    Comment. Thus in the definition (8) of the Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral

with  respect  to  a  function  of  bounded  variation  Φ,  the  particular

representation  of  Φ  as  a  difference  between  two  nondecreasing  functions

does not matter, i.e., v need not be the total variation of Φ on [a, x].  Problem 3. Let ξ be the number of spots obtained in throwing an unbiased

die. Find the mean and variance of ξ.


  Ans. 


  Problem 4. Find the mean and variance of the random variable ξ with

probability density




  Problem 5. Let ξ be the random variable with probability density





Prove that Eξ and Dξ fail to exist.


  Problem  6.  Discuss  random  variables  which  are  neither  discrete  nor

continuous.


  Problem  7.  Given  a  random  variable  ξ  with  distribution  function F,

consider the new random variable η = φ(ξ), where φ is a function summable

with respect to the Stieltjes measure μ generated by F. Express Eξ and Dξ in
                                            F

terms of F.


  Hint. Consider the problem of changing variables in a Lebesgue integral.


  Ans. For example, .


  Problem 8. Prove that if f is continuous on [a, b],  then  the  Riemann-

Stieltjes integral





does not depend on the values taken by φ at its discontinuity points in (a, b).


  Hint. Use Theorem 3 and formula (13).  Comment.  Hence  if f  is  continuous,  we  need  not  insist  that  Φ  be

continuous from the left at its discontinuity points in (a, b). In fact, Φ can be

assigned arbitrary values at these points.


  Problem 9. Write formulas for the Riemann-Stieltjes integral (40) in the

case where f is continuous and


        a)Φ is a jump function;

        b)Φ  is  an  absolutely  continuous  function  with  a  Riemann-

              integrable derivative.


  Problem 10. Evaluate the following Riemann-Stieltjes integrals:




  a) 





  b) 





  c) 




  Problem 11.  Develop  a  theory  of  Riemann-Stieltjes  integration  on  the

whole real line (− ∞, ∞).


  Problem 12. Extend Theorem 4 to the case where a = − ∞ or b = ∞ (or

both), assuming that f(x) approaches a limit as x → ± ∞.


  Problem 13. Let {Φ) be the same as in Theorem 4, and let {f} be a
                            nn

sequence of continuous functions on [a, b] converging uniformly to a limit f.

Prove that  Problem 14. Prove that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the

set of all continuous linear functionals φ on C and the space  of
                                                        [a, b]

Problem 8, p. 332, provided we identify any two elements of  which

coincide at all their continuity points. Prove that the inequality




need not hold for every Φ ∈  corresponding to a given functional φ ∈

C, but that there is always at least one such element Φ for which the
[a, b]

inequality holds.



37. The Spaces L and L
                      12


    37.1. Definition and basic properties of L. Let X be a space equipped
                                                        1

with  a  measure  μ,  where  the  measure  of X  itself  may  be  either  finite  or

infinite. Then by L(X, μ), or simply L, we mean the set of all real functions f
                    11

summable on X (however, see Problem 1). Clearly L is a linear space (with
                                                              1

addition of functions and multiplication of functions by numbers defined in

the usual way), since a linear combination of summable functions is again a

summable function. To introduce a norm in L, we define
                                                    1





where, as in the rest of this section, the symbol ∫ by itself denotes integration

over the whole space X. Of the various properties of a norm (see p. 138), it

follows at once from (1) that







and we need only verify that ∥f∥ = 0 if and only if f = 0. To insure this, weagree to regard equivalent functions (i.e., functions differing only on a set of

measure zero) as identical elements of the space L. Thus the elements of L
                                                            11
                                                                                      14
are,  to  be  perfectly  exact,  classes  of  equivalent  summable  functions.  In

particular,  the  zero  element  of L  is  the  class  consisting  of  all  functions
                                        1

vanishing almost everywhere. With this understanding, we will continue to

talk (more casually) about “functions in L.”
                                                1

  In L, as in any normed linear space, we can use the formula
        1


                                  ρ(f, g) = ∥f − g∥


to define a distance. Let {f} be a sequence of functions in L. Then {f} is
                                n1n

said to converge in the mean to a function f ∈ L if ρ(f, f) → 0 as n → ∞.
                                                        1n


  THEOREM 1. The space L is complete.
                              1


  Proof. Let {f} be a Cauchy sequence in L, so that
                n1


                              ∥f −∥ → 0 as m, n → ∞.
                                m


Then we can find a sequence of indices {n} (where n < n < · · · < n < · ·
                                                  k12k

·) such that





It follows from the corollary to Levi’s theorem (see p. 307) that the series


                                |f| + |f − f| + . . .
                                  n1n2n1


converges almost everywhere on X. Therefore the series


                                f, + f, − f, + . . .
                                  n1n2n1


also converges almost everywhere on X to some function




But {f} converges in the mean to the same function f. In fact, given any ε >
    n
      k0,





for sufficiently large k and l, since {f} is a Cauchy sequence. Hence, by
                                              n

Fatou’s theorem (Theorem 3, p. 307), we can take the limit as l → ∞ behind

the integral sign in (2), obtaining




It follows that f ∈ L (why?) and that f in the mean. But if a Cauchy
                          1n
                                                  k

sequence contains a subsequence converging to a limit, then the sequence

itself must converge to the same limit. Hence f → f in the mean. 
                                                      n


  According to the definition of the Lebesgue integral (see p. 296), given

any function f summable on X and any ε > 0, there is a summable simple

function φ(x) such that


                                  ∫ |f(x) − φ(x)| < ε.


Moreover, the Lebesgue integral of a summable simple function φ taking

values y, y, . . . on sets E, E, . . . is defined as the sum of the series
        1212





(assumed to converge absolutely). Therefore every summable simple function

can be represented as the limit in the mean (i.e., as the limit in the sense of

convergence in the mean) of a sequence of summable simple functions, each

taking only finitely many values. In fact, given any ε > 0, let N be such that





      15
and letThen





In  other  words,  the  set  of  all  simple  functions  taking  only  finitely  many

values is everywhere dense in the space L.
                                                1


  THEOREM 2. Let X be a metric space equipped with a measure μ such

  16
that

    1)Every open set and every closed set in X is measurable;

  2)If a set M ⊂ X is measurable, then





    where  the  greatest  lower  bound  is  taken  over  all  open  sets G ⊂  X

        containing M.

Then the set of all continuous functions on X is everywhere dense in


                                        L(X, μ).
                                        1


  Proof. We need only show that every simple function taking only finitely

many values is the limit in the mean of a sequence of continuous functions.

But every simple function taking only finitely many values is a finite linear

combination  of  characteristic  functions  of  measurable  sets,  and  hence  we

need only show that every such characteristic function χ(x) is the limit in the
                                                                M

mean of a sequence of continuous functions. If M ⊂ X is measurable, then

(3) implies that given any ε > 0, there is a closed set F and an open set G
                                                                MM

such that




        17
Now letThen





Moreover,  φ  is  continuous,  since  ρ(F, x)  and  ρ(X  −  G, x)  are  both
              εMM

continuous functions, with a nonvanishing sum. But |χ − φ| does not exceed
                                                              Mε

1 on G − F, and vanishes outside this set. Using (4), we find that
      MM




  The space L(X, μ) depends on the choice of both the space X and the
                  1

measure μ. For example, L(X, μ) is essentially a finite-dimensional space if μ
                              1

is concentrated on a finite set of points (why?). In analysis, we are mainly

interested in the case where L is infinite-dimensional but has a countable
                                    1
                              18
everywhere dense subset. To characterize such spaces, we introduce the

following concept, stemming from general measure theory:


    DEFINITION. Suppose a space X equipped with a measure μ has a countable

system  of measurable subsets A, A, . . . such that given any ε > 0 and
                                          12

any  measurable  subset M ⊂  X, there  is  a  set A ∈  satisfying  the
                                                              k

inequality


                                    μ(M Δ A) < ε.
                                              k


Then μ is said to have a countable base, consisting of the sets A, A, . . .
                                                                          12


  Example.  Let  μ  be  a  Lebesgue  extension  of  a  measure m  originally

defined on a countable semiring . Then the ring () is obviously itself
                                        mm

countable, and hence, by Theorem 3, p. 277, is a countable base for μ. In

particular, ordinary Lebesgue measure on the line has a countable base, since

we can choose the original semiring  to consist of all intervals (open,
                                                m

closed and half-open) with rational end points.


THEOREM 3. Let X be a space equipped with a measure μ, and suppose μ has

a countable base A, A, . . . . Then L(X, μ) has a countable everywhere
                      121dense subset.


Proof. We will show that the set M of all finite linear combinations of the

form





where f is the characteristic function of A and the numbers c, . . ., c are
        kk1n

rational, forms a countable everywhere dense subset of L = L(X, μ). The
                                                                      11

countability of M is obvious, and we need only show that M is everywhere

dense in L. As already noted, the set of all simple functions taking only
          1

finitely many values is everywhere dense in L. But every such function can
                                                      1

be approximated arbitrarily closely by a function of the same type taking only

rational  values.  Hence  we  need  only  show  that  every  function f  taking

rational values y, . . ., y on pairwise disjoint sets E, . . ., E (with X as their
                  1n1n

union) can be approximated arbitrarily closely in the L-metric by functions
                                                                  1

of the form (5). Clearly, there is no loss of generality in assuming that the

base A, A, . . ., is closed under the operations of taking differences and
      12

forming finite unions and intersections (why?).

    Now, according to the definition, given any ε > 0, there are sets A, . . .,
                                                                                    1

A such that
n


                    μ[E − A) ∪ (A − E)] < ε (k = 1, . . ., n).
                        kkkk


Let




and define a function






Then clearly                                  μ{x:f(x) ≠ f*(x)},


and hence the left-hand side of





can  be  made  arbitrarily  small  by  choosing  ε  >  0  sufficiently  small.  This

proves the theorem, since f* is a function of the form (5). 


  37.2. Definition and basic properties of L. As we have seen, the space
                                                      2

L  = L(X,  μ)  is  a  Banach  space,  i.e.,  a  complete  normed  linear  space.
11

However, L is not Euclidean, since its norm cannot be derived from any
            1

scalar product. This follows from the “parallelogram theorem” (Theorem 15,

p. 160). For example, if X = [0, 2π] and μ is ordinary Lebesgue measure on

the line, then the condition



                                                                  19
fails for the summable functions f(x) ≡ 1, g(x) = sin x. To get a function

space which is not only a normed linear space but also a Euclidean space, we

now consider the set of functions whose squares are summable.

    Thus let X be a space equipped with a measure μ, where we temporarily

assume that μ(X) < ∞. Then by L(X, μ), or simply L, we mean the set of all
                                      22

real functions f whose squares are summable on X, i.e., which satisfy the

condition

                                        2
                                    ∫ f(x)dμ < ∞


(however,  see Problem  6).  As  in  the  case  of L,  we  do  not  distinguish
                                                            1

between  equivalent  functions  (i.e.,  functions  differing  only  on  a  set  of

measure zero).


  THEOREM 4. If f and g belong to L, then so do αf, f + g, and fg, where α is
                                          2

an arbitrary constant. In particular, L is a linear space.
                                            2


  Proof. Obviously αf ∈ L, since
                                2The fact that fg ∈ L follows from the inequality
                      2




                          20
and Theorem 3, p. 297. But then f + g ∈ L, since
                                                    2




where each term on the right is summable. 

    Next we define a scalar product in L, setting
                                              2


                                (f, g) = ∫ f(x)g(x) dμ.


This choice obviously has all the properties of a scalar product listed on p.

142:

  1)(f, f)  0 where (f, f) = 0 if and only if f = 0;

  2)(f, g) = (g, f);

    3)(λf, g) = λ(f, g);

  4)(f, g + g) = (f, g) + (f, g).
            1212

(In asserting that (f, f) = 0 if and only if f = 0, we rely on the fact that every

function vanishing almost everywhere is identified with the zero element of

L.) Thus L is a Euclidean space, with the norm defined by the usual formula
22




(recall Theorem 1, p. 142). In the case of L, (7) takes the form
                                                  2





By the same token, the distance between two elements f, g ∈ L is just
                                                                          2The quantity




is called the meán square deviation of the functions f and g (from each other).

Let {f} be a sequence of functions in L. Then {f} is said to converge in the
    n2n

mean square to a function f ∈ L if ρ(f, f) → 0 as n → ∞.
                                    2n

  In L, as in any other Euclidean space, we have the Schwarz inequality
        2


                                  |(f, g)|  ∥f∥ ∥g∥,


which here takes the form






The L-version of the triangle inequality
    2


                                ∥f + g∥  ∥f∥ + ∥g∥


is clearly





In particular, replacing f by |f| and setting g(x) ≡ 1 in (8), we get






from which it is again apparent (cf. footnote 20) that f ∈ L implies f ∈ L if
                                                                    21

μ(X) < ∞.


  THEOREM 5. The space L is complete.
                              2

    Proof. Let {f} be a Cauchy sequence in L, so that
                  n2


                          ∥f − ∥f → 0as m, n → ∞.
                            mnThen, by (9), given any ε > 0, we have





for sufficiently large m and n, i.e., {f} is also a Cauchy sequence in the L-
                                          n1

metric. Repeating the argument given in the proof of the completeness of L,
                                                                                          1

we choose a subsequence {f} from {f} converging almost everywhere to
                                nn
                                  k

some function f. Clearly, given any ε > 0, we have





for sufficiently large k and l. Hence, by Fatou’s theorem (Theorem 3, p. 307),

we can take the limit as l → ∞ behind the integral sign in (10), obtaining




It follows that f ∈ L (why?) and that f → f in the mean square. But if a
                        2n
                                                k

Cauchy  sequence  contains  a  subsequence  converging  to  a  limit,  then  the

sequence itself must converge to the same limit. Hence f → f in the mean
                                                                    n

square. 


  We  now  drop  the  restriction  μ(X)  <  ∞,  allowing X  to  have  infinite

measure. In the case μ(X) = ∞, it is no longer true that f ∈ L implies f ∈ L,
                                                                      21

a fact deduced from (6) or (9) in the case μ(X) < ∞. For example, let X be the

real line equipped with ordinary Lebesgue measure, and let





Then f belongs to L but not to L, since
                      21





Moreover, if a sequence {f} converges to a limit f in the L-metric, it follows
                              n2from (9) that {f} also converges to f in the L-metric if μ(X) < ∞. However,
                n1

this conclusion fails if μ(X) = ∞, as shown by the example







where {f} approaches no limit in L but approaches the zero function in L
        n12
                                                21
(give the details). Despite all this, we have


  THEOREM 5′. The space L is complete even if μ(X) = ∞, provided that μ is
                                2

σ-finite.


  Proof. As in Sec. 30.2, let




where


                          X ⊂ X ⊂ . . . ⊂ X ⊂ . . . .
                            12n


Moreover, given any function φ on X, let






so that





if φ is summable on X. Let {f} be a Cauchy sequence in L, so that, given
                                  n2

any ε > 0,




for all sufficiently large k and l. Thenand hence, a fortiori,





                                                                                        (n)
But L(X, μ) is complete, by Theorem 5, since μ(X) < ∞. Therefore {f}
    2nnk
                                                          (n)
converges in the metric of L(X, μ) to a function f ∈ L(X, μ). Taking the
                                2n2n

limit as l → ∞ behind the integral sign in (11), we get





(why is this justified?). Since (12) holds for every n, we can now take the

limit as n → ∞, obtaining





Now let

                                      (n)
                              f(x) = f(x)if x ∈ X.
                                                          n


Then (13) implies




It follows that f ∈ L(X, μ) and f → f in the mean square. 
                      2k


  Problem 1. A complex function is said to be summable if its real and

imaginary  parts  are  summable.  Show  that  the  considerations  of Sec. 37.1

carry over verbatim to the case where L consists of all complex summable
                                                1

functions (defined on X).


  Problem 2. Prove that if each of the measures μ and μ has a countable
                                                              12

base, then so does their direct product μ = μ × μ.
                                                  12  Comment. In particular, Lebesgue measure in the plane (or more generally

in n-space) has a countable base.


  Problem 3. Let X be the interval [a, b], and let μ be ordinary Lebesgue

measure on the line. Prove that the set  of all polynomials on [a, b] with

rational coefficients is everywhere dense in L(X, μ.).
                                                    1


  Hint. Use Theorem 2 and the fact that every function continuous on [a, b]

can be approximated in the mean (or even uniformly) by elements of .


  Problem  4.  Prove  that L(X,  μ)  is  separable,  i.e.,  has  a  countable
                                  2

everywhere dense subset, if μ has a countable base.


  Comment. Thus L(X, μ) is a Hilbert space if μ has a countable base (we
                        2

disregard  the  case  where L(X,  μ)  is  finite-dimensional).  It  follows  from
                                2

Theorem 11, p. 155 that all such spaces are isomorphic, in particular, that

L(X, μ) is isomorphic to the space l of all sequences (x, x, . . ., x, . . .)
2212n

such that





(in fact, l corresponds to the case where the measure μ is concentrated on a
        2

countable set of points).


  Problem 5. Prove that every continuous linear functional φ on L(X, μ),
                                                                                  2

where μ has a countable base, can be represented in the form


                                  φ(f) = ∫ f(x)g(x)dμ,


where g is a fixed element of L(X, μ).
                                  2


  Hint. Recall Theorem 2, p. 188.


  Problem 6. Show that the considerations of Sec. 37.2 carry over verbatim

to  the  case  where L  consists  of  all  complex  functions f  satisfying  the
                        2

condition                                          2
                                    ∫ |f(x)| dμ < ∞


provided the scalar product of two such functions f and g is now defined as




Show that the resulting space L is a complex Hilbert space if the measure μ
                                    2

has a countable base (again disregard the finite-dimensional case).


  Problem 7. Let {f}  be  a  sequence  of  functions  defined  on  a  space X
                        n

equipped with a measure μ such that μ(X) < ∞. Prove that


        a)If {f} converges uniformly, then {f} converges in the mean and
                  nn

            in the mean square;

        b)If {f} converges in the mean or in the mean square, then {f}
                  nn

              converges in measure (as defined in Problem 6, p. 292);

        c)If {f} converges in the mean or in the mean square, then {f}
                  nn

            contains a subsequence f which converges almost everywhere.
                                          n
                                            k


  Hint. See Problem 9, p. 292. Alternatively, recall the proof of Theorem 1.


  Problem 8. Prove that the sequence of functions constructed in Problem 8,

p. 292 converges to f(x) ≡ 0 in the mean and in the mean square, without

converging at a single point.


  Problem  9.  Give  an  example  of  a  sequence  of  functions  {f}  which
                                                                                n

converges everywhere on [0, 1], but does not converge in the mean.


  Hint. Let






  Problem 10.  Give  an  example  of  a  sequence  of  functions  {f}  which
                                                                                n

converges  uniformly,  but  does  not  converge  in  the  mean  or  in  the  mean

square.  Hint. According to Problem 7a, we must have μ(X) = ∞. Let








  Problem  11.  Show  that  convergence  in  the  mean  need  not  imply

convergence in the mean square, whether or not μ(X) < ∞.


  Problem 12. Let L(X, μ) be the set of all classes of equivalent (real or
                        p

complex) functions f such that

                                p
                            ∫ |f| dμ < ∞(1  P < ∞),


equipped with the norm





Prove that L(X, μ) is a Banach space.
            p




  1
 Note that the empty set ∅ belongs to , since ∅ = ∅ × ∅ × · · · × ∅ (why?).

  2
 The term product measure will be used with a different meaning below.

  3
 We change to the symbol m here, to “free” μ for use in formula (8).

  4
 The Lebesgue extension of any measure is complete (see Problem 7, p. 280).

  5
 If X is the x-axis and Y the y-axis (so that X × Y is the xy-plane), then A is the projection onto
                                                                    x
                                                                      0
the y-axis of the set in which the vertical line x = x intersects the set A (and similarly for A).
                                            0y
                                                                                  0

  6
 See Theorem 2, p. 305 and Problem 2, p. 311.

  7
  To  avoid  confusion,  we  omit  “outer  parentheses,”  writing  μ(α,  β)  instead  of  μ((α,  β)),  and
similarly in the rest of the formulas (1). Moreover, in m[α, β], we allow the case α = β.

  8
 Give a more detailed argument, recalling Problem 1, p. 279. Note that in this case m(α, β) = m[α,
β] = m(α, β] = m[α, β).

  9
 We presuppose familiarity with the rudiments of probability theory. See e.g., Y. A. Rozanov,
Introductory  Probability  Theory  (translated  by  R.  A.  Silverman),  Prentice-Hall,  Inc.,  EnglewoodCliffs, N.J. (1969).

  10
 Recall formula (8).

  11
 Note that here we rely on the fact that c is not an end point of [a, b].
                                        1

  12
 Think of (23) and (24) as Lebesgue-Stieltjes integrals.

  13(ε)(ε)
 We complete the definition of f by setting f(b) = f(x) = f(b) for every ε > 0.
                                                        n

  14
 Thus the precise definition of addition of two elements φ, φ ∈ L is the following: Let f and
                                                        1211
f be “representatives” of φ and φ, respectively, i.e., let f ∈ φ, f ∈ φ. Then φ + φ is the class
212112212
containing f + f (this class clearly does not depend on the particular choice of f and f).
          1212

  15
 Note that φ is a finite linear combination of characteristic functions, namely
              N



  (see footnote 11, p. 349).

  16
 These conditions are satisfied by ordinary Lebesgue measure in n-space, and in many other
cases of practical interest.

  17
 As usual, ρ(A, x) denotes the distance between the set A and the point x (see Problem 9, p. 54).

  18
 So that L is separable, as defined on p. 48.
            1

  19
 As an exercise, show that the same kind of counter example works quite generally.

  20
 Setting g(x) ≡ 1 in (6), we find that f ∈ L implies f ∈ L (provided that X is of finite
                                              21
measure).

  21
 Note that in the proof of the completeness of L (Theorem 1), X can have either finite or infinite
                                              1
measure.                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY








Akhiezer, N. I. and I. M. Glazman, Theory of Linear Operators in Hilbert Space (translated by M.
  Nestell), Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., New York, Volume I (1961), Volume II (1963).
Berberian, S. K., Measure and Integration, The Macmillan Co., New York (1965).
Burkill, J. C., The Lebesgue Integral, Cambridge University Press, New York (1953).
Day, M. M., Normed Linear Spaces, Springer-Verlag, New York (1963).
Dieudonné, J, Foundations of Modern Analysis, Academic Press, Inc., New York (1960).
Dunford, N. and J. T Schwartz, Linear Operators, Interscience Publishers, Inc., New York, Part I:
  General Theory (1958), Part II: Spectral Theory (1963).
Edwards, R. E., Functional Analysis, Theory and Applications, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York
  (1965).
Fraenkel, A. A., Abstract Set Theory, third edition, North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam (1966).
Friedman,  A  A., Generalized  Functions  and  Partial  Differential  Equations,  Prentice-Hall,  Inc.,
  Englewood Cliffs, N.J. (1963).
Gelfand, I. M. and G. E Shilov, Generalized Functions (translated by E. Saletan et al.), Academic
Press,  Inc.,  New  York, Volume  1: Properties  and  Operations  (1964), Volume  2: Spaces  of
  Fundamental and Generalized Functions (1968).
Hahn,  H.  and  A.  Rosenthal, Set Functions,  University  of  New  Mexico  Press,  Albuquerque,  New
Mexico (1948).
Halmos, P. R., Measure Theory, D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc., Princeton, N.J. (1950).
Halmos, P. R., Introduction  to  Hilbert  Space,  second  edition,  Chelsea  Publishing  Co.,  New  York
  (1957).
Halmos, P. R., Naive Set Theory, D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc., Princeton, N.J. (1960).
Halmos, P. R., A Hilbert Space Problem Book, D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc., Princeton, N.J. (1967).
Hewitt, E. and K. Stromberg, Real and Abstract Analysis, Springer-Verlag, New York (1965).
Hildebrandt, T. H., Introduction to the Theory of Integration, Academic Press, Inc., New York (1963).
Kelley, J. L., General Topology, D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc., Princeton, N.J. (1955).
Kelley, J. L., I. Namioka et al., Linear Topological Spaces, D. Van Nostrand Co., Princeton, N.J.
  (1963).
Kuratowski, K., Introduction to Set Theory and Topology (translated by L. F. Boron), Pergamon Press,
Inc., New York (1961).
Liusternik, L. A. and V. I. Sobolev, Elements of Functional Analysis (translated by A. E. Labarre, Jr. et
al.), Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., Inc., New York (1961).
Loève, M., Probability Theory, third edition, D. Van Nostrand Co., Inc., Princeton, N.J. (1963).
McShane, E. J., Integration, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J. (1944).
Natanson,  I.  P.,  Theory  of  Functions  of  a  Real  Variable  (translated  by  L.  F.  Boron,  with  the
  collaboration of E. Hewitt), Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., New York, Volume I (1955), Volume II
  (1960).Riesz, F. and B. Sz.-Nagy, Functional Analysis (translated by L. F. Boron), Frederick Ungar Publishing
Co., New York (1955).
Royden, H. L., Real Analysis, second edition, The Macmillan Co., New York (1968).
Rudin, W., Principles of Mathematical Analysis, second edition, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New
York (1964).
Saks, S., Theory of the Integral (translated by L. C. Young, with two notes by S. Banach), second
  edition, Dover Publications, Inc., New York (1964).
Schaefer, H. H., Topological Vector Spaces, The Macmillan Co., New York (1966).
Shilov, G. E., Generalized Functions and Partial Differential Equations (translated by B. D. Seckler),
Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, Inc., New York (1968).
Shilov, G. E. and B. L. Gurevich, Integral, Measure and Derivative: A Unified Approach (translated by
R. A. Silverman), Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J. (1966).
Taylor, A. E., Introduction to Functional Analysis, J. Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York (1958).
Titchmarsh,  E.  C., The  Theory  of  Functions,  second  edition,  Oxford  University  Press,  New  York
  (1939).
Yosida, K., Functional Analysis, second edition, Springer-Verlag, New York (1968).
Zaanen, A. C., An Introduction to the Theory of Integration, Interscience Publishers, Inc., New York
  (1958).                                        INDEX








                                            A

Absolutely continuous charge, 347
Absolutely continuous function, 336
Absolutely summable sequence, 185
Adjoint operator, 232
in Hilbert space, 234
Aleph null, 16
Alexandroff, P. S., 90, 97
Algebra of sets, 31
Algebraic dimension, 128
Algebraic number, 19
Almost everywhere, 288
Angle between vectors, 143
Arzelà’s theorem, 102
  generalization of, 107
Axiom of choice, 27
Axiom of countability:
first, 93
second, 82
Axiom of separation:
first, 85
Hausdorff, 85
second, 85

                                            B

Baire’s theorem, 61
B-algebra (see Borel algebra)
Banach, S., 138, 229, 238
Banach space, 140
Base, 81
countable, 382
neighborhood (local), 83
Basis, 121
dual, 185
Hamel, 128
orthogonal, 143orthonormal, 143
Bessel’s inequality, 150, 165
Bicompactum, 96
Binary relation (see Relation)
Birkhoff, G., 28
Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, 101
Borel algebra, 35
irreducible, 36
minimal, 36
Borel closure, 36
Borel sets, 36
Bounded linear functional, 177
norm of, 177
Bounded real function, 110
Bounded set, 65, 141, 169
locally, 169
strongly, 197
weakly, 197
B-set (see Borel set)

                                            C

Cantor, G., 29
Cantor function, 335
Cantor set, 52
points of the first kind of, 53
points of the second kind of, 53
Cantor-Bernstein theorem, 17
Cardinal number, 24
Cartesian product (see Direct product)
Cauchy criterion, 56
Cauchy sequence, 56
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, 38
Chain, 28
maximal, 28
Characteristic function, 349
Charge, 344
absolutely continuous, 347
  concentrated, on a set, 346
continuous, 346
density of, 350
discrete, 347
negative, 344
negative variation of, 346
positive, 344
positive variation of, 346
  Radon-Nikodým derivative of, 350
singular, 347
total variation of, 346
Chebyshev’s inequality, 299
Choice function, 27Classes, 6
  equivalence, 8
Closed ball (see Closed sphere)
Closed graph theorem, 238
Closed set(s), 49
in a topological space, 79
on the real line, 51
unions and intersections of, 49
Closed sphere(s), 46
center of, 46
nested (or decreasing) sequence of, 59
radius of, 46
Closure, 46, 79
Closure operator, 46
properties of, 46
Codimension, 122
Cohen, P. J., 29
Compact space, 92
countably, 95
locally, 97
Compactness, 92
countable, 95
relative, 97
relative countable, 97
Compactum, 92, 96
metric, 96
Complement of a set, 3
Complete limit point, 97
Complete measure, 280
Completely continuous operator(s), 239 ff.
basic properties of, 243–246
in Hilbert space, 246–251
Completely regular space, 92
Completion (of a metric space), 62
Component (of an open set), 55
Conjugate space, 185
of a normed linear space, 184
second, 190
strong topology in, 190
third, 190
weak topology in, 200
weak* topology in, 202
Connected set, 55
Connected space, 84
Contact point, 46, 79
Continuity, 44, 87
from the left, 315
from the right, 315
uniform, 109
Continuous charge, 346Continuous linear functional(s), 175 ff.
order of, 182
sufficiently many, 181
Continuum, 16
power of, 16
Contraction mapping(s), 66 ff.
and differential equations, 71–72
and integral equations, 74–76
and systems of differential equations, 72–74
principle of, 66
Convergence almost everywhere, 289
Convergence in measure, 292
Convergence in the mean, 379
Convergence in the mean square, 385
Convergent sequence:
in a metric space, 47
in a topological space, 84
Convex body, 129
Convex functional, 130, 134
Convex hull, 130
Convex set, 129
Convexity, 128
Countability of rational numbers, 11
Countable additivity, 266, 272
Countable base, 382
Countable set, 10
Countably compact space, 95
Countably Hilbert space, 173
Countably normed (linear) space, 171
complete, 173
Cover, 83
closed, 83
open, 83
Covering (see Cover)
Curve(s):
in a metric space, 112–113
  length of, 114, 115
  sequence of, 115
rectifiable, 332

                                            D

Decomposition of a set into classes, 6–9
δ-algebra, 35
δ-ring, 35
Delta function, 124, 208
Dense set, 48
everywhere, 48
nowhere, 48, 61
Density, 350
Derived numbers, 318left-hand lower, 318
right-hand upper, 318
Diameter of a set, 65
Difference between sets, 3
Differentiation:
of a monotonic function, 318–323
of an integral with respect to its upper limit, 323–326
Dimension, 121
algebraic, 128
Dini’s theorem, 115
Direct product, 238, 352
of measures, 354
Directed set, 29
Dirichlet function, 289, 291, 301
Discontinuity point of the first kind, 315
Discrete charge, 347
Discrete space, 38
Disjoint sets, 2
pairwise, 2
Distance:
between a point and a set, 54
between two sets, 55
properties of, 37
symmetry of, 37
Domain (of definition), 4, 5, 221
Domain (open connected set), 71

                                            E

Egorov’s theorem, 290
Eigenvalue, 235
Eigenvector, 235
Elementary set, 255
measure of, 256
Empty set, 2
ε-neighborhood, 46
ε-net, 98
Equicontinuous family of functions, 102
Equivalence classes, 8
Equivalence relation, 7
Equivalent functions, 288
Equivalent sets, 13
Essential supremum, 311
Essentially bounded function, 310
Euclidean n-space, 38, 144
Euclidean space(s), 138, 142 ff.
characterization of, 160
complete, 153
  norm of vector in, 164
  orthogonal elements of, 164
components of elements of, 149norm in, 142
separable, 146
Euler lines, 105
Exhaustive sequence of sets, 308
Extension of a functional, 132
Extension of a measure, 271, 277, 279
Jordan, 281

                                            F

Factor space, 122
Fatou’s theorem, 307
Field, 37
Finite expansion, 33
Finite function, 208
Finite set, 10
First axiom of countability, 83
First axiom of separation, 85
Fixed point, 66
Fixed point theorem, 66
Fourier coefficients, 149, 152, 165
Fourier series, 149, 165
Fractional part, 8
Fraenkel, A. A., 25, 27
Fredholm equation, 74
homogeneous, 74
kernel of, 74
  nonhomogeneous, 74
Friedman, A., 212
Fubini’s theorem, 359
Function space, 39, 108
Functional(s), 108, 123
addition of, 183
additive, 123
bounded linear (see Bounded linear functional)
    conjugate-homogeneous, 123
  conjugate-linear, 124
continuous, 175
continuous linear (see Continuous linear functionals)
convex, 130, 134
extension of, 132
homogeneous, 123
linear, 124, 175 ff.
Minkowski, 131
null space of, 125
product of, with a number, 183
separation of sets by, 136
Function(s), 4 ff.
absolutely continuous, 336
  Borel-measurable, 284
bounded (real), 110, 207Cantor, 335
characteristic, 349
continuous, 44, 79
  from the left, 315
  from the right, 315
  uniformly, 109
delta, 124, 208
domain (of definition of), 4, 5
equivalent, 288
essentially bounded, 310
finite, 207
general, 5
generalized (see Generalized functions)
generating, 362
infinitely differentiable, 169
integrable, 294, 296, 308
  locally, 208
inverse, 5
jump, 315, 341
jump of, 315
left-hand limit of, 315
lower limit of, 111
lower semicontinuous, 110
measurable, 284 ff.
monotonic, 314
  nondecreasing, 314
nonincreasing, 314
of bounded variation, 328–332
one-to-one, 5
oscillation of, 111
range of, 4, 5
real, 4
right-hand limit of, 315
simple, 286
singular, 341
step, 316
summable, 294, 296, 308
test, 208
uniformly continuous, 109
upper limit of, 111
upper semicontinuous, 110
Fundamental functions (see Test functions)
Fundamental parallelepiped, 98
Fundamental sequence (see Cauchy sequence)
Fundamental space (see Test space)

                                            G

General measure theory, 269 ff.
Generalized function(s), 124, 206 ff.
and differential equations, 211–214complex, 215
  convergence of, 209
definition of, 208
derivative of, 210
of several variables, 214–215
on the circle, 216
operations on, 209–210
product of, with a number, 209
product of, with an infinitely differentiable function, 210
regular, 208
singular, 208
sum of, 209
Gödel, K., 209
Graph, 238
Greatest lower bound (in a partially ordered set), 30
Gurevich, B. L., 350, 351

                                            H

Hahn decomposition, 345
Hahn-Banach theorem, 132, 180
complex version of, 134, 181
Hamel basis, 128
Hausdorff axiom of separation, 85
Hausdorff space, 85
Hausdorff’s maximal principle, 28
Heine-Borel theorem, 92
Helly’s convergence theorem, 370
Helly’s selection principle, 372
Hereditary property, 87
Hilbert, D., 155
Hilbert cube, 98
Hilbert space(s), 155 ff.
complex, 165
countably, 173
  isomorphic, 155, 165
linear manifold in, 156
  closed, 156
subspace(s) of, 156
  direct sum of orthogonal, 159
  (mutually) orthogonal, 158
  orthogonal complement of, 157
Hilbert-Schmidt theorem, 248
Hölder’s inequality, 41
homogeneity of, 42
Hölder’s integral inequality, 45
Homeomorphic mapping, 44, 89
Homeomorphic spaces, 44, 89
Homeomorphism, 44, 89
Hyperplane, 127                                            I

Ideal, two-sided, 252
Image:
of an element, 5
of a set, 5
Infimum, 51
Infinite set, 10
Initial section, 25
Inner measure, 258, 276
Integrable function, 294, 296, 308
Integral part, 8
Interior, 128
Interior point, 50
Intersection of sets, 2
Into mapping, 5
Invariant subspace, 238
Inverse function, 5
Invisible point:
from the left, 319
from the right, 319
Isolated point, 47
Isometry, 44
Isomorphism, 21, 120, 155, 165
  conjugate-linear, 194, 234
Isomorphism theorem, 155, 165

                                            J

Jordan decomposition, 346
Jordan extension, 281
Jordan measurable set, 281
Jordan measure, 281
Jump, 315
Jump function, 315, 341

                                            K

Kelley, J. L., 87, 90, 92, 97
Kernel, 74

                                            L

Lattice, 30
Least upper bound (in a partially ordered set), 30
Lebesgue decomposition, 341, 351, 363
Lebesgue extension, 277, 279
Lebesgue integral, 293 ff.
absolute continuity of, 300–301
as a set function, 343–351
indefinite, 313 ff.of a general measurable function, 296, 308
of a simple function, 294
over a set of infinite measure, 308
vs. Riemann integral, 293–294, 309–310
Lebesgue-integrable function (see Integrable function)
Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral, 364
vs. Riemann-Stieltjes integral, 368
Lebesgue’s bounded convergence theorem, 303
Lebesgue’s theorem:
on differentiation of a monotonic function, 321
on integration of the derivative of an absolutely continuous function, 340
Left-hand limit, 315
Levi’s theorem, 305
Limit of a sequence:
in a metric space, 47
in a topological space, 84
Limit point, 47, 79
complete, 97
Linear closure, 140
Linear combination, 120
Linear dependence, 120
Linear functional, 175 ff.
bounded (see Bounded linear functional)
continuous .(see Continuous linear functionals)
Linear hull, 122
Linear independence, 121
Linear manifold, 140, 156
Linear operator, 221
bounded, 223
  norm of, 224
  spectral radius of, 239
closed, 237
completely continuous (see Completely continuous operators)
graph of, 238
Linear space(s), 118 ff.
basis in, 121
  Hamel, 128
closed segment in, 128
complex, 119
countably normed, 171
dimension of, 121
  algebraic, 128
  finite-dimensional, 121
functionals on (see Functionals)
  infinite-dimensional, 121
  isomorphic, 120
linearly dependent elements of, 120
linearly independent elements of, 121
n-dimensional, 121
normed (see Normed linear spaces)open segment in, 128
real, 119
subspace, 121
  proper, 121
topological (see Topological linear space)
Linearly ordered set (see Ordered set)
Lipschitz condition, 55
Locally integrable function, 208
Lower limit, 111
Lower semicontinuous function, 110
Luzin’s theorem, 293

                                            M

Mapping, 5 ff.
continuous, 44, 87
  contraction, 66
fixed point of, 66
into, 5
natural, 191
one-to-one, 5
onto, 5
order-preserving, 21
Mathematical expectation, 366
Mathematical induction, 28
Mean square deviation, 384
Mean (value), 366
Measurable function, 284 ff.
integration of, 294, 296, 308
Measurable set(s), 259 ff, 267
decreasing sequence of, 266
increasing sequence of, 267
Jordan, 281
Measure(s), 254 ff.
additivity of, 255, 263
complete, 280
continuity of, 267
countably (σ-) additive, 266, 272
direct product of, 354
extension(s) of, 271, 275–283
inner, 258, 276
Jordan, 281
Lebesgue, 259, 276, 279
of an elementary set, 256
of a plane set, 259, 276
of a rectangle, 255
on a semiring, 270
outer, 258, 276
product, 354
σ-finite, 308
signed, 344Stieltjes (see Stieltjes measure)
with a countable base, 382
Measure space, 294
Method of successive approximations, 66, 67
Metric (see Distance)
Metric space(s), 37 ff.
complete, 56
completion of, 62
continuous curves in, 112–113
  length of, 114, 115
  sequence of, 115
continuous mapping of, 44
  convergence in, 47
incomplete, 56
isometric, 44
isometric mapping of, 44
real functions on, 108
  equivalent continuous, 113
    uniformly continuous, 109
relatively compact subsets of, 101
separable, 48
subspace of, 43
total boundedness of, 97–99
    compactness and, 99–101
Metrizable space, 90
Minkowski functional, 131
Minkowski’s inequality, 41
Minkowski’s integral inequality, 45
Monotonic function, 314

                                            N

n-dimensional simplex, 137
  k-dimensional face of, 137
vertices of, 137
n-dimensional (vector) space, 119
Negative set, 344
Neighborhood, 46, 79
Neighborhood base, 83
at zero, 168
Nested sphere theorem, 60
Noncomparable elements, 21
Nondecreasing function, 314
Nonincreasing function, 314
Nonmeasurable set, 268
Normal space, 86
Normed linear space(s), 138
bounded subset of, 141
complete, 140
complete set in, 140
conjugate space of, 184direct product of, 238
subspaces of, 140
Norm(s), 138, 142, 163
compatible, 171
comparable, 172
equivalent, 141, 172
of a bounded linear functional, 177
of a bounded linear operator, 224
properties of, 138
stronger, 172
weaker, 172
n-space, 119
Null space, 125

                                            O

One-to-one correspondence, 5, 10, 13
One-to-one function, 5
Onto mapping, 5
Open ball (see Open sphere)
Open set(s), 50
component of, 55
in a topological space, 78
on the real line, 51
unions and intersections of, 50
Open sphere, 45
center of, 46
radius of, 46
Operator(s), 221 ff.
adjoint, 232
  in Hilbert space, 234
continuous, 221
degenerate, 240
domain (of definition) of, 221
eigenvalue of, 235
eigenvector of, 235
identity (or unit), 222
inverse, 228
invertible, 228
linear (see Linear operator)
product of, 225
  with a number, 225
projection, 223
resolvent of, 236
self-adjoint, 235
spectrum of, 235
sum of, 225
zero, 222
Order type (see Type)
Ordered product, 23
Ordered set, 21Ordered sum, 22
Order-preserving mapping, 21
Ordinal, 24
transfinite, 24
Ordinal number(s), 24
comparison of, 25
Orthogonal basis, 143
Orthogonal complement, 157
Orthogonal system, 143
complete, 143
Orthogonal vectors, 143
Orthogonalization, 148
Orthogonalization theorem, 147
Orthonormal basis, 143
Orthonormal system, 143
closed, 151
complete, 143
  vs. closed, 151
Oscillation, 111
Outer measure, 258, 276

                                            P

Parseval’s theorem, 151
Partial ordering, 20
Partially ordered set(s), 20
  isomorphic, 21
maximal element of, 21
minimal element of, 21
  noncomparable elements of, 21
Partition of a set into classes, 6–9
Peano’s theorem, 104
Petrovski, I. G., 76
Picard’s theorem, 71
Polygonal line, 55
Positive set, 344
Power:
of a set, 16
of the continuum, 16
Preimage:
of a set, 5
of an element, 5
Principle of contraction mapping, 66
Probability density, 367
Product measure, 354, 356
evaluation of, 356–359
Projection operator, 223
Proper subspace, 121

                                            QQuotient space (see Factor space)

                                            R

Radon-Nikodým derivative, 350
Radon-Nikodým theorem, 347
Random variable, 366
continuous, 366
discrete, 366
  mathematical expectation of, 366
mean (value) of, 366
probability density of, 367
variance of, 366
Range. 4, 5
Rectangle, 255
closed, 255
half-open, 255
measure of, 255
open, 255
Rectifiable curve, 332
Reflexive space, 191
Reflexivity, 7
Relation, 7
antisymmetric, 7
binary, 7
  equivalence, 7
reflexive, 7
symmetric, 7
transitive, 7
Relatively compact subset, 97
Relatively countably compact subset, 97
Residue class, 122
Resolvent, 236
Riemann integral, 293
vs. Lebesgue integral, 293–294, 309–310
Riemann-Stieltjes integral, 367
vs. Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral, 368
Riesz lemma, 319
Riesz representation theorem, 374
Riesz-Fischer theorem, 153
Right-hand limit, 315
Ring of sets, 31
minimal, generated by a semiring, 34
minimal, generated by a system of sets, 32
Rozanov, Y. A., 366

                                            S

Scalar product, 142
complex, 163
Schwartz, L., 212Schwarz’s inequality, 40, 142
Second axiom of countability, 82
Second axiom of separation, 85
Self-adjoint operator, 235
Semireflexive space, 191
Semiring of sets, 32
finite expansion in, 33
minimal ring generated by, 34
Separable (metric) space, 48
Set of σ-uniqueness, 282
Set of uniqueness, 282
Set theory, 1–36
naive vs. axiomatic, 29
Set(s), 1 ff.
algebra of, 31
bounded, 65, 141
  totally, 98
Cantor, 52
closed, 49
closure of, 46
complement of, 3
connected, 55
contact point of, 46
convex, 129
countable, 10
curly bracket notation for, 1
decomposition of, 6
dense, 48
  everywhere, 48
  nowhere, 48, 61
diameter of, 65
difference between, 3
direct product of, 352
directed, 29
disjoint, 2
  pairwise, 2
duality principle for, 4
elementary, 255
elements of, 1
empty, 2
equivalent, 13
exhaustive sequence of, 308
finite, 10
infinite, 10
interior of, 128
interior point of, 50
intersection of, 2
isolated point of, 47
Jordan measurable, 281
(Lebesgue) measurable, 259, 267, 276, 279limit point of, 47
  complete, 97
measure of, 259, 267, 276, 279
negative, 344
nonmeasurable, 268
of uniqueness, 282
of σ-uniqueness, 282
open, 50
operations on, 2 ff.
ordered, 21
partially ordered, 20
partition of, 6
positive, 344
power of, 16
ring of, 31
semiring of, 32
subset of, 1
  proper, 2
sum of, 2
symmetric, 171
symmetric difference of 3, 4
systems of, 31–36
totally bounded, 98
uncountable, 10
union of, 2
  well-ordered, 23
Shilov, G. E., 147, 155, 245, 350, 351
σ-additivity (see Countable additivity)
σ-algebra, 35
σ-finite measure, 308
σ-ring, 35
Signed measure, 344
Silverman, R. A., 76, 140, 147, 247, 350, 366
Simple function, 286
Simplex (see n-dimensional simplex)
Simply ordered set (see Ordered set)
Singular charge, 347
Singular function, 341
Smirnov, V. I., 247
Space:
c, 120
c, 120
0
C, 39, 57
[a, b]
2
C, 40, 59
  [a, b]
n
C, 119
C(I, R), 113
of isolated points, 38, 56
of rapidly decreasing sequences, 172
l. 39, 57
2l, 43
p
L, 378
1
L, 383
2
m, 41, 120
1
R, 38, 56
n
R, 38, 57
∞
R 120
  , 41
Spectral radius, 239
Spectrum, 235
continuous, 236
point, 236
regular point of, 235
Step function, 211, 316
Stereographic projection, 14
Stieltjes integral (see Lebesgue-Stieltjes integral)
Stieltjes measure, 362, 364
absolutely continuous, 363
discrete, 363
generating function of, 362
singular, 363
Strong convergence, 195
Strong topology, 184
in conjugate space, 190
Subcover, 83
Subset, 1
proper, 2
Subspace, 121
closed, 140
generated by a set, 122
invariant, 238
proper, 121
Successive approximations, method of, 66, 67
Sum of sets, 2
Summable function, 294, 296, 308
complex, 387
Supremum, 41, 51
Symmetric difference, 3, 4
Symmetric set, 171
Symmetry, 7
System of sets, 31
centered, 92
trace of, 80
unit of, 31

                                            T

Test functions, 208
  convergence of, 208Test space, 208, 216
Tolstov, G. P., 140, 145
Topological linear space, 138, 167 ff.
bounded subset of, 169
continuous mapping of, 87
functionals on, 175
  continuous, 175
    continuous linear, 175 ff.
  linear, 175
locally bounded, 169
locally convex, 169
neighborhood base at zero of, 168
normable, 169
weak topology in, 195
Topological space(s), 78 ff.
base for, 81
bicompact, 96
closed sets of, 79
compact, 92
completely regular, 92
connected, 84
  convergence in, 84
countably compact, 95
cover (covering) of, 83
hereditary property of, 87
locally compact, 97
metrizable, 90
normal, 86
open sets of, 78
points of, 79
real functions on, 108
relatively compact subset of, 97
relatively countable compact subset of, 97
with a countable base, 82
Topology, 78
generated by a system of sets, 80
relative, 80
strong, 184, 190
stronger, 80
weak, 195, 200
weak*, 202
weaker, 80
Total variation, 328, 346
Totally bounded set, 98
Transcendental number, 19
Transfinite induction, 29
Transfinite ordinal, 24
Transitivity, 7
Triangle inequality, 37, 138
T-space, 85
1T-space, 85
2
Two-sided ideal, 252
Tychonoff space, 92
Type(s), 22
ordered sum of, 23
ordered product of, 23
vs. power, 22

                                            U

Uncountability of real numbers, 15
Uncountable set, 10
Uniform continuity, 109
Uniformly bounded family of functions, 102
Union of sets, 2
Unit (of a system of sets), 31
Upper bound (in a partially ordered set), 28
Upper limit, 111
Upper semicontinuous function, 110
Urysohn’s lemma, 91
Urysohn’s metrization theorem, 90

                                            V

van der Waerden, B. L., 327
Variance, 366
Variation:
bounded, 328
negative, 346
positive, 346
total, 328, 346
Vector space (see Linear space)
Volterra equation, 75
Volterra operator, 243

                                            W

Weak convergence, 195
of functionals, 200
Weak* convergence, 202
Weak topology, 195
in conjugate space, 200
Weak* topology, 202
Weierstrass’ approximation theorem, 140, 145
Well-ordered set, 23
(initial) section of, 25
order type of, 24
remainder of, 25
smallest element of, 23
Well-ordering theorem, 27                                            Z

Zermelo, E., 27
Zero element, 118
Zorn’s lemma, 28