  This book made available by the Internet Archive. 










































  










































 
  










































THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING
  










































 

By The Same Author

 

Scrence AND RELIGION: THE RATIONAL AND THE
SUPERRATIONAL The Vale Unisersity Press

Tue NEW INFINITE AND THE OLD THEOLOGY
The Vale Uniersity Press

 

 

 

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
SALES AGENTS

New Yorx Loxvox
Lnckr axp Boscinas Howrrey Mizromn
30-32 Wast a7 Srazer A Conx, E. C.

 

 
  










































THE HUMAN WORTH OF
RIGOROUS THINKING

ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES

By
CASSIUS ]. KEYSER, PuD., LLD.

ADRAIN PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS
covoumia oTvERSITY

P
=)

=3

Pew Work
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS

1916
A righis resereed

PaTEs WU, 8 K
  










































Copyright, 1916
By Corusmia Usavessery Press

 

‘Printed from type, May, 1916
     PREFACE

  THE following fifteen essays and addresses have appeared, in the course

of  the  last  fifteen  years,  as  articles  in  various  scientific,  literary,  and

philosophical journals. For permission to reprint I have to thank the editors

and  managers  of  The  Columbia  University  Quarterly,  The  Columbia

University  Press,  Science,  The  Educational  Review,  The  Bookman,  The

Monist, The Hibbert Journal, and The Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and

Scientific Methods.

  The  title  of  the  volume  indicates  its  subject.  The  fact  that  one  of  the

essays,  the  initial  one,  bears  the  same  title  is  hardly  more  than  a  mere

coincidence, for all of the discussions deal with the subject in question and

nearly all of them deal with it directly, consciously, and in terms.

  In  passing  from  essay  to  essay  the  attentive  reader  will  notice  a  few

repetitions  of  thought  and  possibly  a  few  in  forms  of  expression.  Such

reiterations,  which  owe  their  presence  to  the  occasional  character  of  the

essays  and  to  the  aims  and  circumstances  that  originally  controlled  their

composition, may, it is hoped, be regarded by the charitable reader less as

blemishes than as means of emphasizing important considerations.

  CASSIUS J. KEYSER. April 14, 1916. 










































CONTENTS

e
1. The Human Worth of Rigorous Thinking . . . . . .
1. The Human Significance of Mathematics. . . . . . . . .
L. The Humanization of the Teaching of Mathematics . .
IV. The Wall of the World; or Concerning the Figure and the

Diensions o the Universe of Space. . . . . .. . ... 8
V. Mathematical Emancipations: Dimensionality sod Hyperspace 101
VL. ‘The Universe and Beyond: The Esistence of the Hypercosmic 12

VI, The Asiom of Infiity: A New Presuppenition of Thought . 139

VIIL The Permasent Basis of  Liberal Education . . . . . . . . 163
IX. Graduste Matbematical nstraction for Graduate Studeats not

Intending to Bocome Mathematicians
X. The Source and Functions of a Univensity .
XI. Resoarch in American Universities. . .

 

 

 

  

xm. l‘-—iq)hhhhln-r-‘uh—dmsmnﬂ
the * Existence” of Hyperspace . . . . . - . s

XIV. Mathematicl Producivty in the United Sttes . . . . . . 357

soveiaits WE

 

 

 
   THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING 1

  But in the strong recess of Harmony Established firm abides the rounded

Sphere.

  — EMPEDOCLES

  NEXT to the peaceful pleasure of meeting genuine curiosity, half-way,

upon its own ground, comes the joy of combat when an attack upon some

valued right or precious interest of the human spirit requires to be repelled.

Indeed, given a competent jury, hardly any other undertaking could be more

stimulating than to defend mathematics from a charge of being unworthy to

occupy, in the hierarchy of arts and sciences, the high place to which, from

the  earliest  times,  the  judgment  of  mankind  has  assigned  it.  But,

unfortunately,  no  such  accusation  has  been  brought,  brought,  that  is,  by

persons  of  such  scientific  qualifications  as  to  give  their  opinion  in  the

premises weight enough to call for serious consideration. Mathematics has

been often praised by the scientifically incompetent; it has not, so far as I am

aware, been dispraised, or its worth challenged or denied, by the scientifically

competent. The age-long immunity of mathematics from authorita-

  1 An address delivered before the Mathematical Colloquium of Columbia

University,  October  13,  1913.  Printed,  with  slight  change,  in  Science,

December 5, 1913; also, with other slight changes, printed in The Columbia

University Quarterly, June, 1914, under the title "The Study of Mathematics."

The substance of the address was delivered before the mathematics section of

the California High School Teachers Association, August, 1915, at Berkeley,

California.

  tive arraignment, and the high estimation in which the science has been

almost universally held in enlightened times and places, unite to give it a

position nearly, if not quite, unique in the history of criticism. Perhaps it were

better not so. Mathematicians have a sense of security to which, it may be,

they are not entitled in a critical age and a reeling world. Conceivably it

might  have  been  to  the  advantage  of  mathematics  and  not  only  of

mathematics but of science in general, of philosophy, too, and the general

enlightenment, if in course of the centuries mathematicians had been now and

then really compelled by adverse criticism of their science to discover and to

present not only to themselves but acceptably to their fellow-men the deeper

justifications, if such there be, of the world's approval and applause of their

work. However that may be, no one is likely to dissent from the opinion of

Mr. Bertrand Russell that "in regard to every form of activity it is necessarythat the question should be asked from time to time: what is its purpose and

ideal? In what way does it contribute to the beauty of human existence?" An

inquiry that is thus necessary for the general welfare ought to be felt as. a

duty, unless, more fortunately, it be felt as a pleasure.

  Why study mathematics? What are the rightful claims of the science to

human regard? What are the grounds upon which a university may justify the

annual  expenditure  of  thirty  to  fifty  thousands  of  dollars  to  provide  for

mathematical instruction and mathematical research?

  A  slight  transformation  of  the  questions  will  help  to  .disclose  their

significance and may give a quicker sense of their poignancy and edge. What

is mathematics? I hasten to say that I do not intend to detain the reader

  and thus perhaps to dampen his interest with a definition of mathematics,

though it must be said that the discovery of what mathematics is, is doubtless

one of the very great scientific achievements of the nineteenth century. The

question asks, not for a definition of the science, but for a brief and helpful

description of it — for an obvious mark or aspect of it that will enable us to

know what it is that we are here writing or reading about. Well, mathematics

may be viewed either as an enterprise or as a body of achievements. As an

enterprise mathematics is characterized by its aim, and its aim is to think

rigorously  whatever  is  rigorously  thinkable  or  whatever  may  become

rigorously thinkable in course of the upward striving and refining evolution

of ideas. As a body of achievements mathematics consists of all the results

that have come, in the course of the centuries, from the prosecution of that

enterprise: the truth discovered by it; the doctrines created by it; the influence

of these, through their applications and their beauty, upon the advancement of

civilization and the weal of man.

  Our questions now stand: Why should a human being desire to share in

that spiritual enterprise which has for its aim to think rigorously whatever is

or may become rigorously thinkable and to "frame a world according to a rule

of divine perfection"? Why should men and women seek some knowledge of

that variety of perfection with which men and women have enriched life and

the world by rigorous thought? What are the just claims to human regard of

perfect thought and the spirit of perfect thinking? Upon what grounds may a

university justify the annual expenditure of thirty to fifty thousands of dollars

to  provide  for  the  disciplining  of  men  and  women  in  the  art  of  thinking

rigorously

  and for the promotion of research in the realm of exact thought?  Such are the questions. They plainly sum themselves in one: among the

human agencies that ameliorate life, what is the rdle of rigorous thinking?

What is the role of the spirit that always aspires to the attainment of logical

perfection?

    Evidently  that  question  is  not  one  for  adequate  handling  in  a  brief

magazine article by an ordinary student of mathematics. Rather is it a subject

for  a  long  series  of  lectures  by  a  learned  professor  of  the  history  of

civilization. Indeed so vast is the subject that even an ordinary student of

mathematics can detect some of the more obvious tasks such a philosophic

historian  would  have  to  perform  and  a  few  of  the  difficulties  he  would

doubtless encounter. It may be worth while to mention some of them.

    Certainly one of the tasks, and probably one of the difficulties also, would

be  that  of  securing  an  audience  —  an  audience,  I  mean,  capable  of

understanding  the  lectures,  for  is  not  a  genuine  auditor  a  listener  who

understands? To understand the lectures it would seem to be necessary to

know  what  that  is  which  the  lectures  are  about  —  that  is,  it  would  be

necessary  to  know  what  is  meant  by  rigorous  thinking.  To  know  this,

however, one must either have consciously done some rigorous thinking or

else, at the very least, have examined some specimens of it pretty carefully,

just as, in order to know what good art is, it is, in general, essential either to

have produced good art or to have attentively examined some specimens of it,

or to have done both of these things. Here, then, at the outset our historian

would meet a serious difficulty, unless his audience chanced to be one of

mathematicians,

  which  is  (unfortunately)  not  likely,  inasmuch  as  the  great  majority  of

mathematicians  are  so  exclusively  interested  in  mathematical  study  or

teaching  or  research  as  to  be  but  little  concerned  with  the  philosophical

question of the human worth of their science. It is, therefore, easy to see how

our lecturer would have to begin.

  Ladies and gentlemen, we have met, he would say, we have met to open a

course of lectures dealing with the role of rigorous thinking in the history of

civilization. In order that the course may be profitable to you, in order that it

may be a course in ideas and not merely or mainly a verbal course, it is

essential that you should know what rigorous thinking is and what it is not.

Even I, your speaker, he will own, might reasonably be held to the obligation

of knowing that.

  It  is  reasonable,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  reasonable  to  assume,  hewould say, that in the course of your education you neglected mathematics,

and it is therefore probable or indeed quite certain that, notwithstanding your

many accomplishments, you do not quite know or rather, perhaps I should

say, you are very far from knowing what rigorous thinking is or what it is not.

Of course, as you know, it is, generally speaking, much easier to tell what a

thing is not than to tell what it is, and I might, he would say, I might proceed

by way of a preliminary to indicate roughly what rigorous thinking is not.

Thus I might explain that rigorous thinking, though much of it has been done

in the world and though it has produced a large literature, is nevertheless a

relatively  rare  phenomenon.  I  might  point  out  that  a  vast  majority  of

mankind,  a  vast  majority  of  educated  men  and  women,  have  not  been

disciplined to think rigorously even those things that are most

    available for such thinking. I might point out that, on the other hand, most

of the ideas with which men and women have constantly to deal are as yet too

nebulous and vague, too little advanced in the course of their evolution, to be

available for concatenative thinking and rigorous discourse. I should have to

say, he would add, that, on these accounts, most of the thinking done in the

world in a given day, whether done by men in the street or by farmers or

factory-hands  or  administrators  or  historians  or  physicians  or  lawyers  or

jurists or statesmen or philosophers or men of letters or students of natural

science or even mathematicians (when not strictly employed in their own

subject), comes far short of the demands and standards of rigorous thinking.

  I might go on to caution you, our speaker would say, against the current

fallacy,  recently  advanced  by  eloquent  writers  to  the  dignity  of  a

philosophical  tenet,  of  regarding  what  is  called  successful  action  as  the

touchstone of rigorous thinking. For you should know that much of what

passes in the world for successful action proceeds from impulse or instinct

and not from thinking of any kind; .you should know that no action under the

control of non-rigorous thinking can be strictly successful except by the favor

of chance or through accidental compensation of errors; you should know

that  most  of  what  passes  for  successful  action,  most  of  what  the  world

applauds and even commem-morates as successful action, so far from being

really successful, varies from partial failure to failure that, if not total, would

at all events be fatal in any universe that had the economic decency to forbid,

under pain of death, the unlimited wasting of its resources. The dominant

animal of such a universe would be, in fact,

  THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING ^  a superman. In our world the natural resources of life are superabundant,

and man is poor in reason because he has been the prodigal son of a too

opulent mother. But, ladies and gentlemen, our speaker will conclude, you

will know better what rigorous thinking is not when once you have learned

what it is. This, however, cannot well be learned in a course of lectures in

which that knowledge is presumed. I have, therefore, to adjourn this course

until such time as you shall have gained that knowledge. It cannot be gained

by reading about it or hearing about it. The easiest way, for most persons the

only way, to gain it is to examine with exceeding patience and care some

specimens, at least one specimen, of the literature in which rigorous thinking

is  embodied.  Such  a  specimen,  he  could  add,  is  Dr.  Thomas  L.  Heath's

magnificent edition of Euclid, where an excellent translation of the Elements

from the definitive text of Heiberg is set in the composite light of critical

commentary from Aristotle down to the keenest logical microscopists and

histologists of our own day. If you think Euclid too ancient or too stale even

when seasoned with the wit of more than two thousand years of the acutest

criticism, you may find a shorter and possibly a fresher way by examining

minutely such a work as Veronese's GrundzUge der Geometric or Hilbert's

famous Foundations of Geometry or Peano's Sui Numeri Irrazionali. In works

of this kind and not elsewhere you will find in its nakedness, purity, and

spirit, what you have neglected and what you need. You will note that in the

beginning  of  such  a  work  there  is  found  a  system  of  assumptions  or

postulates, discovered the Lord only and a few men of genius know where or

how, selected perhaps with reference to simplicity and clearness, certainly

selected and tested

  with respect to their compatibility and independence, and, it may be, with

respect  also  to  categoricity.  You  will  not  fail  to  observe  with  the  utmost

minuteness,  and  from  every  possible  angle,  how  it  is  that  upon  these

postulates as a basis there is built up by a kind of divine masonry, little step

by step, a stately structure of ideas, an imposing edifice of rigorous thought, a

towering architecture of doctrine that is at once beautiful, austere, sublime,

and eternal. Ladies and gentlemen, our speaker will say, to accomplish that

examination will require twelve months of pretty assiduous application. The

next lecture of this course will be given one year from date.

  On resuming the course what will our philosopher and historian proceed

to say? He will begin to say what, if he says it concisely, will make up a very

large volume. Room is lacking here, even if competence were not, for somuch as an adequate outline of the matter. It is possible, however, to draw

with confidence a few of the larger lines that such a sketch would have to

contain.

  What is it that our speaker will be obliged to deal with first? I do not

mean obliged logically nor obliged by an orderly development of his subject.

I mean obliged by the expectation of his hearers. Every one can answer that

question. For presumably the audience represents the spirit of the times, and

this age is, at least to a superficial observer, an age of engineering. Now,

what is engineering? Well, the Charter of the Institution of Civil Engineers

tells us that engineering is the "art of directing the great sources of power in

Nature for the use and convenience of man." By Nature here must be meant

external or physical nature, for, if internal nature were also meant, every good

form

  of activity would be a species of engineering, and maybe it is such, but

that is a claim which even engineers would hardly make and poets would

certainly deny. Use and convenience—these are the key-bearing words. It is

perfectly evident that our lecturer will have to deal first of all with what the

world would call the "utility" of rigorous thinking, that is to say, with the

applications of mathematics and especially with its applications to problems

of engineering. If he really knows profoundly what mathematics is, he will

not wish to begin with applications nor even to make applications a major

theme of his discourse, but he must, and he will do so uncomplainingly as a

concession to the external-mindedness of his time and his audience. He will

not  only  desire  to  show  his  audience  applications  of  mathematics  to

engineering, but, being an historian of civilization, he will especially desire to

show them the development of such applications from the earliest times, from

the building of pyramids and the mensuration of land in ancient Egypt down

to such splendid modern achievements as the designing and construction of

an Eads Bridge, an ocean Imperator or a Panama Canal. The story will be

long and difficult, but it will edify. The audience will be amazed at the truth

if they understand. If they do not understand the truth fully, our speaker must

at all events contrive that they shall see it in glimmers and gleams and, above

all,  that  they  shall  acquire  a  feeling  for  it.  They  must  be  led  to  some

acquaintance with the great engineering works of the world, past and present;

they  must  be  given  an  intelligible  conception  of  the  immeasurable

contribution such works have made to the comfort, convenience, and power

of man; and especially must they be convinced of the fact that, not onlywould the greatest of such

  10 THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING

    achievements have been, except for mathematics, utterly impossible, but

that such of the lesser ones as could have been wrought without mathematical

help could not have been thus accomplished without wicked and pathetic

waste both of material resources and of human toil. In respect to this latter

point, the relation of mathematics to practical economy in large affairs, our

speaker will no doubt invite his hearers to read and reflect upon the ancient

work of Frontinus on the Water Supply of the City of Rome in order that thus

they  may  gain  a  vivid  idea  of  the  fact  that  the  most  practical  people  of

history,  despising  mathematics  and  the  finer  intellectualizations  of  the

Greeks, were unable to accomplish their own great engineering feats except

through  appalling  waste  of  materials  and  men.  Our  lecturer  will  not  be

content, however, with showing the service of mathematics in the prevention

of waste; he will show that it is indispensable to the productivity and trade of

the modern world. Before quitting this division of his subject he will have

demonstrated that, if all the contributions which mathematics has made, and

which nothing else could make, to navigation, to the building of railways, to

the construction of ships, to the subjugation of wind and wave, electricity and

heat,  and  many  other  forms  and  manifestations  of  energy,  he  will  have

demonstrated, I say, and the audience will finally understand, that, if all these

contributions of mathematics were suddenly withdrawn, the life and body of

industry and commerce would suddenly collapse as by a paralytic stroke, the

now splendid outer tokens of material civilization would perish, and the face

of  our  planet  would  quickly  assume  the  aspect  of  a  ruined  and  bankrupt

world.

  As our lecturer has been constrained by circumstances

  to back into his subject, as he has, that is, been compelled to treat first of

the service that mathematics has rendered engineering, he will probably next

speak of the applications of mathematics to the so-called natural sciences —

the  more  properly  called  experimental  sciences  —  of  physics,  chemistry,

biology, economics, psychology, and the like. Here his task, if it is to be, as it

ought to be, expository as well as narrative, will be exceedingly hard. For

how can he weave into his narrative an intelligible exposition of Newton's

Principia, Laplace's Me-canique Celeste, Lagrange's Mecanique Analytique,

Gauss's Theoria Motus Corporum Coelestium, Fourier's Thtorie Analytique

de la Chaleur, Maxwell's Electricity and Magnetism, not to mention scores ofother equally difficult and hardly less important works of a mathematical-

physical character? Even if our speaker knew it all, which no man can, he

could not tell it all intelligibly to his hearers. These will have to be content

with a rather general and superficial view, with a somewhat vague intuition

of the truth, with fragmentary and analogical insights gained through settings

forth of great things by small; and they will have to help themselves and their

speaker, too, by much pertinent reading. No doubt the speaker will require his

hearers, in order that they may thus gain a tolerable perspective, to read well

not only the first two volumes of the magnificent work of John Theodore

Merz  dealing  with  the  History  of  European  Thought  in  the  Nineteenth

Century, but also many selected portions of the kindred literature there cited

in richest profusion. The work treats mainly of natural science, but it deals

with it philosophically, under the larger aspect, that is, of science regarded as

Thought.  By  the  help  of  such  literature  in  the  hands  of  his  auditors,  our

lecturer will

  12 THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING

  be able to give them a pretty vivid sense of the great and increasing role

of  mathematics  in  suggesting,  formulating,  and  solving  problems  in  all

branches of natural science. Whether it be with "the astronomical view of

nature" that he is dealing, or "the atomic view" or "the mechanical view" or

"the physical view" or "the morphological view" or "the genetic view" or "the

vitalistic  view"  or  "the  psychophysical  view"  or  "the  statistical  view,"  in

every case, in all these great attempts of reason to create or to find a cosmos

amid the chaos of the external world, the presence of mathematics and its

manifold service, both as instrument and as norm, illustrate and confirm the

Kantian and Rie-mannian conception of natural science as "the attempt to

understand nature by means of exact concepts."

  In connection with this division of his subject, our speaker will find it

easy to enter more deeply into the spirit and marrow of it. He will be able to

make it clear that there is a sense, a just and important sense, in which all

thinkers and especially students of natural science, though their thinking is

for  the  most  part  not  rigorous,  are  yet  themselves  contributors  to

mathematics. I do not refer to the powerful stimulation of mathematics by

natural science in furnishing it with many of its problems and in constantly

seeking its aid. What I mean is that all thinkers and especially students of

natural  science  are  engaged,  both  consciously  and  unconsciously,  both

intentionally  and  unintentionally,  in  the  mathematicization  of  concepts  —that is to say, in so transforming and refining concepts as to fit them finally

for the amenities of logic and the austerities of rigorous thinking, We are

dealing here, our speaker will say, with a process transcending conscious

design. We are dealing with a process deep in the nature and

  THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING 13

  being of the psychic world. Like a child, an idea, once it is born, once it

has come into the realm of spiritual light, possibly long before such birth,

enters upon a career, a career, however, that, unlike the child's, seems to be

immortal. In most cases and probably in all, an idea, on entering the world of

consciousness, is vague, nebulous, formless, not at once betraying either what

it is or what it is destined to become. Ideas, however, are under an impulse

and law of amelioration. The path of their upward striving and evolution —

often a long and winding way — leads towards precision and perfection of

form. The goal is mathematics. Witness, for example, our lecturer will say,

the  age-long  travail  and  aspiration  of  the  great  concept  now  known  as

mathematical continuity, a concept whose inner structure is even now known

and understood only of mathematicians, though the ancient Greeks helped in

molding  its  form  and  though  it  has  long  been,  if  somewhat  blindly,  yet

constantly employed in natural science, as when a physicist, for example, or

an astronomer uses such numbers as e and tr in computation. Witness, again,

how  that  supreme  concept  of  mathematics,  the  concept  of  function,  has

struggled through thousands of years to win at length its present precision of

form  out  of  the  nebulous  sense,  which  all  minds  have,  of  the  mere

dependence  of  things  on  other  things.  Witness,  too,  he  will  say,  the

mathematical concept of infinity, which prior to a half-century ago was still

too vague for logical discourse, though from remotest antiquity the great idea

has played a conspicuous role, mainly emotional, in theology, philosophy,

and science. Like examples abound, showing that one of the most impressive

and significant phenomena in the life of the psychic world, if we will but

discern and contemplate it, is the process

  14 THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING

  by which ideas advance, often slowly indeed but surely, from their initial

condition of formlessness and inde-termination to the mathematical estate.

The  chemic-ization  of  biology,  the  physicization  of  chemistry,  the

mechanicization  of  physics,  the  mathematicization  of  mechanics,  the

arithmeticization of mathematics, these well-known tendencies and drifts in

science do but illustrate on a large scale the ubiquitous process in question.  At length, ladies and gentlemen, our speaker will say, in the light of the

last consideration the deeper and larger aspects of our subject are beginning

to show themselves and there is dawning upon us an impressive vision. The

nature, function, and life of the entire conceptual world seem to come within

the circle and scope of our present enterprise. We are beginning to see that to

challenge  the  human  worth  of  mathematics,  to  challenge  the  worth  of

rigorous thinking, is to challenge the worth of all thinking, for now we see

that  mathematics  is  but  the  ideal  to  which  all  thinking,  by  an  inevitable

process  and  law  of  the  human  spirit,  constantly  aspires.  We  see  that  to

challenge the worth of that ideal is to arraign before the bar of values what

seems the deepest process and inmost law of the universe of thought. Indeed

we see that in defending mathematics we are really defending a cause yet

more momentous, the whole cause, namely, of the conceptual procedure of

science and the conceptual activity of the human mind, for mathematics is

nothing  but  such  conceptual  procedure  and  activity  come  to  its  maturity,

purity, and perfection.

  Now, ladies and gentlemen, our lecturer will say, I cannot in this course

deal explicitly and fully with this larger issue. But, he will say, we are living

in a day when that issue has been raised; we happen to be living

  in  a  time  when,  under  the  brilliant  and  effective  leadership  of  such

thinkers as Professor Bergson and the late Professor James, the method of

concepts, the method of intellect, the method of science, is being powerfully

assailed; and, he will say, whilst I heartily welcome this attack of criticism as

causing scientific men to reflect more deeply upon the method of science, as

exhibiting more clearly the inherent limitations of its method, and as showing

that life is so rich as to have many precious interests and the world much

truth beyond the reach of that method, yet I cannot refrain, he will say, from

attempting to point out what seems to me a radical error of the critics, a

fundamental  error  of  theirs,  in  respect  to  what  is  the  highest  function  of

conception and in respect to what is the real aim and ideal of the life of

intellect. For we shall thus be led to a deeper view of our subject proper.

  These critics find, as all of us find, that what we call mind or our minds

is,  in  some  mysterious  way,  functionally  connected  with  certain  living

organisms known as human bodies; they find that these living bodies are

constantly immersed in a universe of matter and motion in which they are

continually pushed and pulled, heated and cooled, buffeted and jostled about

— a universe that, according to James, would, in the "absence of concepts,"reveal itself as "a big blooming buzzing confusion" — though it is hard to see

how  such  a  revelation  could  happen  to  any  one  devoid  of  the  concept

"confusion," but let that pass; our critics find that our minds get into some

initial  sort  of  knowing  connection  with  that  external  blooming  confusion

through what they call the sensibility of our bodies, yielding all manner of

sensations  as  of  weights,  pressures,  pushes  and  pulls,  of  intensities  and

extensities of brightness,

  16 THE, HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING

  sound, time, colors, space, odors, tastes, and so on; they find that we

must, on pain of organic extinction, take some account of these elements of

the material world; they find that, as a fact, we human beings constantly deal

with these elements through the instrumentality of concepts; they find that the

effectiveness of our dealing with the material world is precisely due to our

dealing with it conceptually; they infer that, therefore, dealing with matter is

exactly what concepts are for, saying with Ostwald, for example, that the goal

of  natural  science,  the  goal  of  the  conceptual  method  of  mind,  "is  the

domination of nature by man"; not only, our speaker will say, do our critics

find  that  we  deal  with  the  material  world  conceptually,  and  effectively

because conceptually, but they find also that life has interests and the world

values not accessible to the conceptual method, and as this method is the

method of the intellect, they conclude, not only that the intellect cannot grasp

life,  but  that  the  aim  and  ideal  of  intellect  is  the  understanding  and

subjugation of matter, saying with Professor Bergson "that our intellect is

intended to think matter," "that our concepts have been formed on the model

of solids," "that the essential function of our intellect . . . is to be a light for

our  conduct,  to  make  ready  for  our  action  on  things,"  that  "the  intellect

always behaves as if it were fascinated by the contemplation of inert matter,"

that "intelligence . . . aims at a practically useful end," that "the intellect is

never quite at its ease, . . . except when it is working upon inert matter, more

particularly upon solids," and much more to the same effect.

  Now, ladies and gentlemen, our speaker will ask, what are we to think of

this? What are we to think of this evaluation of the science-making method of

con-

  cepts? What are we to think of the aim and ideal here ascribed to the

intellect  and  of  the  station  assigned  it  among  the  faculties  of  the  human

mind? In the first place, he will say, it ought to be evident to the critics

themselves, and evident to them even in what they esteem the poor light ofintellect,  that  the  above-sketched  movement  of  their  minds  is  a  logically

unsound movement. They do not indeed contend that, because a living being

in order to live must deal with the material world, it must, therefore, do so by

means of concepts. The lower animals have taught them better. But neither

does it follow that, because certain bipeds in dealing with the material world

deal with it conceptually, the essential function of concepts is just to deal

with matter. Nor does such an inference respecting the essential function of

concepts follow from the fact that the superior effectiveness of man's dealing

with the physical world is due to his dealing with it conceptually. For it is

obviously  conceivable  and  supposable  that  such  conceptual  dealing  with

matter is only an incident or byplay or subordinate interest in the career of

concepts. It is conceivably possible that such employment with matter is only

an avocation, more or less serious indeed and more or less advantageous, yet

an avocation, and not the vocation, of intellect. Is it not evidently possible to

go  even  further?  Is  it  not  logically  possible  to  admit  or  to  contend  that,

inasmuch as the human intellect is functionally attached to a living body

which is itself plunged in a physical universe, it is absolutely necessary for

the intellect to concern itself with matter in order to preserve, not indeed the

animal life of man, but his intellectual life — is it not allowable, he will say,

to  admit  or  to  maintain  that  and  at  the  same  time  to  deny  that  such

concernment

  18 THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING

  with  matter  is  the  intellect's  chief  or  essential  function  and  that  the

subjugation of matter is its ideal and aim?

  Of course, our lecturer will say, our critics might be wrong in their logic

and right in their opinion, just as they might be wrong in their opinion and

right in their logic, for opinion is often a matter, not of logic or proof, but of

temperament, taste, and insight. But, he will say, if the issue as to the chief

function  of  concepts  and  the  ideal  of  the  intellect  is  to  be  decided  in

accordance  with  temperament,  taste,  and  insight,  then  there  is  room  for

exercise of the preferential faculty, and alternatives far superior to the choice

of our critics are easy enough to find. It may accord better with our insight

and taste to agree with Aristotle that "It is owing," not to the necessity of

maintaining animal life or the desire of subjugating matter, but "it is owing to

their wonder that men both now begin and first began to philosophize; they

wondered originally at the obvious difficulties, then advanced little by little

and stated the difficulties about the greater matters." The striking contrast ofthis with the deliverances of Bergson is not surprising, for Aristotle was a

pupil  of  Plato  and  the  doctrine  of  Bergson  is  that  of  Plato  completely

inverted. It may accord better with our insight and taste to agree with the

great K. G. J. Jacobi, who, when he had been reproached by Fourier for not

devoting  his  splendid  genius  to  physical  investigations  instead  of  pure

mathematics, replied that a philosopher like his critic "ought to know that the

unique  end  of  science  is,"  not  public  utility  and  application  to  natural

phenomena, but "is the honor of the human spirit." It may accord better with

our temperament and insight to agree with the sentiment of Diotima: "I am

persuaded that all men do all things, and the better they

  are, the better they do them, in the hope," not of subjugating matter, but

"in the hope of the glorious fame of immortal virtue."

  But it is unnecessary, ladies and gentlemen, it is unnecessary, our speaker

will say, to bring the issue to final trial in the court of temperaments and

tastes. We should gain there a too easy victory. The critics are psychologists,

some of them eminent psychologists. Let the issue be tried in the court of

psychology, for it is there that of right it belongs. They know the fundamental

and relevant facts. What is the verdict according to these? The critics know

the experiments that have led to and confirmed the psychophysical law of

Weber  and  Fechner  and  the  doctrine  of  thresholds;  they  know  that,  in

accordance with that doctrine and that law, an appropriate stimulus, no matter

what the department of sense, may be finite in amount and yet too small, or

finite and yet too large, to yield a sensation; they know that the difference

between two stimuli of a kind appropriate to a given sense department, no

matter what department, may be a finite difference and yet too small for

sensibility to detect, or to work a change of sensation; they ought to know,

though they seem not to have recognized, much less to have weighed, the fact

that,  owing  to  the  presence  of  thresholds,  the  greatest  number  of  distinct

sensations possible in any department of sense is a finite number; they ought

to know that the number of different departments of sense is also a. finite

number; they ought to know that, therefore, the total number of distinct or

different sensations of which a human being is capable is a finite number;

they ought to know, though they seem not to have recognized the fact, that,

on  the  other  hand,  the  world  of  concepts  is  of  infinite  multiplicity,  that

concepts, the

  20 THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING

  fruit of intellect, as distinguished from sensations, the fruit of sensibility,are infinite in number; they ought, therefore, to see, our speaker will say,

though none of them has seen, that in attempting to derive intellect out of

sensibility, in attempting to show that (as James says) "concepts flow out of

percepts," they are confronted with the problem of bridging the immeasurable

gulf between the finite and the infinite, of showing, that is, how an infinite

multiplicity can arise from one that is finite. But even if they solved that

apparently insuperable problem, they could not yet be in position to affirm

that the function of intellect and its concepts is, like that of sensibility, just

the function of dealing with matter, as the function of teeth is biting and

chewing. Far from it.

  Let us have another look, the lecturer will say, at the psychological facts

of the case. Owing to the presence of thresholds in every department of sense

it may happen and indeed it does happen constantly in every department, that

three different amounts of stimulus of a same kind give three sensations such

that  two  of  them  are  each  indistinguishable  from  the  third  and  yet  are

distinguishable from one -another. Now, for sensibility in any department of

sense,  two  magnitudes  of  stimulus  are  unequal  or  equal  according  as  the

sensations given by them are or are not distinguishable. Accordingly in the

world of sensible magnitudes, in the sensible universe, in the world, that is, of

felt  weights  and  thrusts  and  pulls  and  pressures,  of  felt  brightnesses  and

warmths and lengths and breadths and thicknesses and so on, in this world,

which is the world of matter, magnitudes are such that two of them may each

be equal to a third without being equal to one another. That, our speaker will

say, is a most significant fact and it means that the sensible

  THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING 21

  world,  the  world  of  matter,  is  irrational,  infected  with  contradiction,

contravening the essential laws of thought. No wonder, he will say, that old

Heracleitus declared the unaided senses "give a fraud and a lie."

  Now, our speaker will ask, what has been and is the behavior of intellect

in the presence of such contradiction? Observe, he will say, that it is intellect,

and  not  sensibility,  that  detects  the  contradiction.  Of  the  irrationality  in

question  sensibility  remains  insensible.  The  data  among  which  the

contradiction subsists are indeed rooted in the sensible world, they inhere in

the world of matter, but the contradiction itself is known only to the logical

faculty  called  intellect.  Observe  also,  he  will  say,  and  the  observation  is

important, that such contradictions do not compel the intellect to any activity

whatever intended to preserve the life of the living organism to which theintellect is functionally attached. That is a lesson we have from our physical

kin, the beasts. What, then, has the intellect done because of or about the

contradiction? Has it gone on all these centuries, as our critics would have us

believe,  trying  to  "think  matter,"  as  if  it  did  not  know  that  matter,  being

irrational, is not thinkable? Far from it, he will say, the intellect is no such

ass.

  What it has done, instead of endlessly and stupidly besieging the illogical

world of sensible magnitudes with the machinery of logic, what it has done,

our lecturer will say, is this: it has created for itself another world. It has not

rationalized  the  world  of  sensible  magnitudes.  That,  it  knows,  cannot  be

done. It has discerned the ineradicable contradictions inherent in them, and

by means of its creative power of conception it has made a new world, a

world of conceptual magnitudes that, like the continue of mathematics, are so

  22 THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING

    constructed by the spiritual architect and so endowed by it as to be free

alike from the contradictions of the sensible world and from all thresholds

that could give them birth. Indeed conception, to speak metaphorically hi

terms  borrowed  from  the  realm  of  sense,  is  a  kind  of  infinite  sensibility,

transcending any finite distinction, difference or threshold, however minute

or fine. And now, our speaker will say, it is such magnitudes, magnitudes

created  by  intellect  and  not  those  discovered  by  sense,  though  the  two

varieties  are  frequently  not  discriminated  by  their  names;  it  is  such

conceptual magnitudes that constitute the subject-matter of science. If the

magnitudes of science, apart from their rationality, often bear in conformation

a kind of close resemblance to magnitudes of sense, what is the meaning of

the fact? It means, contrary to the view of Bergson but in accord with that of

Poincare, that the free crea-ative artist, intellect, though it is not constrained,

yet has chosen to be guided, in so far as its task allows, by facts of sense.

Thus we have, for example, conceptual space and sensible space so much

alike in conformation that, though one of them is rational and the other is not,

the undiscriminating hold them as the same.

  And now, our lecturer will ask, for we are nearing the goal, what, then, is

the motive and aim of this creative activity of the intellect? Evidently it is not

to preserve and promote the life of the human body, for animals flourish

without the aid of concepts, without "discourse of reason," and despite the

contradictions in the world of sense. The aim is, he will say, to preserve and

promote the life of the intellect itself. In a realm infected with irrationality,with omnipresent contradictions of the laws of thought, intellect cannot live,

much less flourish; in the world of sense, it has no proper subject-

  THE HUMAN WORTH OF RIGOROUS THINKING 23

  matter, no home, no life. To live, to flourish, it must be able to think, to

think in accordance with the laws of its being. It is stimulated and its activity

is sustained by two opposite forces: discord and concord. By the one it is

driven; by the other, drawn. Intellect is a perpetual suitor. The object of the

suit is, not the conquest of matter, it is a thing of mind, it is the music of the

spirit, it is Harmonia, the beautiful daughter of the Muses. The aim, the ideal,

the beatitude of intellect is harmony. That is the meaning of its endless talk

about compatibilities, consistencies and concords, and that is the meaning of

its endless battling and circumvention and transcendence of contradiction.

But what of the applications of science and public service? These are by-

products of the intellect's aim and of the pursuit of its ideal. Many things it

regards as worthy, high, and holy — applications of science, public service,

the "wonder" of Aristotle, Jacobi's "honor of the human spirit," Diotima's

"glorious fame of immortal virtue" -but that which, by the law of its being,

Intellect seeks above all and perpetually pursues and loves, is Harmony. It is

for a home and a dwelling with her that intellect creates a world; and its

admonition is: Seek ye first the kingdom of harmony, and all these things

shall be added unto you.

  And the ideal and admonition, thus revealed in the light of analysis, are.

justified of history. Inverting the order of time, we have only to contemplate

the great periods in the intellectual life of Paris, Florence, and Athens. If,

among these mightiest contributors to the spiritual wealth of man, Athens is

supreme, she is also supreme in her devotion to the intellect's ideal. It is of

Athens that Euripides sings:

  The sons of Erechtheus, the olden,

  Whom high gods planted of yore In an old land of heaven upholden,

  A proud land untrodden of war: They are hungered, and lo, their desire

  With wisdom is fed as with meat: In their skies is a shining of fire,

  A joy in the fall of their feet: And thither with manifold dowers,

  From the North, from the hills, from the morn, The Muses did gather their

powers,

  That a child of the Nine should be born; And Harmony, sown as the

flowers,

  Grew gold in the acres of corn.  And thus, ladies and gentlemen, our lecturer will say, what I wish you to

see  here  is,  that  science  and  especially  mathematics,  the  ideal  form  of

science, are creations of the intellect in its quest of harmony. It is as such

creations that they are to be judged and their human worth appraised. Of the

applications of mathematics to engineering and its service in natural science,

I have spoken at length, he will say, in course of previous lectures. Other

great themes of our subject remain for consideration. To appraise the worth

of mathematics as a discipline in the art of rigorous thinking and as a means

of giving facility and wing to the subtler imagination; to estimate and explain

its value as a norm for criticism and for the guidance of speculation and

pioneering in fields not yet brought under the dominion of logic; to estimate

its esthetic worth as showing forth in psychic light the law and order of the

psychic world; to evaluate its ethical significance in rebuking by its certitude

and eternality the facile scepticism that doubts all knowledge, and especially

in serving as a retreat for the spirit when as at times the world of sense seems

madly bent on heaping strange misfortunes up and "to and fro the chances of

the years dance like an idiot in

  the wind"; to give a sense of its religious value in "the contemplation of

ideas under the form of eternity," in disclosing a cosmos of perfect beauty

and  everlasting  order  and  in  presenting  there,  for  meditation,  endless

sequences traversing the rational world and seeming to point to a mystical

region above and beyond: these and similar themes, our speaker will say,

remain to be dealt with in subsequent lectures of the course.

  THE HUMAN SIGNIFICANCE OF MATHEMATICS l

  Homo sum; humani nil a me alienum puto.

  — TERENCE

  THE subject of this address is not of my choosing. It came to me by

assignment. I may, therefore, be allowed to say that it is in my judgment

ideally suited to the occasion. This meeting is held here upon this beautiful

coast because of the presence of an international exposition, and we are thus

invited  to  a  befitting  largeness  and  liberality  of  spirit.  An  international

exposition  properly  may  and  necessarily  will  admit  many  things  of  a

character too technical to be intelligible to any one but the expert and the

specialist. Such things, however, are only incidental — contributory, indeed,

yet incidental — to pursuit of the principal aim, which is, I believe, or ought

to -be, the representation of human things as human — an exhibition and

interpretation of industries, institutions, sciences and arts, not primarily intheir accidental or particular character as illustrating individuals or classes or

specific  localities  or  times,  but  primarily  in  their  essential  and  universal

character as representative of man. A world-exposition will, therefore, as far

as practicable, avoid placing in the forefront matters so abstruse as to be fit

for the

  1  An  address  delivered  August  3,  1915,  Berkeley,  Calif.,  at  a  joint

meeting of the American Mathematical Society, the American Astronomical

Society, and Section A of the American Association for the Advancement of

Science. Printed in Science, November 12, 1915.

    contemplation  and  understanding  of  none  but  specialists;  it  will,  as  a

whole, and in all its principal parts, address itself to the general intelligence;

for  it  aims  at  being,  for  the  multitudes  of  men  and  women  who  avail

themselves  of  its  exhibitions  and  lessons,  an  exposition  of  humanity:  an

exposition,  no  doubt,  of  the  activities  and  aspirations  and  prowess  of

individual men and women, but of men and women, not in their capacity, as

individuals, but as representatives of humankind. Individual achievements are

not the object, they are the means, of the exposition. The object is humanity.

  What is the human significance — what is the significance for humanity

— of "the mother of the sciences"? And how may the matter be best set forth,

not for the special advantage of professional mathematicians, for I shall take

the  liberty  of  having  these  but  little  in  mind,  but  for  the  advantage  and

understanding  of  educated  men  and  women  in  general?  I  am  unable  to

imagine a more difficult undertaking, so technical, especially in its language,

and  so  immense  is  the  subject.  It  is  clear  that  the  task  is  far  beyond  the

resources of an hour's discourse, and so it is necessary to restrict and select.

This being the case, what is it best to choose? The material is superabundant.

What part of it or aspect of it is most available for the end in view? "In

abundant matter to speak a little with elegance," says Pindar, "is a thing for

the  wise  to  listen  to."  It  is  not,  however,  a  question  of  elegance.  It  is  a

question of emphasis, of clarity, of effectiveness. What shall be our major

theme?

  Shall it be the history of the subject? Shall it be the modern developments

of  mathematics,  its  present  status  and  its  future  outlook?  Shall  it  be  the

utilities of the science, its so-called applications, its service in

  practical affairs, in engineering and in what it is customary to call the

sciences of nature? Shall it be the logical foundations of mathematics, its

basic principles, its inner nature, its characteristic processes and structure, thedifferences  and  similitudes  that  come  to  light  in  comparing  it  with  other

forms of scientific and philosophic activity? Shall it be the bearings of the

science  as  distinguished  from  its  applications  —  the  bearings  of  it  as  a

spiritual enterprise upon the higher concerns of man as man? It might be any

one of these things. They are all of them great and inspiring themes.

  It is easy to understand that a historian would choose the first. The history

of mathematics is indeed impressive, but is it not too long and too technical?

And is it not already accessible in a large published literature of its own? I

grant,  the  historian  would  say,  that  its  history  is  long,  for  in  respect  of

antiquity  mathematics  is  a  rival  of  art,  surpassing  nearly  all  branches  of

science and by none of them surpassed. I grant that, for laymen, the history is

technical,  frightfully  technical,  requiring  interpretation  in  the  interest  of

general intelligence. I grant, too, that the history owns a large literature, but

this, the historian would say, is not designed for the general reader, however

intelligent, the numerous minor works no less than the major ones, including

that  culminating  monumental  work  of  Moritz  Cantor,  being,  all  of  them,

addressed to specialists and intelligible to them alone. And yet it would be

possible to tell in one hour, not indeed the history of mathematics, but a true

story  of  it  that  would  be  intelligible  to  all  and  would  show  its  human

significance  to  be  profound,  manifold,  and  even  romantic.  It  would  be

possible to show historically that this science, which now carries its head so

high in the tenuous atmosphere

  of pure abstractions, has always kept its feet upon the solid earth; it would

be possible to show that it owns indeed a lowly origin, in the familiar needs

of common life, in the homely necessities of counting herds and measuring

lands;  it  would  be  possible  to  show  that,  notwithstanding  its  birth  in  the

concrete things of sense and raw reality, it yet so appealed to sheer intellect -

and  we  must  not  forget  that  creative  intellect  is  the  human  faculty  par

excellence — it so appealed to this distinctive and disinterested faculty of

man that, long before the science rose to the level of a fine art in the great

days of Euclid and Archimedes, Plato in the wisdom of his maturer years

judged it essential to the education of freemen because, said he, there is in it a

necessary something against which even God can not contend and without

which neither gods nor demi-gods can wisely govern mankind; it would be

possible, our historian could say, to show historically to educated laymen

that, even prior to the inventions of analytical geometry and the infinitesimal

calculus, mathematics had played an indispensable role in the "Two NewSciences" of physics and mechanics in which Galileo laid the foundations of

our modern knowledge of nature; it would be possible to show not only that

the analytical geometry of Descartes and Fermat and the calculus of Leibnitz

and Newton have been and are essential to our still advancing conquest of the

sea, but that it is owing to the power of these instruments that the genius of

such as Newton, Laplace and Lagrange has been enabled to create for us a

new earth and a new heavens compared with which the Mosaic cosmogony

or the sublimest creation of the Greek imagination is but "as a cabinet of

brilliants, or rather a little jewelled cup found in the ocean or the wilderness";

it would

  be  possible  to  show  historically  that,  just  because  the  pursuit  of

mathematical truth has been for the most part disinterested — led, that is, by

wonder, as Aristotle says, and sustained by the love of beauty with the joy of

discovery  —  it  would  be  possible  to  show  that,  just  because  of  the

disinterestedness  of  mathematical  research,  this  science  has  been  so  well

prepared  to  meet  everywhere  and  always,  as  they  have  arisen,  the

mathematical  exigencies  of  natural  science  and  engineering;  above  all,  it

would be feasible to show historically that to the same disinterestedness of

motive operating through the centuries we owe the upbuilding of a body of

pure doctrine so towering to-day and vast that no man, even though he have

the "Andean intellect" of a Poincare, can embrace it all. This much, I believe,

and  perhaps  more,  touching  the  human  significance  of  mathematics,  a

historian of the science might reasonably hope to demonstrate in one hour.

  More difficult, far more difficult, I think, would be the task of a pure

mathematician who aimed at an equivalent result by expounding, or rather by

delineating, for he could not in one hour so much as begin to expound, the

modern developments of the subject. Could he contrive even to delineate

them in a way to reveal their relation to what is essentially humane? Do but

consider for a moment the nature of such an enterprise. Mathematics may be

legitimately pursued for its own sake or for the sake of its applications or

with a view to understanding its logical foundations and internal structure or

in  the  interest  of  magnanimity  or  for  the  sake  of  its  bearings  upon  the

supreme  concerns  of  man  as  man  or  from  two  or  more  of  these  motives

combined.  Our  supposed  delineator  is  actuated  by  the  first  of  them:  his

interest in mathematics is an

    interest in mathematics for the sake of mathematics; for him the science is

simply a large and growing body of logical consistencies or compatibilities;he derives his inspiration from the muse of intellectual harmony; he is a pure

mathematician.  He  knows  that  pure  mathematics  is  a  house  of  many

chambers; he knows that its foundations lie far beneath the level of common

thought;  and  that  the  superstructure,  quickly  transcending  the  power  of

imagination to follow it, ascends higher and higher, ever keeping open to the

sky; he knows that the manifold chambers — each of them a mansion in itself

— are all of them connected in wondrous ways, together constituting a fit

laboratory and dwelling for the spirit of men of genius. He has assumed the

task of presenting a vision of it that shall be worthy of a world-exposition.

Can he keep the obligation? He wishes to show that the life and work of pure

mathematicians are human life and work: he desires to show that these toilers

and dwellers in the chambers of pure thought are representative men. He

would exhibit the many-chambered house to the thronging multitudes of his

fellow men and women; he would lead them into it; he would conduct them

from chamber to chamber by the curiously winding corridors, passing now

downward, now upward, by delicate passageways and subtle stairs; he would

show  them  that  the  wondrous  castle  is  not  a  dead  or  static  affair  like  a

structure of marble or steel, but a living architecture, a living mansion of life,

human as their own; he would show them the mathetic spirit at work, how it

is ever weaving, tirelessly weaving, fabrics of beauty, finer than gossamer yet

stronger than cables of steel; he would show them how it is ever enlarging its

habitation, deepening its foundations, expanding more and more and

  elevating  the  superstructure;  and,  what  is  even  more  amazing,  how  it

perpetually  performs  the  curious  miracle  of  permanence  combined  with

change,  transforming,  that  is,  the  older  portions  of  the  edifice  without

destroying it, for the structure is eternal: in a word, he would show them a

vision of the whole, and he would do it in a way to make them perceive and

feel that, in thus beholding there a partial and progressive attainment of the

higher ideals of man, they were but gazing upon a partial and progressive

realization of their own appe-titions and dreams.

  That is what he would do. But how? Mengenlehre, Zahlenlehre, algebras

of many kinds, countless geometries of countless infinite spaces, function

theories, transformations, invariants, groups and the rest — how can these

with all their structural finesse, with their heights and depths and limitless

ramifications, with their labyrinthine and interlocking modern developments

— I will not say how can they be presented in the measure and scale of a

great exposition — but how is it possible in one hour to give laymen even aglimpse of the endless array? Nothing could be more extravagant or more

absurd than such an undertaking. Compared with it, the American traveler's

hope of being able to see Rome in a single forenoon was a most reasonable

expectation.  But  it  is  worth  while  trying  to  realize  how  stupendous  the

absurdity is.

  It is evident that our would-be delineator must compromise. He can not

expound, he can not exhibit, he can not even delineate the doctrines whose

human worth he would thus disclose to his fellow men and women. The fault

is neither his nor theirs. It must be imputed to the nature of things. But he

need not, therefore, despair and he need not surrender. The

  method he has proposed — the method of exposition — that indeed he

must abandon as hopeless, but not his aim. He is addressing men and women

who are no doubt without his special knowledge and his special discipline, as

he in his turn is without theirs, but who are yet essentially like himself. He

would have them as fellows and comrades persuaded of the dignity of his

Fach: he would have them feel that it is also theirs; he would have them

convinced  that  mathematics  stands  for  an  immense  body  of  human

achievements, for a diversified continent of pure doctrine, for a discovered

world of intellectual harmonies. He can not show it to them as a painter

displays a canvas or as an architect presents a cathedral. He can not give them

an immediate vision of it, but he can give them intimations; by appealing to

their  fantasie  and,  through  analogy  with  what  they  know,  to  their

understanding, not only can he convince them that his world exists, but he

can give them an intuitive apprehension of its living presence and its meaning

for humankind. This is possible because, like him, they, too, are idealists,

dreamers and poets — such essentially are all men and women. His auditors

or his readers have all had some experience of ideas and of truth, they have

all had inklings of more beyond, they have all been visited and quickened by

a sense of the limitless possibilities of further knowledge in every direction,

they have all dreamed of the perfect and have felt its lure. They are thus

aware that the small implies the large; having seen hills, they can believe in

mountains; they know that Euripides, Shakespeare, Dante, Goethe, are but

fulfillments of prophecies heard in peasant tales and songs; they know that

the symphonies of Beethoven or the dramas of Wagner are harbingered in the

melodies and the sighs of those who

  garner grain and in their hearts respond to the music of the winds or the

"solemn anthems of the sea"; they sense the secret by which the astronomy ofNewton and Laplace is foretokened in the shepherd's watching of the stars;

and knowing thus this plain spiritual law of progressiveness and implication,

they are prepared to grasp the truth that modern mathematics, though they do

not understand it, is, like the other great things, but a sublime fulfillment, the

realization of prophecies involved in what they themselves, in common with

other educated folk, know of the rudiments of the science. Indeed, they would

marvel if upon reflection it did not seem to be so. Our pure mathematician in

speaking to his fellow men and women of his science will have no difficulty

in persuading them that he is speaking of a subject immense and eternal. As

born idealists they have intimations of their own — the evidence of intuition,

if you please — or a kind of insight resembling that of the mystic — that in

the world of mind there must be something deeper and higher, stabler and

more  significant,  than  the  pitiful  ideas  in  life's  routine  and  the  familiar

vocations of men. They are thus prepared to believe, before they are told, that

behind  the  veil  there  exists  a  universum  of  exact  thought,  an  everlasting

cosmos of ordered ideas, a stable world of concatenated truth. In their study

of the elements, in school or college, they may have caught a shimmer of it

or,  in  rare  moments  of  illumination,  even  a  gleam.  Of  the  existence,  the

reality, the actuality, of our pure mathematician's world they will have no

doubt, and they will have no doubt of its grandeur. They may even, in a

vague way, magnify it overmuch, feeling that it is, in some wise, more than

human, significant only for the rarely gifted spirit that dwells, like a star,

  apart. The pure mathematician's difficulty lies in showing, in his way, that

such is not the case. For he does not wish to adduce utilities and applications.

He is well aware of these. He knows that if he "would tell them they are more

in number than the sands." Neither does he despise them as of little moment.

On the contrary, he values them as precious. But he wishes to do his subject

and his auditors the honor of speaking from a higher level: he desires to

vindicate the worth of mathematics on the ground of its sheer ideality, on the

ground of its intellectual harmony, on the ground of its beauty, "free from the

gorgeous  trappings"  of  sense,  pure,  austere,  supreme.  To  do  this,  which

ought, it seems, to be easy, experience has shown to be exceedingly difficult.

For the multitude of men and women, even the educated multitude, are wont

to cry,

  Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, It is too high, I can not attain

unto it,

  thus meaning to imply, What, then, or where is its human significance?Their voice is heard in the challenge once put to me by the brilliant author of

"East London Visions." What, said he, can be the human significance of "this

majestic  intellectual  cosmos  of  yours,  towering  up  like  a  million-lustred

iceberg into the arctic night," seeing that, among mankind, none is permitted

to behold its more resplendent wonders save the mathematician alone? What

response will our pure mathematician make to this challenge? Make, I mean,

if he be not a wholly naive devotee of his science and so have failed to reflect

upon the deeper grounds of its justification. He may say, for one thing, what

Professor Klein said on a similar occasion:

  Apart  from  the  fact  that  pure  mathematics  can  not  be  supplanted  by

anything else as a means for developing the purely logical faculties of the

  mind, there must be considered here, as elsewhere, the necessity of the

presence of a few individuals in each country developed in far higher degree

than the rest, for the purpose of keeping up and gradually raising the general

standard. Even a slight raising of the general level can be accomplished only

when some few minds have progressed far ahead of the average.

  That is doubtless a weighty consideration. But is it all or the best that may

be said? It is just and important but it does not go far enough; it is not, I fear,

very convincing; it is wanting in pungence and edge; it does not touch the

central nerve of the challenge. Our pure mathematician must rally his sceptics

with sharper considerations. He may say to them: You challenge the human

significance of the higher developments of pure mathematics because they

are inaccessible to all but a few, because their charm is esoteric, because their

deeper beauty is hid from nearly all mankind. Does that consideration justify

your challenge? You are individuals, but you are also members of a race.

Have you as individuals no human interest nor human pride in the highest

achievements of your race? Is nothing human, is nothing humane, except

mediocrity and the commonplace? Was Phidias or Michel Angelo less human

than the carver and painter of a totem-pole? Was Euclid or Gauss or Poincare

less representative of man than the countless millions for whom mathematics

has meant only the arithmetic of the market place or the rude geometry of the

carpenter?  Does  the  quality  of  humanity  in  human  thoughts  and  deeds

decrease as they ascend towards the peaks of achievement, and increase in

proportion as they become vulgar, attaining an upper limit in the beasts? Do

you not know that precisely the reverse is true? Do you not count aspiration

humane? Do you not see that it is not the common things that every one may

reach, but excellences high-  dwelling among the rocks — do you not know that, in respect of human

worth, these things, which but few can attain, are second only to the supreme

ideals attainable by none?

  How very different and how very much easier the task of one who sought

to  vindicate  the  human  significance  of  mathematics  on  the  ground  of  its

applications! In respect of temperamental interest, of attitude and outlook, the

difference between the pure and the applied mathematician is profound. It is

—  if  we  may  liken  spiritual  things  to  things  of  sense  —  much  like  the

difference between one who greets a new-born day because of its glory and

one who regards it as a time for doing chores and values its light only as

showing the way. For the former, mathematics is justified by its supreme

beauty; for the latter, by its manifold use. But are the two kinds of value

essentially incompatible? They are certainly not. The difference is essentially

a difference of authority — a difference, that is, of worth, of elevation, of

excellence.  The  pure  mathematician  and  the  applied  mathematician

sometimes  may,  indeed  they  not  infrequently  do,  dwell  together

harmoniously in a single personality. If our spokesman be such a one — and I

will not suppose the shame of having the utilities of the science represented

on such an occasion by one incapable of regarding it as anything but a tool,

for that would be disgraceful — if, then, our spokesman be such a one as I

have supposed, he might properly begin as follows: In speaking to you of the

applications  of  mathematics  I  would  not  have  you  suppose,  ladies  and

gentlemen, that I am thus presenting the highest claims of the science to your

regard; for its highest justification is the charm of its immanent beauty; I do

hot mean, he will say, the beauty of ap-

  pearances  —  the  fleeting  beauties  of  sense,  though  these,  too,  are

precious — even the outer garment, the changeful robe, of reality is a lovely

thing;  I  mean  the  eternal  beauty  of  the  world  of  pure  thought;  I  mean

intellectual  beauty;  in  mathematics  this  nearly  attains  perfection;  and

"intellectual beauty is self-sufficing"; uses, on the other hand, are not; they

wear an aspect of apology; uses resemble excuses, they savor a little of a plea

in mitigation. Do you ask: Why, then, plead them? Because, he will say,

many  good  people  have  a  natural  incapacity  to  appreciate  anything  else;

because,  also,  many  of  the  applications,  especially  the  higher  ones,  are

themselves matters of exceeding beauty; and especially because I wish to

show, not only that use and beauty are compatible forms of worth, but that

the more mathematics has been cultivated for the sake of its inner charm, thefitter has it become for external service.

    Having  thus  at  the  outset  put  himself  in  proper  light  and  given  his

auditors  a  scholar's  warning  against  what  would  else,  he  fears,  foster  a

disproportionment  of  values,  what  will  he  go  on  to  signalize  among  the

utilities of a science whose primary allegiance to logical rectitude allies it to

art, and which only incidentally and secondarily shapes itself to the ends of

instrumental service? He knows that the applications of mathematics, if one

will but trace them out in their multifarious ramifications, are as many-sided

as  the  industries  and  as  manifold  as  the  sciences  of  men,  penetrating

everywhere throughout the full round of life. What will he select? He will not

dwell long upon its homely uses in the rude computations and mensurations

of counting-house and shop and factory and field, for this indispensable yet

humble manner of world-wide and

    perpetual service is known of all men and women. He will quickly pass to

higher  considerations  —  to  navigation,  to  the  designing  of  ships,  to  the

surveying of lands and seas, and the charting of the world, to the construction

of  reservoirs  and  aqueducts,  canals,  tunnels  and  railroads,  to  the  modern

miracles of the marine cable, the telegraph, the telephone, to the multiform

achievements  of  every  manner  of  modern  engineering,  civil,  mechanical,

mining, electrical, by which, through the advancing conquest of land and sea

and air and space and time, the conveniences and the prowess of man have

been multiplied a billionfold. It need not be said that not all this has been

done by mathematics alone. Far from it. It is, of course, the joint achievement

of  many  sciences  and  arts,  but  —  and  just  this  is  the  point  —  the

contributions of mathematics to the great work, direct and indirect, have been

indispensable. And it will require no great skill in our speaker to show to his

audience, if it have a little imagination, that, as I have said elsewhere, if all

these mathematical contributions were by some strange spiritual cataclysm to

be suddenly withdrawn, the life and body of industry and commerce would

suddenly collapse as by a paralytic stroke, the now splendid outer tokens of

material civilization would quickly perish, and the face of our planet would at

once  assume  the  aspect  of  a  ruined  and  bankrupt  world.  For  such  is  the

amazing utility, such the wealth of by-products, if you please, that come from

a science and art that owes its life, its continuity and its power to man's love

of intellectual harmony and pleads its inner charm as its sole appropriate

justification. Indeed it appears — contrary to popular belief — that in our

world there is nothing else quite so practical as the inspiration of a muse.  But this is not all nor nearly all to which our applied mathematician will

wish to invite attention. It is only the beginning of it. Even if he does not

allude  to  the  quiet  service  continuously  and  everywhere  rendered  by

mathematics in its role as a norm or standard or ideal in every field of thought

whether exact or inexact, he will yet desire to instance forms and modes of

application  compared  with  which  those  we  have  mentioned,  splendid  and

impressive as they are, are meager and mean. For those we have mentioned

are  but  the  more  obvious  applications  —  those,  namely,  that  continually

announce themselves to our senses everywhere in the affairs, both great and

small,  of  the  workaday  world.  But  the  really  great  applications  of

mathematics — those which, rightly understood, best of all demonstrate the

human significance of the science — are not thus obvious; they do not, like

the others, proclaim themselves in the form of visible facilities and visible

expedients  everywhere  in  the  offices,  the  shops,  and  the  highways  of

commerce and industry; they are, on the contrary, almost as abstract and

esoteric as mathematics itself, for they are the uses and applications of this

science  in  other  sciences,  especially  in  astronomy,  in  mechanics  and  in

physics,  but  also  and  increasingly  in  the  newer  sciences  of  chemistry,

geology,  mineralogy,  botany,  zoology,  economics,  statistics  and  even

psychology, not to mention the great science and art of architecture. In the

matter of exhibiting the endless and intricate applications of mathematics to

the  natural  sciences,  applications  ranging  from  the  plainest  facts  of

crystallography to the faint bearings of the kinetic theory of gases upon the

constitution of the Milky Way, our speaker's task is quite as hopeless as we

found the pure mathematician's to be; and he, too, will have to com-

  promise; he will have to request his auditors to acquaint themselves at

their leisure with the available literature of the subject and especially to read

attentively the great work of John Theodore Merz dealing with the "History

of European Thought in the Nineteenth Century," where they will find, in a

form fit for the general reader, how central has been the r61e of mathematics

in all the principal attempts of natural science to find a cosmos in the seeming

chaos of the natural world. Another many-sided work that in this connection

he  may  wish  to  commend  as  being  in  large  part  intelligible  to  men  and

women of general education and catholic mind is Enriques's "Problems of

Science."

  I turn now for a moment to the prospects of one who might choose to

devote the hour to an exposition or an indication of modern developments inwhat  it  is  customary  to  call  the  foundations  of  mathematics  —  to  a

characterization, that is, and estimate of that far-reaching and still advancing

critical  movement  which  has  to  do  with  the  relations  of  the  science,

philosophically considered, to the sciences of logic and methodology. What

can he say on this great theme that will be intelligible and edifying to the

multitudes  of  men  and  women  who,  though  mathematically  inexpert,  yet

have a genuine humane curiosity respecting even the pro-founder and subtler

life and achievements of science? He can point out that mathematics, like all

the  other  sciences,  like  the  arts  too,  for  that  matter,  and  like  philosophy,

originates  in  the  refining  process  of  reflection  upon  the  crude  data  of

common sense; he can point out that this process has gradually yielded from

out  the  raw  material  and  still  continues  to  yield  more  and  more  ideas  of

approximate perfection in the respects of precision and form; he can point out

that such ideas, thus

    disentangled and trimmed of their native vagueness and indetermination,

disclose  their  mutual  relationships  and  so  become  amenable  to  the

concatenative processes of logic; and he can point out that these polished

ideas  with  their  mutual  relationships  become  the  bases  or  the  content  of

various branches of mathematics, which thus tower above common sense and

appear to grow out of it and to stand upon it like trees or forests upon the

earth.  He  will  point  out,  however,  that  this  appearance,  like  most  other

obvious  appearances,  is  deceiving;  he  will,  that  is,  point  out  that  these

upward-growing sciences or branches of science are found, in the light of

further  reflection,  to  be  downward-growing  as  well,  pushing  their  roots

deeper and deeper into a dark soil far beneath the ground of evident common

sense;  indeed,  he  will  show  that  common  sense  is  thus,  in  its  relation  to

mathematics, but as a sense-litten mist enveloping only the mid-portion of the

stately structure, which, like a towering mountain, at once ascends into the

limpid ether far above the shining cloud and rests upon a base of subterranean

rock far below; he will point out that, accordingly, mathematicians, in respect

of temperamental interest, fall into two classes — the class of those who

cultivate  the  upward-growing  of  the  science,  working  thus  in  the  upper

regions  of  clearer  light,  and  the  class  of  those  who  devote  themselves  to

exploring the deep-plunging roots of the science; and it is, he will say, to the

critical  activity  of  the  latter  class  —  the  logicians  and  philosophers  of

mathematics — that we owe the discovery of what we are wont to call the

foundations of mathematics — the great discovery, that is, of an immensemathematical  stt&-structure,  which  penetrates  far  beneath  the  stratum  of

common sense and of which many of even the greatest mathematicians

  of former times were not aware. But whilst such founda-tional research is

in the main a modern phenomenon, it is by no means exclusively such; and to

protect his auditors against a false perspective in this regard and the peril of

an overweening pride in the achievements of their own time, our speaker may

recommend  to  them  the  perusal  of  Thomas  L.  Heath's  superb  edition  of

Euclid's "Elements" where, especially in the first volume, they will be much

edified to find, in the rich abundance of critical citation and commentary

which the translator has there brought together, that the refined and elaborate

logico-mathematical researches of our own time have been only a deepening

and  widening  of  the  keen  mathematical  criticism  of  a  few  centuries

immediately preceding and following the great date of Euclid. Indeed but for

that general declension of Greek spirit which Professor Gilbert Murray in his

"Four Stages of Greek Religion" has happily characterized as "the failure of

nerve,"  what  we  know  as  the  modern  critical  movement  in  mathematics

might  well  have  come  to  its  present  culmination,  so  far  at  least  as  pure

geometry is concerned, fifteen hundred or more years ago. It is a pity that the

deeper and stabler things of science and the profounder spirit of man can not

be  here  disclosed  in  a  manner  commensurate  with  the  great  exposition,

surrounding us, of the manifold practical arts and industries of the world. It is

a pity there is no means by which our speaker might, in a manner befitting

the  subject  and  the  occasion,  exhibit  intelligibly  to  his  fellow  men  and

women the ways and results of the last hundred years of research into the

groundwork  of  mathematical  science  and  therewith  the  highly  important

modern developments in logic and the theory of knowledge. How astonished

the beholders would

  be, how delighted too, and proud to belong to a race capable of such

patience and toil, of such disinterested devotion, of such intellectual finesse

and depth of penetration. I can think of no other spectacle quite so impressive

as the inner vision of all the manifold branches of rigorous thought seen to

constitute one immense structure of autonomous doctrine reposing upon the

spiritual basis of a few select ideas and, superior to the fading beauties of

time and sense, shining there like a celestial city, in "the white radiance of

eternity." That is the vision of mathematics that a student of its philosophy

would, were it possible, present to his fellow men and women.

  In view of the foregoing considerations it evidently is, I think, in thenature of the case impossible to give an adequate sense of the human worth

of mathematics if one choose to devote the hour to any one of the great

aspects of it with which we have been thus far concerned. Neither the history

of  the  subject  nor  its  present  estate  nor  its  applications  nor  its  logical

foundations — no one of these themes lends itself well to the purpose of such

exposition, and still less do two or more of them combined. Even if such

were not the case I should yet feel bound to pursue another course; for I have

been long persuaded that, in respect of its human significance, mathematics

invites to a point of view which, unless I am mistaken, has not been taken and

held in former attempts at appreciation. I have already alluded to bearings of

mathematics as distinguished from applications. It is with its bearings that I

wish to deal. I mean its bearings upon the higher concerns of man as man —

those interests, namely, which have impelled him to seek, over and above the

needs of raiment and shelter and food, some inner

    adjustment of life to the poignant limitations of life in our world and

which  have  thus  drawn  him  to  manifold  forms  of  wisdom,  not  only  to

mathematics  and  natural  science,  but  also  to  literature  and  philosophy,  to

religion  and  art,  and  theories  of  righteousness.  What  is  the  rfile  of

mathematics in this perpetual endeavor of the human spirit everywhere to win

reconciliation of its dreams and aspirations with the baffling conditions and

tragic facts of life and the world? What is its relation to the universal quest of

man  for  some  supreme  and  abiding  good  that  shall  assuage  or  annul  the

discords and tyrannies of time and limitation, withholding less and less, as

time goes by, the freedom and the peace of an ideal harmony infinite and

eternal?

  In endeavoring to suggest, in the time remaining for this address, a partial

answer to that great question, in attempting, that is, to indicate the relations of

mathematics to the supreme ideals of mankind, it will be necessary to seek a

perspective point of view and to deal with large matters in a large way.

  Of the countless variety of appetitions and aspirations that have given

direction  and  aim  to  the  energies  of  men  and  that,  together  with  the

constraining  conditions  of  life  in  our  world,  have  shaped  the  course  and

determined the issues of human history, it is doubtless not yet possible to

attempt confident and thoroughgoing classification according to the principle

of relative dignity or that of relative strength. If, however, we ask whether, in

the great throng of passional determinants of human thought and life, there is

one supreme passion, one that in varying degrees of consciousness controlsthe  rest,  unifying  the  spiritual  enterprises  of  our  race  in  directing  and

converging them all upon a single sovereign aim, the answer, I believe, can

not be doubt-

  ful:  the  activities  and  desires  of  mankind  are  indeed  subject  to  such

imperial direction and control. And if now we ask what the sovereign passion

is, again the answer can hardly admit of question or doubt. In order to see

even a priori what the answer must be, we have only to imagine a race of

beings endowed with our human craving for stability, for freedom, and for

perpetuity of life and its fleeting goods, we have only to fancy such a race

flung,  without  equipment  of  knowledge  or  strength,  into  the  depths  of  a

treacherous universe of matter and force where they are tossed, buffeted and

torn  by  the  tumultuous  onward-rushing  flood  of  the  cosmic  stream,

originating  they  know  not  whence  and  flowing  they  know  not  why  nor

whither, we have, I say, only to imagine this, sympathetically, which ought to

be easy for us as men, and then to ask ourselves what would naturally be the

controlling passion and dominant enterprise of such a race — unless, indeed,

we suppose it to become strangely enamored of distress or to be driven by

despair to self-extinction. We humans require no Gotama nor Heracleitus to

tell us that man's lot is cast in a world where naught abides. The universal

impermanence -of things, the inevitableness of decay, the mocking frustration

of deepest yearnings and fondest dreams, all this has been keenly realized

wherever men and women have had seeing eyes or been even a little touched

with the malady of meditation, and everywhere in the literature of power is

heard the cry of the mournful truth. "The life of man," said the Spirit of the

Ocean, "passes by like a galloping horse, changing at every turn, at every

hour."

  "Great treasure halls hath Zeus in heaven, From whence to man strange

dooms be given, Past hope or fear."

  Such  is  the  universal  note.  Whether  we  glance  at  the  question  in  a

measure a priori, as above, or look into the cravings of our own hearts, or

survey the history of human emotion and thought, we shall find, I think, in

each and all these ways, that human life owns the supremacy of one desire: it

is the passion for emancipation, for release from life's limitations and the

tyranny of change: it is our human passion for some ageless form of reality,

some everlasting vantage-ground or rock to stand upon, some haven of refuge

from the all-devouring transformations of the weltering sea. And so it is that

our human aims, aspirations, and toils thus find their highest unity — theironly intelligible unity — in the spirit's quest of a stable world, in its endless

search for some mode or form of reality that is at once infinite, changeless,

eternal.

  Does some one say: This may be granted, but what is the point of it all? It

is obviously true enough, but what, pray, can be its bearing upon the matter in

hand? What light does it throw upon the human significance of mathematics?

The question is timely and just. The answer, which will grow in fullness and

clarity as we proceed, may be at once begun.

  How long our human ancestors, in remote ages, may have groped, as

some of their descendants even now grope, among the things of sense, in the

hope of finding there the desiderated good, we do not know — past time is

long and the evolution of wisdom has been slow. We do know that, long

before  the  beginnings  of  recorded  history,  superior  men  —  advanced

representatives of their kind — must have learned that the deliverance sought

was not to be found among the objects of the mobile world, and so the spirit's

quest passed from thence; passed from the realm of perception and sense

  to the realm of concept and reason: thought ceased, that is, to be merely

the unconscious means of pursuit and became itself the quarry — mind had

discovered  mind;  and  there,  in  the  realm  of  ideas,  in  the  realm  of  spirit

proper, in the world of reason or thought, the great search — far outrunning

historic time — has been endlessly carried on, with varying fortunes, indeed,

but  without  despair  or  breach  of  continuity,  meanwhile  multiplying  its

resources and assuming gradually, as the years and centuries have passed, the

characters and forms of what we know today as philosophy and science and

art. I have mentioned the passing of the quest from the realm of sense to the

realm  of  conception:  a  most  notable  transition  in  the  career  of  mind  and

especially significant for the view I am aiming to sketch. For thought, in thus

becoming a conscious subject or object of thought, then began its destined

course in reason: in ceasing to be merely an unconscious means of pursuit

and becoming itself the quarry, it definitely entered upon the arduous way

that leads to the goal of rigor. And so it is evident that the way in question is

not a private way; it does not belong exclusively to mathematics; it is public

property;  it  is  the  highway  of  conceptual  research.  For  it  is  a  mistake  to

imagine that mathematics, in virtue of its reputed exactitude, is an insulated

science,  dwelling  apart  in  isolation  from  other  forms  and  modes  of

conceptual activity. It would be such, were its rigor absolute; for between a

perfection  and  any  approximation  thereto,  however  close,  there  alwaysremains an infinitude of steps. But the rigor of mathematics is not absolute —

absolute  rigor  is  an  ideal,  to  be,  like  other  ideals,  aspired  unto,  forever

approached, but never quite attained, for such attainment would mean that

every possibility of error or

    indetermination,  however  slight,  had  been  eliminated  from  idea,  from

symbol, and from argumentation. We know, however, that such elimination

can never be complete, unless indeed the human mind shall one day lose its

insatiable faculty for doubting. What, then, is the distinction of mathematics

on the score of exactitude? Its distinction lies, not in the attainment of rigor

absolute, but partly in its exceptional devotion thereto and especially in the

advancement  it  has  made  along  the  endless  path  that  leads  towards  that

perfection.  But,  as  I  have  already  said,  it  must  not  be  thought  that

mathematics is the sole traveler upon the way. It is important to see clearly

that it is far from being thus a solitary enterprise. First, however, let us adjust

our imagery to a better correspondence with the facts. I have spoken of the

path. We know, however, that the paths are many, as many as the varieties of

conceptual  subject-matter,  all  of  them  converging  towards  the  same  high

goal. We see them originate here, there and yonder in the soil and haze of

common thought; we see how indistinct they are at first — how ill-defined;

we  observe  how  they  improve  in  that  regard  as  the  ideas  involved  grow

clearer and clearer, more and more amenable to the use and governance of

logic. At length, when thought, in its progress along any one of the many

courses, has reached a high degree of refinement, precision and certitude,

then and thereafter, but not before, we call it mathematical thought; it has

undergone a long process of refining evolution and acquired at length the

name of mathematics; it is not, however, the creature of its name; what is

called mathematics has been long upon the way, owning at previous stages

other  designations  —  common  sense,  practical  art  perhaps,  speculation,

theology it may be,

    philosophy, natural science, or it may be for many a millennium no name

at all. Is it, then, only a question of names? In a sense, yes: the ideal of

thought is rigor; mathematics is the name that usage employs to designate,

not attainment of the ideal, for it can not be attained, but its devoted pursuit

and  close  approximation.  But  this  is  not  the  essence  of  the  matter.  The

essence is that all thought, thought in all its stages, however rude, however

refined, however named, owns the unity of being human: spiritual activities

are one. Mathematics thus belongs to the great family of spiritual enterprisesof  man.  These  enterprises,  all  the  members  of  the  great  family,  however

diverse in form, in modes of life, in methods of toil, in their progress along

the way that leads towards logical rectitude, are alike children of one great

passion.  In  genesis,  in  spirit  and  aspiration,  in  motive  and  aim,  natural

science, theology, philosophy, jurisprudence, religion and art are one with

mathematics: they are all of them sprung from the human spirit's craving for

invariant reality in a world of tragic change; they all of them aim at rescuing

man from "the blind hurry of the universe from vanity to vanity": they seek

cosmic stability — a world of abiding worth, where the broken promises of

hope shall be healed and infinite aspiration shall cease to be mocked.

  Such has been the universal and dominant aim and such are the cardinal

forms that time has given its prosecution.

  And now we must ask: What have been the fruits of the endless toil?

What  has  the  high  emprize  won?  And  what  especially,  have  been  the

contributions of mathematics to the total gain? To recount the story of the

spirit's quest for ageless forms of reality would be to tell afresh, from a new

point of view, the his-

    HUMAN SIGNIFICANCE OF MATHEMATICS $1

  tory of human thought, so many and so diverse are the modes or aspects

of being that men have found or fancied to be eternal. Edifying indeed would

be the tale, but it is long, and the hour contracts. Even a meager delineation is

hardly possible here. Yet we must not fail to glance at the endless array and

to call, at least in part, the roll of major things. But where begin? Shall it be in

theology? How memory responds to the magic word. "The past rises before

us like a dream." As the long succession of the theological centuries passes

by, what a marvelous pageant do they present of human ideals, contrivings

and dreams, both rational and superrational. Alpha and Omega, the beginning

and ending, which is, which was and which is to come; I Am That I Am;

Father of lights with which is no variableness, neither shadow of turning; the

bonitas, unit as. infinitas, immutabilitas of Deity; the undying principle of

soul;  the  sublime  hierarchy  of  immortal  angels,  terrific  and  precious,

discoursed of by sages, commemorated by art, feared and loved by millions

of men and women and children: these things may suffice to remind us of the

invariant forms of reality found or invented by theology in her age-long toil

and passion to conquer the mutations of time by means of things eternal.

  But  theology's  record  is  only  an  immense  chapter  of  the  vastly  more

inclusive annals of world-wide philosophic speculation running through theages. If we turn to philosophy understood in the larger sense, if we ask what

answers she has made in the long course of time to the question of what is

eternal, so diverse and manifold are the voices heard across the centuries,

from the East and from the West, that the combined response must needs

seem to an unaccustomed ear like an infinite

  babel of tongues: the Confucian Way of Heaven; the mystic Tao, so much

resembling fate, of Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu; Buddhism's inexorable spiritual

law  of  cause  and  effect  and  its  everlasting  extinction  of  individuality  in

Nirvana — the final blowing out of consciousness and character alike; Ahura

Mazda, the holy One, of Zarathustra; Fate, especially in the Greek tragedies

and Greek religion — the chain of causes in nature, "the compulsion in the

way things grow," a fine thread running through the whole of existence and

binding even the gods; the cosmic matter, or TO aTT€Lpov of Anaximander;

the  cosmic  order,  the  rhythm  of  events,  the  logos  or  reason  or  nous,  of

Heracleitus; the finite, space-filling sphere, or One, of the deep Parmenides;

the four material and two psychic, six eternal, elements, of Empedocles; the

infinitude of everlasting mind-moved simple substances of Anaxagoras; the

infinite  multitude  and  endless  variety  of  invariant  "seeds  of  things"  of

Leucippus, Democritus, Epicurus and Lucretius, together with their doctrines

of absolute void and the conservations of mass and motion and infinite room

or space; Plato's eternal world of pure ideas; the great Cosmic Year of a

thousand thinkers, rolling in vast endlessly repeated cycles on the beginning-

less, endless course of time from eternity to eternity; the changeless thought-

forms  of  Zeno,  Gorgias  and  Aristotle;  Leibnitz's  indestructible,  pre-

established harmony; Spinoza's infinite unalterable substance; the Absolute

of the Hegelian school; and so on and on far beyond the limits of practicable

enumeration. This somewhat random partial list of things will serve to recall

and  to  represent  the  enormous  motley  crowd  of  answers  that  the  ages  of

philosophic  speculation  have  made  to  the  supreme  inquiry  of  the  human

spirit: what is there

  that  survives  the  mutations  of  time,  abiding  unchanged  despite  the

whirling flux of life and the world?

  And now, in the interest of further representing salient features in a large

perspective view, let me next ask what contribution to the solution of the

great problem has been made by jurisprudence. Jurisprudence is no doubt at

once a branch of philosophy and a branch of science, but it has an interest, a

direction and a character of its own. And for the sake of due emphasis it willbe well worth while to remind ourselves specifically of the half-forgotten fact

that, in its quest for justice and order among men, jurisprudence long ago

found  an  answer  to  our  oft-stated  riddle  of  the  world,  an  answer  which,

though but a partial one, yet satisfied the greatest thinkers for many centuries,

and which, owing to the inborn supernalizing proclivity of the human mind,

still  exercises  sway  over  the  thought  of  the  great  majority  of  mankind.  I

allude to the conception of jus natural? or lex natunr. the doctrine that in the

order of Nature there somehow exists a perfect, invariant, universally and

eternally valid system or prototype of law over and above the imperfect laws

and changeful polities of men — a conception and doctrine long familiar in

the juristic thought of antiquity, dominating, for example, the Antigone of

Sophocles, penetrating the Republic and the Laws of Plato, proclaimed by

Demosthenes in the Oration on the Crown, becoming, largely through the

Republic and the Laws of Cicero, the crowning conception of the imperial

jurisprudence of Rome, and still holding sway, as I have said, except in the

case of our doubting Thomases of the law, who virtually deny our world the

existence of any perfection whatever because they can not, so to speak, feel it

with the hand, as if they did not know that to suppose an

  ideal to be thus realized would be a flat contradiction in terms.

  If we turn for a moment to art and enquire what has been her relation to

the poignant riddle, shall we not thus be going too far afield? The answer is

certainly  no.  In  (Eternitatem  pingo,  said  Zeuxis,  the  Greek  painter.  "The

purpose  of  art,"  says  John  La  Farge,  "is  commemoration."  In  these  two

sayings, one of them ancient, the other modern, we have, I think, the evident

clue. They do but tell us that art, like the other great enterprises of man,

springs from our spirit's coveting of worth that abides. Like theology, like

philosophy, like jurisprudence, like natural science, too, as I mean to point

out further, and like mathematics, art is born of the universal passion for the

dignity  of  things  eternal.  Her  quest,  like  theirs,  has  been  a  search  for

invariants,  for  goods  that  are  everlasting.  And  what  has  she  found?  The

answer is simple. "The idea of beauty in each species of being," said Joshua

Reynolds,  "is  perfect,  invariable,  divine."  We  know  that  by  a  faculty  of

imaginative, mystical, idealizing discernment there is revealed to us, amid the

fleeting  beauties  of  Time,  the  immobile  presence  of  Eternal  beauty,

immutable archetype and source of the grace and loveliness beheld in the

shifting  scenes  of  the  flowing  world  of  sense.  Such,  I  take  it,  is  art's

contribution to our human release from the tyranny of change and the law ofdeath.

  And now what should be said of science? Not so brief and far less simple

would be the task of characterizing or even enumerating the many things that

in the great drama of modern science have been assigned the role of invariant

forms of reality or eternal modes of being. It would be necessary to mention

first of all, as most imposing of all, our modern form of the ancient

  doctrine of fate. I mean the reigning conception of our universe as an

infinite machine — a powerful conception that more and more fascinates

scientific minds even to the point of obsession and according to which it

should be possible, were knowledge sufficiently advanced, to formulate, in a

system of differential equations, the whole of cosmic history from eternity to

eternity in minutest detail, not even excluding a skeptic's doubt whether such

formulation  be  theoretically  possible  nor  excluding  the  conviction,  which

some  minds  have,  that  the  doctrine,  regarded  as  an  ultimate  creed,  is  an

abominable libel against the character of a world where the felt freedom of

the human spirit is not an illusion. It would be necessary to mention — as

next perhaps in order of impressiveness — another doctrine that is, curiously

enough, vividly reminiscent of old-time fate. I allude this time to the doctrine

of  heredity,  a  tremendous  conception,  in  accordance  with  which  —  as

Professor W. B. Smith has said in his recent powerful address on "Push or

Pull"? — "the remotest past reaches out its skeletal fingers and grapples both

present and future in its iron grip." And there is the conservation of energy

and that of mass — both of them, again, doctrines prefigured in the thought

of ancient Greece — and numerous other so-called natural laws, simple and

complex, familiar and unfamiliar, all posing as permanent forms of reality —

as natural invariants under the infinite system of cosmic transformations —

and thus together constituting the enlarging contribution of natural science

towards the slow vindication of a world that has seemed capricious, lawless

and impermanent.

  Such, then, is a conspectus, suggested rather than portrayed, of the results

which  the  great  allies  of  mathematics,  operating  through  the  ages,  have

achieved in

  their  passionate  endeavor  to  transcend  the  tragic  vicissitudes  and

limitations of life in an " ever-growing and perishing" universe and to win at

length the freedom, the dignity and the peace of a stable world where order

and harmony reign and spiritual goods endure. If we are to arrive at a really

just  or  worthy  sense  of  the  human  significance  of  mathematics,  it  is  inrelation with those great results of her sister enterprises that the achievements

of this science must be appraised. Immense indeed and high is the task of

criticism as thus conceived. How diverse and manifold the doctrines to be

evaluated, what depths to be plumbed, what heights to be scaled, how various

the  relationships  and  dignities  to  be  assigned  their  rightful  place  in  the

hierarchy of values. In the presence of such a task what can we think or say in

the remaining moments of the hour? If we have succeeded in setting the

problem in its proper light and in indicating the sole eminence from which

the matter may be rightly viewed, we ought perhaps to be content with that as

the issue of the hour, for it is worth while to sketch a worthy program of

criticism even if time fails us to perform fully the task thus set. And yet I can

not refrain from inviting you to imagine, before we close, a few at least of the

things that one who essayed the great critique would submit to his auditors

for meditation. And what do you imagine the guiding lines and major themes

of his discourse would be? I fancy he would say: The question before us,

ladies and gentlemen, is not a question of weighing utilities nor of counting

applications nor of measuring material gains; it is a question of human ideals

together with the various means of pursuing them and the differing degrees of

their approximation; we are occupied with a question of appreciation, with

the problem of values. I am,

  he would say, addressing you as representatives of man, and in so doing, I

am not regarding man as a mere practician, as a hewer of wood and drawer of

water, as an animal content to serve the instincts for shelter and food and

reproduction. I am contemplating him as a spiritual being, as a thinker, poet,

dreamer, as a lover of knowledge and beauty and wisdom and the joy of

harmony and light, responding to the lure of an ideal destiny, troubled by the

mystery of a baffling world, conscious subject of tragedy, yearning for stable

reality, for infinite freedom, for perpetuity and a thousand perfections of life.

As representatives of such a being, you, he would say, and I, even if we be

not ourselves producers of theology or philosophy or science or jurisprudence

or art or mathematics, are nevertheless rightful inheritors of all this manifold

wisdom of man. The question is: What is the inheritance worth? We are the

heirs and we are to be the judges of the great responses that time has made to

the spiritual needs of humanity. What are the responses worth? What are their

values, joint and several, absolute and relative? And what, especially, is the

human worth of the response of mathematics? It is, he would say, not only

our privilege, but, as educated individuals and especially as representatives ofour race, it is our duty, to ponder the matter and reach, if we can, a right

appraisement. For the proper study of mankind is man, and it is essential to

remember that ''La vie de la science cst la critique" I have, he would say, tried

to make it clear that mathematics is not an isolated science. I have tried to

show that it is not an antagonist, nor a rival, but is the comrade and ally of the

other great forms of spiritual activity, all aiming at the same high end. I have

reminded you of the principal answers made by

  these to the spiritual needs of man, and I do not, he would say, desire to

underrate or belittle them. They are a precious inheritance. Many of them

have not, indeed, stood the test of time; others will doubtless endure for aye;

all of them, for a longer or shorter period, have softened the ways of life to

millions of men and women. Neither do I desire, he would say, to exaggerate

the contributions of mathematics to the spiritual weal of humanity. What I

desire is a fair comparative estimate of its claims. "Truth is the beginning of

every  good  thing,  both  to  gods  and  men."  I  am  asking  you  to  compare,

consider and judge for yourselves. The task is arduous and long.

  There  are,  our  critic  would  say,  certain  paramount  considerations  that

every one in such an enterprise must weigh, and a few of them may, in the

moments that remain, be passed in brief review. Consider, for example, our

human craving for a world of stable reality. Where is it to be found? We

know the answers of theology, of philosophy, of natural science and the rest.

We know, too, the answer of literature and general thought:

  The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces, The solemn temples, the

great  globe  itself,  Yea,  all  which  it  inherit,  shall  dissolve,  And,  like  the

baseless fabric of this vision, Leave not a rack behind.

  And now what, he would ask, is the answer of mathematics? The answer,

he would have to say, is this: Transcending the flux of the sensuous universe,

there exists a stable world of pure thought, a divinely ordered world of ideas,

accessible to man, free from the mad dance of time, infinite and eternal.

    Consider our human craving for freedom. Of freedom there are many

kinds. Is it the freedom of limitless

  room, where our passion for outward expression, for externalization of

thought, may attain its aim? It is to mathematics, our critic would say, that

man is indebted for that priceless boon; for it is the cunning of this science

that has at length contrived to release our long imprisoned thought from the

old confines of our three-fold world of sense and opened to its wing the

interminable skies of hyperspace. But if it be a more fundamental freedomthat is meant, if it be freedom of thought proper — freedom, that is, for the

creative  activity  of  intellect  —  then  again  it  is  to  mathematics  that  our

faculties must look for the definition and a right estimate of their prerogatives

and power. For, regarding this matter, we may indeed acquire elsewhere a

suspicion or an inkling of the truth, but mathematics, and nothing else, is

qualified to give us knowledge of the fact that our intellectual freedom is

absolute save for a single limitation — the law of non-contradiction, the law

of logical compatibility, the law of intellectual harmony— sole restriction

imposed  by  "the  nature  of  things"  or  by  logic  or  by  the  muses  upon  the

creative activity of the human spirit.

    Consider next, the critic might say, our human craving for a living sense

of rapport and comradeship with a divine Being infinite and eternal. Except

through the modern mathematical doctrine of infinity, there is, he would have

to say, no rational way by which we may even approximate an understanding

of the supernal attributes with which our faculty of idealization has clothed

Deity  —  no  way,  except  this,  by  which  our  human  reason  may  gaze

understandingly upon the downward-looking aspects of the overworld. But

this is not all. I need not, he would say, remind you of the reverent saying

attributed to Plato that "God is a

    geometrician." Who is so unfortunate as not to know something of the

religious  awe,  the  solace  and  the  peace  that  come  from  cloistral

contemplation of the purity and everlastingness of mathematical truth?

    Mighty is the charm of those abstractions to a mind beset with images and

haunted by himself.

  "More frequently," says Wordsworth, speaking of geometry,

  More frequently from the same source I drew

  A pleasure quiet and profound, a sense

  Of permanent and universal sway,

  And paramount belief; there, recognized

  A type, for finite natures, of the one

  Supreme Existence, the surpassing life

  Which to the boundaries of space and time,

  Of melancholy space and doleful time,

  Superior and incapable of change,

  Not touched by welterings of passion — is,

  And hath the name of God. Transcendent peace

  And silence did wait upon those thoughts  That were a frequent comfort to my youth.

  And  so  our  spokesman,  did  time  allow,  might  continue,  inviting  his

auditors to consider the relations of mathematics to yet other great ideals of

humanity — our human craving for rectitude of thought, for ideal justice, for

dominion  over  the  energies  and  ways  of  the  material  universe,  for

imperishable beauty, for the dignity and peace of intellectual harmony. We

know that in all such cases the issue of the great critique would be the same,

and it is needless to pursue the matter further. The light is clear enough.

Mathematics is, in many ways, the most precious response that the human

spirit  has  made  to  the  call  of  the  infinite  and  eternal.  It  is  man's  best

revelation of the "Deep Base of the World."

  THE HUMANIZATION OF THE TEACHING OF MATHEMATICS 1

  WHEN the distinguished chairman of your mathematical conference did

me  the  honor  to  request  me  to  speak  to  you,  he  was  generous  enough,

whether wisely or unwisely, to leave the choice of a subject to my discretion,

merely stipulating that, whatever the title might be, the address itself should

bear  upon  the  professional  function  of  those  men  and  women  who  are

engaged in teaching mathematics in secondary schools. Inex-pertness, it has

been said, is the curse of the world; and one may, not unnaturally, feel some

hesitance in undertaking a task that might seem to resemble the rftle of a

physician when, as sometimes happens, he is called upon to treat a patient

whose  health  and  medical  competence  surpass  his  own.  I  trust  I  am  not

wanting in that natural feeling. In the present instance two considerations

have  enabled  me  to  overcome  it.  One  of  them  is  that,  having  had  some

experience in teaching mathematics in secondary schools, I might, it seemed

to me, regard that experience, though it was gained more than a score of

years ago, as giving something like a title to be heard in your counsels. The

other consideration is that, in regard to the teaching of mathematics, whether

in secondary schools or in colleges, I

  1 Address given at the meeting of the Michigan School Masters' Club, at

Ann  Arbor,  March  28,  1912.  Printed  in  Science,  April  26,  1912;  in  The

Educational Renew, September, 1912; and in the Michigan School Masters'

Magazine.

  have acquired a certain conviction, a pretty firm conviction, which, were

it properly presented, you would doubtless be generous enough and perhaps

ingenious enough to regard as having some sort of likeness to a message.

  My  conviction  is,  that  hope  of  improvement  in  mathematics  teaching,whether in secondary schools or in colleges, lies mainly in the possibility of

humanizing  it.  It  is  worth  while  to  remember  that  our  pupils  are  human

beings. What it means to be a human being we all of us presumably know

pretty well; indeed we know it so well that we are unable to tell it to one

another adequately; and, just because we do so well know what it means to be

a human being, we are prone to forget it as we forget, except when the wind

is blowing, that we are constantly immersed in the earth's atmosphere. To

humanize the teaching of mathematics means so to present the subject, so to

interpret its ideas and doctrines, that they shall appeal, not merely to the com-

putatory  faculty  or  to  the  logical  faculty  but  to  all  the  great  powers  and

interests of the human mind. That mathematical ideas and doctrines, whether

they be more elementary or more advanced, admit of such a manifold, liberal

and stimulating interpretation, and that therefore the teaching of mathematics,

whether in secondary schools or in colleges, may become, in the largest and

best sense, human, I have no doubt. That mathematical ideas and doctrines do

but seldom receive such interpretation and that accordingly the teaching of

mathematics is but seldom, in the largest and best sense, human, I believe to

be equally certain. That the indicated humanization of mathematical teaching,

the bringing of the matter and the spirit of mathematics to bear, not merely

upon certain fragmentary faculties of the

  mind,  but  upon  the  whole  mind,  that  this  is  a  great  desideration  is,  I

assume, beyond dispute.

  How can such humanization be brought about? The answer, I believe, is

not far to seek. I do not mean that the answer is easy to discover or easy to

communicate. I mean that the game is near at hand and that it is not difficult

to locate it, though it may not be easy to capture it. The difficulty inheres, I

believe,  in  our  conception  of  mathematics  itself;  not  so  much  in  our

conception of what mathematics, in a definitional sense, is, for that sense of

what mathematics is has become pretty clear in our day, but in our sense or

want of sense of what mathematics, whatever it may be, humanly signifies. In

order to humanize mathematical teaching it is necessary, and I believe it is

sufficient,  to  come  under  the  control  of  a  right  conception  of  the  human

significance of mathematics. It is sufficient, I mean to say, and it is necessary,

greatly to enlarge, to enrich and to vitalize our sense of what mathematics,

regarded as human enterprise, signifies.

  What does mathematics, regarded as an enterprise of the human spirit,

signify?  What  is  a  just  and  worthy  sense  of  the  human  significance  ofmathematics?

  To  the  extent  in  which  any  of  us  really  succeeds  in  answering  that

question worthily, his teaching will have the human quality, in so far as his

teaching is, in point of external circumstance, free to be what it would. I

believe it is important to put the question, and it is with the putting of it rather

than with the proposing of an answer to it that I am here at the outset mainly

concerned. For any one who is really to acquire possession of an answer that

is worthy must win the answer for himself. I need not say to you that such an

acquisition as a worthy answer to this kind of question does

  64 HUMANIZATION OF TEACHING MATHEMATICS

  not belong to the category of things that may be lent or borrowed, sold or

bought, donated or acquired by gift. No doubt the answers we may severally

win will differ as our temperaments differ. Yet the matter is not solely a

matter of temperament. It is much more a matter first of knowledge and then

of the evaluation of the knowledge and of its subject. To the winning of a

worthy  sense  of  the  human  significance  of  mathematics  two  things  are

indispensable,  knowledge  and  reflection:  knowledge  of  mathematics  and

reflection upon it. To the winning of such a sense it is essential to have the

kind of knowledge that none but serious students of mathematics can gain.

Equally essential is another thing and this thing students of mathematics in

our day do not, or do but seldom, gain. I mean the kind of insight and the

liberality of view that are to be acquired only by prolonged contemplation of

the nature of mathematics and by prolonged reflection upon its relations of

contrast and similitude to the other great forms of spiritual activity.

  The  question,  though  it  is  a  question  about  mathematics,  is  not  a

mathematical question; it is a philosophical question. And just because it is a

philosophical  question,  mathematicians,  despite  the  fact  that  one  of  the

indispensable qualifications for considering it is possessed by them alone,

have  in  general  ignored  it.  They  have,  in  general,  ignored  it,  and  their

ignoring of it may help to explain the curious paradox that whilst the world,

whose mathematical knowledge varies from little to less, has always as if

instinctively held mathematical science in high esteem, it has at the same

time  usually  regarded  mathematicians  as  eccentric  and  abnormal,  as

constituting a class apart, as being something more or something less than

human. It may explain,

  too, I venture to believe it does partly explain, both why it is that in the

universities  the  number  of  students  attracted  to  advanced  lectures  inmathematics compared with the numbers drawn to advanced courses in some

other great subjects not inherently more attractive, is so small; and why it is

that, among the multitudes who pursue mathematics in the secondary schools,

only a few find in the subject anything like delight. For I do not accept the

traditional and still current explanation, that the phenomenon is due to a well-

nigh universal lack of mathematical faculty. I maintain, on the contrary, that a

vast majority of mankind possess mathematical faculty in a very considerable

degree. That the average pupil's interest in mathematics is but slight, is a

matter of common knowledge. His lack of interest is, in my opinion, due, not

to a lack of the appropriate faculty in him, but to the circumstance that he is a

human being, whilst mathematics, though it teems with human interest, is not

presented to him in its human guise.

  If you ask the world — represented, let us say, by the man in the street or

in  the  market  place  or  the  field  —  to  tell  you  its  estimate  of  the  human

significance  of  mathematics,  the  answer  of  the  world  will  be,  that

mathematics has given mankind a metrical and com-putatory art essential to

the  effective  conduct  of  daily  life,  that  mathematics  admits  of  countless

applications  in  engineering  and  the  natural  sciences,  and  finally  that

mathematics is a most excellent instrumentality for giving mental discipline.

Such  will  be  the  answer  of  the  world.  The  answer  is  intelligible,  it  is

important, and it is good so far as it goes; but it is far from going far enough

and it is not intelligent. That it is far from going far enough will become

evident as we proceed. That the answer is not intelligent is evident at once,

  for the first part of it seems to imply that the rudimentary mathematics of

the carpenter and the counting-house is scientific, which it is not; the second

part of the answer is but an echo by the many of the voice of the few; and, as

to the final part, the world's conception of intellectual discipline is neither

profound nor well informed but is itself in sorry need of discipline.

  If, turning from the world to a normal mathematician, you ask him to

explain to you the human significance of mathematics, he will repeat to you

the answer of the world, of course with far more appreciation than the world

has of what the answer means, and he will supplement the world's response

by an important addition. He will add, that is, that mathematics is the exact

science, the science of exact thought or of rigorous thinking. By this he will

not mean what the world would mean if the world employed, as sometimes it

does  employ,  the  same  form  of  words.  He  will  mean  something  very

different. Especially if he be, as I suppose him to be, a normal mathematicianof the modern critical type, he will mean that mathematics is, in the oft-cited

language of Benjamin Peirce, "the science that draws necessary conclusions;"

he  will  mean  that,  in  the  felicitous  words  of  William  Benjamin  Smith,

"mathematics is the universal art apodictic;" he will mean that mathematics

is, in the nicely technical phrase of Fieri, "a hypothetico-deductive system." If

you ask him whether mathematics is the science of rigorous thinking about

all the things that engage the thought of mankind or only about a few of

them, such as numbers, figures, certain operations, and the like, the answer he

will give you depends. If he be a normal mathematician of the elder school,

he will say that mathematics is the science of rigorous thinking about only a

relatively few

  things and that these are such as you have exemplified. And if now, with

a little Socratic persistence, you press him to indicate the human significance

of a science of rigorous thinking about only a few of the countless things that

engage human thought, his answer will give you but little beyond a repetition

of  the  above-mentioned  answer  of  the  world.  But  if  he  be  a  normal

mathematician of the modern critical type, he will say that mathematics is the

science of rigorous thinking about all the things that engage human thought,

about all of them, he will mean, in the sense that thinking, as it approaches

perfection, tends to assume certain definite forms, that these forms are the

same  whatever  the  subject  matter  of  the  thinking  may  be,  and  that

mathematics is the science of these forms as forms. If you respond, as you

well may respond, that, in accordance with this ontological conception of

mathematics, this science, instead of thinking about all, thinks about none, of

the concrete things of interest to human thought, and that accordingly Mr.

Bertrand  Russell  was  right  in  saying  that  "mathematics  is  the  science  in

which one never knows what one is talking about nor whether what one says

is true" -if you respond that, from the point of view above assumed, that

delicious mot of Mr. Russell's must be solemnly held as true, and then if, in

accordance with your original purpose, you once more press for an estimation

of the human significance of such a science, I fear that the reply, if your

interlocutor is a mathematician of the normal type, will contain little that is

new  beyond  the  assertion  that  the  science  in  question  is  very  interesting,

where, by interesting, he means, of course, interesting to mathematicians. It is

true that Professor Klein has said: "Apart from the fact that pure mathematics

can not be

  supplanted by anything else as a means for developing the purely logicalfaculties  of  the  mind,  there  must  be  considered  here  as  elsewhere  the

necessity of the presence of a few individuals in each country developed in a

far higher degree than the rest, for the purpose of keeping up and gradually

raising the general standard. Even a slight raising of the general level can be

accomplished only when some few minds have progressed far ahead of the

average." Here indeed we have, in these words of Professor Klein, a hint, if

only a hint, of something better. But Professor Klein is not a mathematician

of the normal type, he is hypernormal. If, in order to indicate the human

significance of mathematics regarded as the science of the forms of thought

as forms, your normal mathematician were to say that these forms constitute,

of themselves, an infinite and everlasting world whose beauty, though it is

austere and cold, is pure, and in which is the secret and citadel of whatever

order and harmony our concrete universe contains, it would yet be your right

and your duty to ask, as the brilliant author of "East London Visions" once

asked  me,  namely,  what  is  the  human  significance  of  "this  majestic

intellectual cosmos of yours, towering up like a million-lustered iceberg into

the arctic night," seeing that, among mankind, none is permitted to behold its

more resplendent wonders save the mathematician himself? But the normal

mathematician will not say what I have just now supposed him to say; he will

not  say  it,  because  he  is,  by  hypothesis,  a  normal  mathematician,  and

because,  being  a  normal  mathematician,  he  is  exclusively  engaged  in

exploring the iceberg. A farmer was once asked why he raised so many hogs.

"In order," he said, "to buy more land." Asked why he desired more land, his

answer was, "in order to raise more

  corn." Being asked to say why he would raise more corn, he replied that

he wished to raise more hogs. If you ask the normal mathematician why he

explores the iceberg so much, his answer will be, in effect at least, "in order

to explore it more." In this exquisite circularity of motive, the farmer and the

normal  mathematician  are  well  within  their  rights.  They  are  within  their

rights just as a musician would be within his rights if he chanced to be so

exclusively interested in the work of composition as never to be concerned

with having his creations rendered before the public and never to attempt a

philosophic estimate of the human worth of music. The distinction involved

is not the distinction between human and inhuman, between social and anti-

social;  it  is  the  distinction  between  what  is  human  or  inhuman,  social  or

antisocial, and what is neither the one nor the other. No one, I believe, may

contest  the  normal  mathematician's  right  as  a  mathematical  student  orinvestigator to be quite indifferent as to the social value or the human worth

of his activity. Such activity is to be prized just as we prize any other natural

agency or force that, however undesignedly, yet contributes, sooner or later,

directly or indirectly, to the weal of mankind. The fact is that, among motives

in research, scientific curiosity, which is neither moral nor immoral, is far

more  common  and  far  more  potent  than  charity  or  philanthropy  or

benevolence. But when the mathematician passes from the rdle of student or

investigator to the role of teacher, that right of indifference ceases, for he has

passed to an office whose functions are social and whose obligations are

human. It is not his privilege to chill and depress with the encasing fogs of

the iceberg. It is his privilege and his duty, in so far as

  he may, to disclose its " million-lustered" splendors in all their power to

quicken and illuminate, to charm and edify, the whole mind.

  The conception of mathematics as the science of the forms of thought as

forms, the conception of it as the refinement, prolongation and elaboration of

pure logic, is, as you are doubtless aware, one of the great outcomes, perhaps

I should say it is the culminating philosophical outcome, of a century's effort

to ascertain what mathematics, in its intimate structure, is. This conception of

what mathematics is comes to its fullest expression and best defense, as you

doubtless know, in such works as Schroeder's "Algebra der Logik," White-

head's "Universal Algebra," Russell's "Principles of Mathematics," Peano's

"Formulario  Matematico,"  and  especially  in  Whitehead  and  Russell's

monumental "Principia Mathematical' I cite this literature because it tells us

what, in a definitional sense, the science in which the normal mathematician

is exclusively engaged, is. If we wish to be told what that science humanly

signifies, we must look elsewhere; we must look to a mathematician like

Plato, for example, or to a philosopher like Poincare, but especially must we

look  to  our  own  faculty  for  discerning  those  fine  connective  things  —

community of aim, interformal analogies, structural similitudes — that bind

all  the  great  forms  of  human  activity  and  aspiration  —  natural  science,

theology, philosophy, jurisprudence, religion, art and mathematics — into

one grand enterprise of the human spirit.

  In the autumn of 1906 there was published in Poet Lore a short poem

which, though it says nothing explicitly of mathematics, yet admits of an

interpretation  throwing  much  light  upon  the  human  significance  of  the

science and indicating well, I think, the normal mathe-

    matician's place in the world of spiritual interests. Jlhe author of the poemis  my  excellent  friend  and  teacher,  Professor  William  Benjamin  Smith,

mathematician,  philosopher,  poet  and  theologian.  I  have  not  asked  his

permission to interpret the poem as I shall invite you to interpret it. What its

original motive was I am not informed — it may have been the exceeding

beauty of the ideas expressed in it or the harmonious mingling of their light

with the melody of their song. The title of the poem is "The Merman and the

Seraph." As you listen to the reading of it, I shall ask you to regard the

Merman  as  representing  the  normal  mathematician  and  the  Seraph  as

representing, let us say, the life of the emotions in their higher reaches and

their finer susceptibilities.

  Deep the sunless seas amid, Far from Man, from Angel hid, Where the

soundless tides are rolled Over Ocean's treasure-hold, With dragon eye and

heart of stone, The ancient Merman mused alone.

  And aye his arrowed Thought he wings

  Straight at the inmost core of things —

  As mirrored in his Magic glass

  The lightning-footed Ages pass, —

  And knows nor joy nor Earth's distress,

  But broods on Everlastingness.

    "Thoughts that love not, thoughts that hate not,

    Thoughts that Age and Change await not,

  All unfeeling,

  All revealing,

    Scorning height's and depth's concealing, These be mine — and these

alone I" — Saith the Merman's heart of stone.

  Flashed a radiance far and nigh As from the vertex of the sky, — Lo! a

Maiden beauty-bright

  And mantled with mysterious might Of every power, below, above, That

weaves resistless spell of Love.

  Through the weltering waters cold Shot the sheen of silken gold; Quick

the frozen Heart below Kindled in the amber glow; Trembling Heavenward

Nekkan yearned Rose to where the Glory burned. "Deeper, bluer than the

skies are, Dreaming meres of morn thine eyes are

  All that brightens

  Smile or heightens

  Charm is thine, all life enlightens, Thou art all the soul's desire." — Sang

the Merman's Heart of Fire. "Woe thee, Nekkan! Ne'er was given Thee towalk the ways of Heaven;

  Vain the vision,

  Fate's derision,

  Thee  that  raps  to  realms  elysian,  Fathomless  profounds  are  thine"  —

Quired the answering voice divine.

  Came  an  echo  from  the  West,  Pierced  the  deep  celestial  breast;

Summoned, far the Seraph fled, Trailing splendors overhead; Broad beneath

her flying feet Laughed the silvered ocean-street.

  On the Merman's mortal sight

  Instant fell the pall of Night;

  Sunk to the sea's profoundest floor

  He dreams the vanished Vision o'er,

  Hears anew the starry chime,

  Ponders aye Eternal Time.

    "Thoughts that hope not, thoughts that fear not,

    Thoughts that Man and Demon veer not

  Times unending

    Comprehending,

  Space and worlds of worlds transcending, These are mine — but these

alone!" — Sighs the Merman's heart of stone.

  I have said that the poem, if it receive the interpretation that I have invited

you to give it, throws much light on the human significance of mathematics

and indicates well the place of the normal mathematician in the world of

spiritual interests. No doubt the place of the merman and the place of the

angel  are  not  the  same:  no  doubt  the  world  of  whatsoever  in  thought  is

passionless, infinite and everlasting, and the world of whatsoever in feeling is

high and beauteous and good are distinct worlds, and they are sundered wide

in the poem. But, though in the poem they are held widely apart, in the poet

they are united. For the song is not the merman's song nor are its words the

words  of  the  seraph.  It  is  the  voice  of  the  poet  —  a  voice  of  man.  The

merman's world and the world of the seraph are not the same, they are very

distinct; in conception they are sundered; they may be sundered in life, but in

life it need not be so. The merman indeed is confined to the one world and

the seraph to the other, but man, a man unless he be a merman, may inhabit

them both. For the angel's denial, the derision of fate, is not spoken of man, it

is spoken of the merman; and the merman's sigh is not his own, it is a human

sigh — so lonely seems the merman in the depths of his abode.  No, the world of interests of the human spirit is not the merman's world

alone nor the seraph's alone. It is not so simple. It is rather a cluster of worlds,

of worlds that differ among themselves as differ the lights by which they are

characterized. As differ the lights. The human spirit is susceptible of a variety

of lights and it lives at once in a corresponding variety of worlds. There is

perception's  light,  commonly  identified  with  solar  radiance  or  with  the

radiance of sound, for music,

  too, is, to the spirit, a kind of illumination: perceptional light, in which we

behold  the  colors,  forms  and  harmonies  of  external  nature:  a  beautiful

revelation  —  a  world  in  which  any  one  might  be  willing  to  spend  the

remainder of his days if he were but permitted to live so long. And there is

imagination's  light,  disclosing  a  new  world  filled  with  wondrous  things,

things that may or may not resemble the things revealed in perception's light

but are never identical with them: light that is not superficial nor constrained

to paths that are straight but reveals the interiors of what it illuminates and

phases that look away. Again, there is the light of thought, of reason, of logic,

the light of analysis, far dimmer than perception's light, dimmer, too, than

that of imagination, but far more penetrating and far more ubiquitous than

either of them, disclosing things that curiously match the things that they

disclose and countless things besides, namely, the world of ideas and the

relations that bind them: a cosmic world, in the center whereof is the home of

the merman. There remains to be named a fourth kind of light. I mean the

light of emotion, the radiance and glory of things that, save by gleams and

intimations, are not revealed in perception or in imagination or in thought: the

light of the seraph's world, the world of the good, the true and the beautiful,

of the spirit of art, of aspiration and of religion.

  Such, in brief, is the cluster of worlds wherein dwell the spiritual interests

of the human beings to whom it is our mission to teach mathematics. My

thesis is that it is our privilege to show, in the way of our teaching it, that its

human significance is not confined to one of the worlds but, like a subtle and

ubiquitous ether, penetrates them all. Objectively viewed, conceptually taken,

these worlds, unlike the spheres of the

    geometrician, do not intersect — a thing in one of them is not in another;

but  the  things  in  one  of  them  and  the  things  in  another  may  own  a  fine

resemblance serving for mutual recall and illustration, effecting transfer of

attention — transformation as the mathematicians call it — from world to

world; for whilst these worlds of interest, objectively viewed, have naught incommon, yet subjectively they are united, united as differing mansions of the

house  of  the  human  spirit.  A  relation,  for  example,  between  three

independent variables exists only in the grey light of thought, only in the

world of the merman; the habitation of the geometric locus of the relation is

the world of imagination; if a model of the locus be made or a drawing of it,

this  will  be  a  thing  in  the  world  of  perception;  finally,  the  wondrous

correlation  of  the  three  things,  or  the  spiritual  qualities  of  them  —  the

sensuous beauty of the model or the drawing, the unfailing validity of the

given relation holding as it does throughout "the cycle of the eternal year,"

the immobile presence of the locus or image poised there in eternal calm like

a figure of justice — these may serve, in contemplating them, to evoke the

radiance of the seraph's world: and thus the circuit and interplay, ranging

through  the  world  of  imagination  and  the  world  of  thought  from  what  is

sensuous to what is supernal, is complete. It would not have seemed to Plato,

as it may seem to us, a far cry from the prayer of a poet to the theorem of

Pythagoras, for example, or to that of Archimedes respecting a sphere and its

circumscribing cylinder. Yet I venture to say, that calm reflection upon the

existence and nature of such a theorem — cloistral contemplation, I mean, of

the fact that it is really true, of its serene beauty, of its silent omnipresence

throughout the infinite universe

  of  space,  of  the  absolute  exactitude  and  invariance  of  its  truth  from

everlasting to everlasting — such reflection will not fail to yield a sense of

reverence and awe akin to the feeling that, for example, pervades this choral

prayer by Sophocles:

  "Oh! that my lot may lead me in the path of holy innocence of word and

deed, the path which august laws ordain, laws that in the highest empyrean

had their birth, of which Heaven is the father alone, nor did the race of mortal

men beget them, nor shall oblivion put them to sleep. The god is mighty in

them and he groweth not old."

  But why should we think it strange that interests, though they seem to

cluster about opposite poles, are yet united by a common mood? Of the great

world of human interests, mathematics is indeed but a part; but is a central

part, and, in a profound and precious sense, it is "the eternal type of the

wondrous whole." For poetry and painting, sculpture and music — art in all

its  forms  —  philosophy,  theology,  religion  and  science,  too,  however

passional their life and however tinged or deeply stained by local or temporal

circumstance, yet have this in common: they all of them aim at values whichtranscend the accidents and limitations of every time and place; and so it is

that the passion-lessness of the merman's thought, the infiniteness of the kind

of being he contemplates and the everlasting-ness of his achievements enter

as essential qualities into the ideals that make the glory of the seraph's world.

I do not forget, in saying this, that, of all theory, mathematical theory is the

most  abstract.  I  do  not  forget  that  mathematics  therefore  lends  especial

sharpness to the contrast in the Mephistophe-lian warning:

    HUMAN1ZAT10N OF TEACHING MATHEMATICS ^^

  Grey, my dear friend, is all theory, Green the golden tree of life.

  Yet I know that one who loves not the grey of a naked woodland has

much to learn of the esthetic resources of our northern clime. A mathematical

doctrine, taken in its purity, is indeed grey. Yet such a doctrine, a world-

filling theory woven of grey relationships finer than gossamer but stronger

than cables of steel, leaves upon an intersecting plane a tracery surpassing in

fineness and beauty the exquisite artistry of frost-work upon a windowpane.

Architecture, it has been said, is frozen music. Be it so. Geometry is frozen

architecture.

  No, the belief that mathematics, because it is abstract, because it is static

and cold and grey, is detached from life, is a mistaken belief. Mathematics,

even in its purest and most abstract estate, is not detached from life. It is just

the ideal handling of the problems of life, as sculpture may idealize a human

figure or as poetry or painting may idealize a figure or a scene. Mathematics

is precisely the ideal handling of the problems of life, and the central ideas of

the science, the great concepts about which its stately doctrines have been

built up, are precisely the chief ideas with which life must always deal and

which, as it tumbles and rolls about them through time and space, give it its

interests and problems, and its order and rationality. That such is the case a

few indications will suffice to show. The mathematical concepts of constant

and variable are represented familiarly in life by the notions of fixedness and

change. The concept of equation or that of an equational system, imposing

restriction upon variability, is matched in life by the concept of natural and

spiritual law, giving order to what were else chaotic

  change  and  providing  partial  freedom  in  lieu  of  none  at  all.  What  is

known in mathematics under the name of limit is everywhere present in life

in the guise of some ideal, some excellence high-dwelling among the rocks,

an "ever flying perfect" as Emerson calls it, unto which we may approximate

nearer and nearer, but which we can never quite attain, save in aspiration. Thesupreme concept of functionality finds its correlate in life in the all-pervasive

sense of interdependence and mutual determination among the elements of

the world. What is known in mathematics as transformation — that is, lawful

transfer of attention, serving to match in orderly fashion the things of one

system  with  those  of  another  —  is  conceived  in  life  as  a  process  of

transmutation by which, in the flux of the world, the content of the present

has come out of the past and in its turn, in ceasing to be, gives birth to its

successor, as the boy is father to the man and as things, in general, become

what  they  are  not.  The  mathematical  concept  of  invariance  and  that  of

infinitude, especially the imposing doctrines that explain their meanings and

bear their names — what are they but mathematicizations of that which has

ever been the chief of life's hopes and dreams, of that which has ever been the

object  of  its  deepest  passion  and  of  its  dominant  enterprise,  I  mean  the

finding  of  worth  that  abides,  the  finding  of  permanence  in  the  midst  of

change, and the discovery of the presence, in what has seemed to be a finite

world, of being that is infinite? It is needless further to multiply examples of

a correlation that is so abounding and complete as indeed to suggest a doubt

which is the juster, to view mathematics as the abstract idealization of life, or

to regard life as the concrete realization of mathematics.

  Finally, I wish to emphasize the fact that the great concepts out of which

the so-called higher mathematical branches have grown — the concepts of

variable  and  constant,  of  function,  class  and  relation,  of  transformation,

invariance,  and  group,  of  finite  and  infinite,  of  discreteness,  limit,  and

continuity — I wish, in closing, to emphasize the fact that these great ideas of

the higher mathematics, besides penetrating life, as we have seen, in all its

complexity and all its dimensions, are omnipresent, from the very beginning,

in the elements of mathematics as well. The notion of group, for example,

finds easy and beautiful illustration, not only among the simpler geometric

notions amd configurations, but even in the ensemble of the very integers

with which we count. The like is true of the distinction of finite and infinite,

and of the ideas of transformation, of invariant, and nearly all the rest. Why

should  the  presentation  of  them  have  to  await  the  uncertain  advent  of

graduate years of study? For life already abounds, and the great ideas that

give it its interests, order and rationality, that is to say, the focal concepts of

the higher mathematics, are everywhere present in the elements of the science

as glistening bassets of gold. It is our privilege, in teaching the elements, to

avail ourselves of the higher conceptions that are present in them; it is ourprivilege to have and to give a lively sense of their presence, their human

significance,  their  beauty  and  their  light.  I  do  not  advocate  the  formal

presentation, in secondary schools, of the higher conceptions, in the way of

printed texts, for the printed text is apt to be arid and the letter killeth. What I

wish to recommend is the presentation of them, as opportunity may serve, in

Greek fashion, by means of dialectic, face to face, voice answering to voice,

ani-

  mated  with  the  varying  moods  and  motions  and  accents  of  life  —

laughter, if you will, and the lightning of wit to cheer and speed the slower

currents of sober thought. Of dialectic excellence, Plato at his best, as in the

"Phaedo" or the "Republic," gives us the ideal model and eternal type. But

Plato's  ways  are  frequently  circuitous,  wearisome  and  long.  They  are  ill

suited to the manners of a direct and undeliberate age; and we must find, each

for himself, a shorter course. Somebody imbued with the spirit of the matter,

possessed of ample knowledge and having, besides, the requisite skill and

verve ought to write a book showing, in so far as the printed page can be

made to show, how naturally and swiftly and with what a delightful sense of

emancipation  and  power  thought  may  pass  by  dialectic  paths  from  the

traditional elements of mathematics both to its larger concepts and to a vision

of their bearings on the higher interests of life. I need not say that such a

handling  of  ideas  implies  much  more  than  a  verbal  knowledge  of  their

definitions. It implies familiarity with the doctrines that unfold the meanings

of the ideas defined. It is evident that, in respect of this matter, the scripture

must read: Knowing the doctrine is essential to living the life.  THE  WALLS  OF  THE  WORLD:  OR  CONCERNING  THE  FIGURE

AND THE DIMENSIONS OF THE UNIVERSE OF SPACE 1

  THERE is something a little incongruous in attempting to consider the

subject of this address in a theater or lecture hall whose roof and walls shut

out from view the wide expanses of the world and the azure deeps. For how

can  we,  amid  the  familiar  finite  scenes  of  a  closed  and  blinded  room,

command a fitting mood for contemplating the infinite scenes without and

beyond?  A  subject  that  has  sheer  vastness  for  its  central  or  major  theme

demands for its appropriate contemplation the still expanse of some vast and

open solitude, such as the peak of a lone and lofty mountain would afford,

where the gaze meets no wall save the far horizon and no roof but the starry

sky. Perhaps you will be good enough for the time to transport yourselves, in

imagination, into the stillness of such a solitude, so that in the musing spirit

of the place the questions to be propounded for consideration here may arise

naturally and give us a due sense of their significance and impressiveness.

What are the dimensions and what is the figure of our universe of space?

How big is it and what is its shape? What is the figure of it and what is its

size?

  1 An address delivered under the auspices of the local chapters of the

Society of Sigma Xi at the state universities of Minnesota, Nebraska and

Iowa, April 24, 28 and 30, 1913, respectively, and at a joint meeting of the

chapters of Sigma Xi and Phi Beta Kappa of Columbia University, May 8,

1913. Printed in Science, June 13, 1913.

  I do not mind owning that these questions have haunted me a good deal

from the days of my youth. It happened in those days, though I was not aware

of it nor became aware of it till after many years, that there were then coming

into mathematics, just entering the fringe, so to speak, or the vestibule of the

science, certain striking ideas which, as I venture to "hope we may see, were

destined, if not indeed to enable us to answer the questions with certainty, at

all events to clarify them, to enrich their meaning and to make it possible to

discuss them profitably. It has not been my fortune to meet many persons

who had seriously propounded the questions to themselves or who seemed to

be immediately interested in them when propounded by others — not many,

even among astronomers, whose minds, it may be assumed, are especially

"accustomed to contemplation of the vast." And so I have been forced to the

somewhat  embarrassing  conclusion  that  my  own  long  interest  in  the

questions has been due to the fact of my being of a specially practical turn ofmind. Quite seriously I venture to say that we are here engaged in a practical

enterprise.  .  For  even  if  the  questions  were  in  the  nature  of  the  case

unanswerable, which we do not admit, who does not know how great the

boons that have come to men through pursuit of the unattainable? And who

does not know that, as Mr. Chesterton has said, if you wish really to know a

man, the most practical question to ask is, not about his occupation or his

club membership or his party or church affiliations, but what are his views of

the all-embracing world? What does he think of the universe. Do but fancy

for a moment that in somewise men should come to know the exact shape or

figure and especially the exact size or dimensions of the all-immersing space

of

  our universe. It requires but little imagination, not much reflection, no

extensive  knowledge  of  cosmogonic  history  and  speculation,  no  very

profound  insight  into  the  ways  of  truth  to  men,  it  needs,  I  say,  but  little

philosophic sense to see that such knowledge would in a thousand ways,

direct and indirect, react powerfully upon our whole intelligence, upon all our

attitudes, sentiments and views, transforming our theology, our ethics, our

art, our religion, our philosophy, our literature, our science, and therewith

affecting  profoundly  the  whole  sense  and  manner,  the  tone,  color  and

meaning, of all our institutions and the affairs of daily life. Nothing is quite

so practical, in the sense of being effectual and influential, as the views men

hold, consciously or unconsciously, regarding the great locus of their lives

and their cosmic home.

  In order to discuss the questions before us intelligibly and profitably it is

not necessary by way of clearing the ground to enter far into metaphysical

speculation or into psychological analysis with a view to ascertaining what it

is that we mean or ought to mean by space. We are not obliged to dispute,

much less decide, whether space is subjective or objective or both or indeed

something that, as Plato in the "Timaeus" acutely contends, is neither the one

nor the other. We may or may not agree with the contention of Kant that

space is, not an object, but the form, of outer sense; we may or may not agree

with  the  radically  different  contention  of  PoincarS  that  (geometric  as

distinguished  from  sensible)  space  is  nothing  but  what  is  known  in

mathematics as a group, of which the concept "is imposed on us, not as form

of our sense, but as form of our understanding." It is, I say, not necessary for

us, in tke interest of soundness and intelligibility, to try

  to compose such differences or to attempt a settlement of these profoundand important questions. As to the distinction between sensible space and

geometric space, it would indeed be indispensable to draw it sharply and to

keep it always in mind, if we were undertaking to ascertain what the subject

(or the object) of geometry is, or, what is tantamount, if we were seeking to

get clearly aware of what it is that geometry is about. But in discussing the

subject before us it is unnecessary to be always guarding that distinction; for,

whilst it is the space of geometry, and not sensible space, that we shall be

talking about, yet it would be a hindrance rather than a help if we did not

allow, as we habitually do allow, the two varieties of space — the imagery of

the one, the conceptual characters of the other — to mingle freely in our

thinking. There will be finesse enough for the keenest arrows of our thought

without our going out of the way to find it. A procedure less sophisticated

will suffice. It will be sufficient to regard space as being what, to the layman

and to the student of natural science, it has always seemed to be: a vast region

or room round about us, an immense exteriority, locus of all suspended and

floating objects of outer sense, the whence, where and whither of motion,

theater, in a word, of the ageless drama of the physical universe. In naturally

so construing the term we do not commit ourselves to the philosophy, so-

called,  of  common  sense;  we  thus  merely  save  our  discourse  from  the

encumbrance of needless refinements; for it is obvious that, if space be not

indeed what we have said it seems to be, the seeming is yet a fact, and our

questions would remain without essential change: what, then, we should ask,

are the dimensions and what is the figure of that seeming? Though all the

things contained within that triply

    extended spread or expanse which we call space are subject to the law of

ceaseless change, the expanse itself, the container of all, appears to suffer no

variation  whatever,  but  to  be,  unlike  time,  a  genuine  constant,  the  same

yesterday, today and forever, sole absolute invariant under the infinite host of

transformations that constitute the cosmic flux. Whether it be so in fact, of

course we do not know. We only know that no good reason has ever been

advanced for holding the contrary as an hypothesis.

  And yet there is a sense, which we ought I think to notice, an interesting

sense, in which space seems to be, not a constant, but, like time, a variable.

There is a sense, deeper and juster perhaps than at first we suspect, in which

the space of our universe has in the course of time alternately shrunken and

grown.  During  the  last  century,  for  example,  it  has,  so  it  seems,  greatly

grown, in response, it may be, to an increasing need of the human mind. Bygrown I do not mean grown in the usual sense, I do not mean the biological

sense, I do not mean the sense that was present to the mind of that great man

Leonardo da Vinci, when he wrote in effect as follows: if you wish to know

that the earth has been growing, you have only to observe "how, among the

high mountains, the walls of ancient and ruined cities are being covered over

and concealed by the earth's increase"; and, if you would learn how fast the

earth is growing, you have only to set a vase, filled with pure earth, upon a

roof; to note how green herbs will immediately begin to shoot up; to note that

these, when mature, will cast their seeds; to allow the process to continue

through repetition; then, after the lapse of a decade, to measure the soil's

increase; and, finally, to multiply, in order to have thus determined "how

  much the earth has grown in the course of a thousand years." In this

matter, Leonardo was doubtless wrong. At all events current scientific views

are against him. The earth, we know, has grown, but the growth has been by

accretion, by addition from without, and not, in biologic sense, by expansion

from within (unless, indeed, we adopt the beautiful hypothesis of the poet and

physicist, Theodor Fechner, for which so hard-headed a scientific man as

Bernhardt Riemann had so much respect, the hypothesis, namely, that the

plants, the earth and the stars have souls). The myriad-minded Florentine

was, we of today think, in error, his error being one of those brilliant mistakes

that but few men have been qualified to make. But in saying that space has

grown we do not mean that it has grown in the biologic sense of Leonardo

nor yet in the sense of addition from without. We mean that it has grown as a

thing in mind may grow, as a thing in thought may grow; we mean that it has

grown in men's conception of it. That space has, in this sense, been enlarged

prodigiously in the course of recent time is evident to all. It has been often

said that " the first grand discovery of modern times is the immense extension

of  the  universe  in  space."  It  would  be  juster  to  say  that  the  first  grand

achievement of modern science has been the immense extension of space

itself, the prodigious enlargement of it, in the imagination and especially in

the  thought  of  men.  If  we  will  but  take  the  trouble  to  recall  vividly  the

Mosaic cosmogony, in terms of which most of us have but recently ceased to

frame our sublimest conceptions of the vast: if we remind ourselves of Plato's

"concentric  crystal  spheres,  the  adamantine  axis  turning  in  the  lap  of

necessity, the bands that held the heaven together like a girth that clasps

  a ship, the shaft which led from earth to sky, and which was paced by the

soul in a thousand years"; if we compare these conceptions with our own; ifwe think of "the fields from which our stars fling us their light," fields that

are really near and yet are so far that the swiftest of messengers, capable of

circling  the  earth  eight  times  in  a  second,  requires  for  its  journey  hither

thousands  of  years;  if  we  do  but  make  some  such  comparisons,  we  shall

begin to realize dimly that, compared with modern space — the space of

modern thought — elder space — the space of elder thought — is indeed "but

as a cabinet of brilliants, or rather a little jewelled cup found in the ocean or

the wilderness."

  Suppose  that  in  fact  space  were  thus,  like  time,  not  a  constant,  but  a

variable; suppose it were a mental thing growing with the growth of mind; an

increasing  function  of  increasing  thought;  suppose  it  were  a  thing  whose

enlargement is essential as a psychic condition or concomitant or effect of the

progress  of  science;  would  not  our  questions  regarding  its  figure  and  its

dimensions then lose their meaning? The answer is, no; as rational beings we

should still be bound to ask: what are the dimensions and what is the figure of

space to date? That is not all. If these questions were answered, we could

propound the further questions: whether the space so characterized — the

space  of  the  present  —  is  adequate  to  the  present  needs  of  science,  and

whether it is not destined to yet further expansion in response to the future

needs of thought.

  Men  do  not  feel,  however,  that  such  spatial  enlargements  as  I  have

indicated  are  genuine  enlargements  of  space.  In  spite  of  whatever

metaphysics or psychology may seem obliged to say to the contrary, men feel

that what is nrw in such an enlargement is merely an in-

  crease of enlightenment regarding something old; they feel that what is

new is, not an added vastness, but a discovery of a vastness that always was

and always will be. Let us trust this feeling and, regarding space as constant

from everlasting to everlasting, let us take the questions in their natural intent

and form: what are the dimensions and what is the figure of our universe of

space?

  If you propound these questions to a normal student of natural science,

say to a normal astronomer, his response will be — what? If you appear to

him  to  be  quite  sincere  and  if,  besides,  he  be  in  an  amiable  mood,  his

response  will,  not  improbably,  be  a  significant  shrug  of  the  shoulders,

designed  to  intimate  that  his  time  is  too  precious  to  be  squandered  in

considering questions that, if not meaningless, are at all events unanswerable.

I maintain, on the contrary, that this same student of natural science, andindeed, all other normally educated men and women, have, as a part of their

intellectual stock in trade, perfectly definite answers to both of the questions.

I  do  not  mean  that  they  are  aware  of  possessing  such  wealth  nor  shall  I

undertake to say in advance whether their answers be correct. What I am

asserting and what, with your assistance, I shall endeavor to demonstrate, is

that perfectly precise, very intelligent and perfectly intelligible answers to

both of the questions are logically involved in what every normally educated

mind regards as the securest of its intellectual possessions. In order to show

that such answers are to be found embedded in the content of the normally

educated mind and in order to lay them bare, it will be necessary to have

recourse  to  the  process  of  explication.  Explication,  however,  is  nothing

strange to an academic audience. It is true, indeed, that we

  no longer derive the verb, to educate, from educere, but it is yet a fact, as

every one knows, that a large part of education is eduction — the leading

forth into light what is hidden in the familiar content of our minds.

  What are those answers? I shall present them in the familiar and brilliant

words  of  one  who  in  the  span  of  a  short  life  achieved  a  seven-fold

immortality: immortality as a physicist, as a philosopher, as a mathematician,

as a theologian, as a writer of prose, as an inventor and as a fanatic. From this

brief  but  "immortal"  characterization  I  have  no  doubt  that  you  detect  the

author at once and at once recall the words: Space is an infinite sphere whose

center is everywhere and whose surface is nowhere.

  You  will  observe  that,  without  change  of  meaning,  I  have  substituted

"space" for "universe" and "surface" for "circumference." This brilliant mot

of Blaise Pascal, as every one knows, has long been valued throughout the

world as a splendid literary gem. I am not aware that it has been at any time

regarded seriously as a scientific thesis. It may, however, be so regarded. I

propose to show, with your co-operation, that this exquisite saying of Pascal

expresses  with  mathematical  precision  the  firm,  albeit  unconscious,

conviction of the normally educated mind respecting the size and the shape of

the space of our universe. Be good enough to note carefully at the outset the

cardinal phrases: infinite sphere, center everywhere, surface nowhere.

  If you are told that there is an object completely enclosed and that the

object is equally distant from all parts of the enclosing boundary or wall, you

instantly and rightly think of a sphere having that object as center. Let me ask

you to think of some point, any

    convenient point, P, together with all the straight lines or rays — called asheaf of lines or rays — that, beginning at P, run out from it as far as ever the

nature of space allows. We ask: do all the rays of the sheaf run out equally

far?  It  seems  perfectly  evident  that  they  do,  and  with  this  we  might  be

content. It will be worth while, however, to examine the matter a little more

attentively. Denote by L any chosen line or ray of the sheaf. Choose any

convenient unit of length, say a mile. We now ask: how many of our units,

how many miles can we, starting from P, lay off along L? Lay off, I mean,

not in fact, but in thought. In other words: how many steps, each a mile long,

can we, in traversing L, take in thought? Hereafter let the phrase "in thought"

be understood. Can the question be answered? It can. . Can it be answered

definitely? Absolutely so. How? As follows. Before proceeding, however, let

me beg of you not to hesitate or shy if certain familiar ideas seem to get

submitted  to  the  logical  process—the  mind-expanding  process  —  of

generalization. There is to be no resort to any kind of legerdemain. Let us be

willing to transcend imagination, and, without faltering, to follow thought,

for  thought,  free  as  the  spirit  of  creation,  owns  no  bar  save  that  of

inconsistence  or  self-contradiction.  Consider  the  sequence  of  cardinal

numbers,

  (S) i, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, ....

  The  sequence  is  neither  so  dry  nor  so  harmless  as  it  seems.  It  has  a

beginning; but it has no end, for, by the law of its formation, after each term

there is a next. The difference between a sequence that stops somewhere and

one that has no end is awful. No one, unless spiritually unborn or dead, can

contemplate that gulf without emotions that take hold of the infinite and

    everlasting. Let us compare the sequence with the ray L of our sheaf.

Choose in (5) any number n, however large. Can we go from P along L that

number n of miles? We are certain that we can. Suppose the trip made, a mile

post set up and on it painted the number n to tell how far the post is from P.

As n is any number in (5), we may as well suppose, indeed we have already

implicitly supposed, mile posts, duly distributed and marked, to have been set

up along L to match each and every number in the sequence. Have we thus

set up all the mile posts that L allows? We are certain that we have, for, if we

go out from P along L any possible but definite number of miles, we are

perfectly  certain  that  that  number  is  a  number  in  the  sequence,  and  that

accordingly the journey did but take us to a post set up before. What is the

upshot?  It  is  that  L  admits  of  precisely  as  many  mile  posts  as  there  are

cardinal numbers, neither more nor less. How long is L? The answer is: L isexactly as many miles long as there are integers or terms in the sequence (5).

Can we say of any other line or ray L' of the sheaf what we have said of L?

We are certain that we can. Indeed we have said it, for L was any line of the

sheaf. May we, then, say that any two lines, L and L', of the sheaf are equal?

We  may  and  we  must.  For,  just  as  we  have  established  a  one-to-one

correspondence between the mile posts of L and the terms of (5), so we may

establish a one-to-one correspondence between the mile posts of L and those

of L' t and what we mean by the equality of two classes of things is precisely

the  possibility  of  thus  setting  up  a  one-to-one  correlation  between  them.

Accordingly, all the lines or rays of our sheaf are equal. We can not fail to

note that thus there is forming in our minds the conception of a sphere,

  Q2 THE WALLS OF THE WORLD

  centered at P, larger, however, than any sphere of slate or wood or marble

— a sphere, if it be a sphere, whose radii are the rays of our sheaf. Is not the

thing, however, too vast to be a sphere? Obviously yes, if the lines or rays of

the sheaf have a length that is indefinite, unassignable; obviously no, if their

length be assignable and definite. We have seen the length of a ray contains

exactly as many miles as there are integers or terms in (S). The question,

then, is: has the totality of these terms a definite assignable number? The

answer is, yes. To show it, look sharply at the following fact, a bit difficult to

see only because it is so obvious, being writ, so to speak, on the very surface

of the eye. I wish, in a word, to make clear what is meant by the cardinal

number of any given class of things. The fingers of my right hand constitute a

class of objects; the fingers of my left hand, another class. We can set up a

one-to-one correspondence between the classes, pairing the objects in the one

with those in the other. Any two classes admitting of such a correlation are

said  to  be  equivalent.  Now  given  any  class  K,  there  is  another  class  C

composed of all the classes each of which is equivalent to K. C is called the

cardinal number of K, and the name of C, if it has received a name, tells how

many objects are in K. Thus, if K is the class of the fingers of my right hand,

the word five is the name of the class of classes each equivalent to K. Now to

the application. The terms of (S) constitute a class K (of terms). Has it a

definite number? Yes. What is it? It is the class of all classes each equivalent

to K. Has this number class received a name of its own? Yes, and it has, like

many other numbers, received a symbol, namely, X, read Aleph null. It is,

then, this cardinal number Aleph, not familiar, indeed, but perfectly definite

  as denoting a definite class, it is this that tells us how many terms are in(5) and therewith tells us the length of the rays of our sheaf. Herewith the

concept  that  was  forming  is  now  completely  formed:  space  is  a  sphere

centered at P.

  But is the sphere, as Pascal asserts, an infinite sphere? We may easily see

that it is. Again consider the sequence (S) and with it the similar sequence

(50,

  (S) i, 2, 3, 4, s, 6, 7, • . •, (50 a, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, ..

  Observe that all the terms in (S') are in (5) and that (S) contains terms that

are not in (S f ). (S') is, then, a proper part of (5). Next observe that we can

pair each term in (5) with the term below it in (S 7 ). That is to say: the

whole, (5), is equivalent to one of its parts, (5'). A class that thus has a part to

which it is equivalent is said to be infinite, and the number of things in such a

class is called an infinite number. Aleph is, then, an infinite number, and so

we see that the rays of our sheaf, the radii of our sphere, are infinite in length:

space is an infinite sphere centered at P.

  Finally, what of the phrases, center everywhere, surface nowhere? Can

we give them a meaning consistent with common usage and common sense?

We  can,  as  follows.  Let  O  be  any  chosen  point  somewhere  in  your

neighborhood. By saying that the center P is everywhere we mean that P may

be taken to be any point within a sphere centered at O and having a finite

radius, a radius, that is, whose length in miles is expressed by any integer in

(S). And by saying that the surface of our infinite sphere is nowhere we mean

that no point of the surface can be reached by traveling out from P any finite

number, however large, of miles, by traveling, that

  is, a number of miles expressed by any number, however large, in (5).

  Here we have touched our primary goal: we have demonstrated that men

and women whose education, in respect of space, has been of normal type,

believe  profoundly,  albeit  unawares,  that  the  space  of  our  universe  is  an

infinite sphere of which the center is everywhere and the surface nowhere.

Such is the beautiful conception, the great conception —• mathematically

precise yet mystical withal and awful in its limitless reaches — which is ever

ready to form itself, in the normally educated mind and there to stand a deep-

rooted  conscious  conviction  regarding  the  shape  and  the  size  of  the  all-

embracing world.

  Is the conception valid? Does the conviction correspond to fact? Is it

true? It is not enough that it be intelligible, which it is; it is not enough that it

be  noble  and  sublime,  which  also  it  is.  No  doubt  whatever  is  noble  andsublime is, in some sense, true. For we mortals have to do with more than

reason. Yet science, science in the modern technical sense of the term, having

elected for its field the domain of the rational, allows no superrational tests of

truth to be sufficient or final. We must, therefore, ask: are the dimensions and

the figure of our space, in fact, what, as we have seen, Pascal asserts and the

normally educated mind believes them to be? Long before the days of Pascal,

back yonder in the last century before the beginning of the Christian era, one

of  the  acutest  and  boldest  thinkers  of  all  time,  immortal  expounder  of

Epicurean thought, answered the question, with the utmost confidence, in the

affirmative. I refer to Lucretius and his "De Rerum Natura." In my view that

poem  is  the  greatest  and  finest  union  of  literary  excellence  and  scientific

spirit to

  be found in the annals of human thinking. I maintain that opinion of the

work  despite  the  fact  that  the  majority  of  its  conclusions  have  been

invalidated by time, have perished by supersession; for we must not forget

that, in respect of knowledge, "the present is no more exempt from the sneer

of the future than the past has been." I maintain that opinion of the work

despite the fact that the enterprise of Lucretius was marvelously extravagant;

for we must not forget that the relative modesty of modern men of science is

not inborn, but is only an imperfectly acquired lesson. Well, it is in that great

work that Lucretius endeavors to prove that our universe of space is infinite

in  the  sense  that  we  have  explained.  His  argument,  which  runs  to  many

words, may be briefly paraphrased as follows. Conceive that, starting from

any point of space, you go out in any direction as far as you please, and that

then you hurl your javelin. Either it will go on, in which case there is space

ahead for it to move in, or it will not go on, in which case there must be space

ahead to contain whatever prevents its going. In either case, then, however far

you may have gone, there is yet space beyond. And so, he concludes, space is

infinite, and he triumphantly adds:

  Therefore the nature of room and the space of the unfathomable void are

such  as  bright  thunderbolts  can  not  race  through  in  their  course  though

gliding on through endless tract of time, no nor lessen one jot the journey that

remains to go by all their travel — so huge a room is spread out on all sides

for things without any bounds in all directions round.

  Such is the argument, the great argument, of the Roman poet. Great I call

it, for it is great enough to have fooled all philosophers and men of science

for  two  thousand  years'.  Indeed  only  a  decade  ago  I  heard  the  argumentconfidently employed by an American

  thinker  of  more  than  national  reputation.  But  is  the  argument  really

fallacious? It is. The conclusion may indeed be quite correct — space may

indeed be infinite, as Lucretius asserts — but it does not follow from his

argument. To show the fallacy is no difficult feat. Consider a sphere of finite

radius. We may suppose it to be very small or intermediate or very large —

no matter what its size so long as its radius is finite. By sphere, in this part of

the discussion, I shall mean sphere-surface. Be good enough to note and bear

that in mind. Observe that this sphere — this surface — is a kind of room. It

is a kind of space, region or room where certain things, as points, circle arcs

and countless other configurations can be and move. These things, confined

to this surface, which is their world, their universe of space, if you please,

enjoy a certain amount, an immense amount, of freedom: the points of this

world can move in it hither, thither and yonder; they can move very far,

millions and millions of miles, even in the same direction, if only the sphere

be taken large enough. I see no reason why we should not, for the sake of

vividness,  fancy  that  spherical  world  inhabited  by  two-dimensional

intelligences conformed to their locus and home just as we are conformed to

our own space of three dimensions. I see no reason why we should not fancy

those  creatures,  in  the  course  of  their  history,  to  have  had  their  own

Democritus and Epicurus, to have had their own Roman republic or empire

and in it to have produced the brilliant analogues of our own Virgil, Cicero

and Lucretius. Do but note attentively — for this is the point — that their

Lucretius  could  have  said  about  their  space  precisely  what  our  own  said

about ours. Their Lucretius could have said to his fellow-inhabitants of the

sphere: "starting at any

  point, go as far as ever you please in any straight line" — such line would

of course (as we know) be a great circle of the sphere — "and then hurl your

javelin" the javelin would, as we know, be only an arc of a great circle —

"either it will go on, in which case, etc.; or it will not, etc."; thus giving an

argument identical with that of our own Lucretius. But what could it avail?

We know what would happen to the javelin when hurled as supposed in the

surface: it would go on for a while, there being nothing to prevent it. But

whether it went on or not, it could not be logically inferred that the surface,

the space in question, is infinite, for we know that the surface is finite, just so

many, a finite number of, square miles. The fallacy, at length, is bare. It

consists — the fact has been recently often pointed out — in the age-longfailure  to  distinguish  adequately  between  unbegrenzt  and  unendlich  —

between  boundless  and  infinite  as  applied  to  space.  What  our  fancied

Lucretius proved is, if anything, that the sphere is boundless, but not that it is

infinite. What our real Lucretius proved is, if anything, that the space of our

universe is boundless, but not that it is infinite. That a region or room may be

boundless without being infinite is clearly shown by the sphere (surface).

How evident, once it is drawn, the distinction is. And yet it was never drawn,

in thinking about the dimensions of space, until in 1854 it was drawn by

Riemann in his epoch-marking and epoch-making Habilitalionschrift on the

foundations of geometry.

  What, then, is the fact? Is space finite, as Riemann held it may be? Or is it

infinite, as Lucretius and Pascal deliberately asserted, and as the normally

educated  mind,  ho  we  vet  unconsciously,  yet  firmly  believes?  No  one

"knows. The question is one of the few great out-

  standing  scientific  questions  that  intelligent  laymen  may,  with  a  little

expert assistance, contrive to grasp. Shall we ever find the answer? Time is

long, and neither science nor philosophy feels constrained to haul down the

flag and confess an ignorabimus. Neither is it necessary or wise for science

and philosophy to camp indefinitely before a problem that they are evidently

not yet equipped to solve. They may proceed to related problems, always

reserving the right to return with better instruments and added light.

  In the present instance, let us suppose, for the moment, that Lucretius,

Pascal and the normally educated mind are right: let us suppose that space is

infinite, as they assert and believe. In that case the bounds of the universe are

indeed remote, and yet we may ask: are there not ways to pass in thought the

walls of even so vast a world? There are such ways. But where and how? For

are we not supposing that the walls to be passed are distant by an amount that

is infinite? And how may a boundary that is infinitely removed be reached

and overpassed? The answer is that there are many infinites of many orders;

that infinites are surpassed by other infinites; that infinites, like the stars,

differ  in  glory.  This  is  not  rhetoric,  it  is  naked  fact.  One  of  the  grand

achievements of mathematics in the nineteenth century is to have defined

infinitude (as above defined) and to have discovered that infinites rise above

infinites, in a genuine hierarchy without a summit. In order to show how we

can in thought pass the Lucretian and Pascal walls of our universe, I must ask

you to assume as a lemma a mathematical proposition which has indeed been

rigorously established and is familiar, but the proof of which we can not tarryhere to reproduce. Consider all the real numbers from zero

  to one inclusive, or, what is tantamount, consider all the points in a unit

segment  of  a  continuous  straight  line.  The  familiar  proposition  that  I  am

asking  you  to  assume  is  that  it  is  not  possible  to  set  up  a  one-to-one

correspondence between the points of that segment and the positive integers

(in the sequence above given), but that, if you take away from the segment an

infinitude  (Aleph)  of  points  matching  all  the  positive  integers,  there  will

remain  in  the  segment  more  points,  infinitely  more,  than  you  have  taken

away.  That  means  that  the  infinitude  of  points  in  the  segment  infinitely

surpasses the infinitude of positive integers; surpasses, that is, the infinitude

of mile posts on the radius of our infinite (Pascal) sphere. Now conceive a

straight line containing as many miles as there are points in the segment. You

see at once that in that conception you have overleaped the infinitely distant

walls of the Lucretian universe. Overleaped, did I say? Nay, you have passed

beyond those borders by a distance infinitely greater than the length of any

line contained within them. And thus it appears that, not our imagination,

indeed, but our reason may gaze into spatial abysses beside which the infinite

space of Lucretius and Pascal is but a meager thing, infinitesimally small.

There remain yet other ways by which we are able to escape the infinite

confines of this latter space. One of these ways is provided in the conception

of hyperspaces enclosing our own as this encloses a plane. But that is another

story, and the hour is spent.

  The course we have here pursued has not, indeed, enabled us to answer

with final assurance the two questions with which we set out. I hope we have

seen along the way something of the possibilities involved. I hope we have

gained some insight into the meaning of the

    questions and have seen that it is possible to discuss them profitably. And

especially  I  hope  that  we  have  seen  afresh,  what  we  have  always  to  be

learning again, that it is not in the world of sense, however precious it is and

ineffably wonderful and beautiful, nor yet in the still finer and ampler world

of  imagination,  but  it  is  in  the  world  of  conception  and  thought  that  the

human  intellect  attains  its  appropriate  freedom  —  a  freedom  without  any

limitation save the necessity of being consistent. Consistency, however, is

only a prosaic name for a limitation which, in another and higher realm,

harmony imposes even upon the muses.

    MATHEMATICAL  EMANCIPATIONS:  DIMENSIONALITY  AND

HYPERSPACE 1    AMONG the splendid generalizations effected by modern mathematics,

there is none more brilliant or more inspiring or more fruitful, and none more

nearly commensurate with the limitless immensity of being itself, than that

which produced the great concept variously designated by such equivalent

terms  as  hyperspace,  multidimensional  space,  n-space,  n-fold  or  w-

dimensional space, and space of n dimensions.

  In science as in life the greatest truths are the simplest. Intelligibility is

alike the first and the last demand of the understanding. Naturally, therefore,

those scientific generalizations that have been accounted really great, such as

the  Newtonian  law  of  gravitation,  or  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of

energy, or the all-conquering concept of cosmic evolution, are, all of them,

distinguished by their simplicity and apprehensibility. To that rule the notion

of hyperspace presents no exception. For its fair understanding, for a live

sensibility  to  its  manifold  significance  and  quickening  power,  a  long  and

severe  mathematical  apprenticeship,  however  helpful  it  would  be,  is  not

demanded  in  preparation,  but  only  the  serious  attention  of  a  mature

intelligence  reasonably  inured  by  discipline  to  the  exactions  of  abstract

thought and the austerities of the higher imag-

  1 Printed in Tke Monist, January, 1906. For a deeper view of this subject

the reader may be referred to the ijlh essay of this volume.

  ination. And it is to the reader having this general equipment, rather than

to the professional mathematician as such, that the present communication is

addressed.

  To  a  clear  understanding  of  what  the  mathematician  means  by

hyperspace, it is in the first place necessary to conceive in its full generality

the closely related notion of dimensionality and to be able to state precisely

what  is  meant  by  saying  that  a  given  manifold  has  such  and  such  a

dimensionality,  or  such  and  such  a  number  of  dimensions,  in  a  specified

entity or element.

    Discrimination, as the proverb rightly teaches, is the beginning of mind.

The  first  psychic  product  of  that  initial  psychic  act  is  numerical:  to

discriminate is to produce two, the simplest possible example of multiplicity.

The discovery, or better the invention, better still the production, best of all

the creation, of multiplicity with its correlate of number, is, therefore, the

most primitive achievement or manifestation of mind. Such creation is the

immediate issue of intellection, nay, it is intellection, identical with its deed,

and,  without  the  possibility  of  the  latter,  the  former  itself  were  quiteimpossible. Accordingly it is not matter for surprise but is on the contrary a

perfectly natural or even inevitable phenomenon that explanations of ultimate

ideas  and  ultimate  explanations  in  general  should  more  and  more  avail

themselves of analytic as distinguished from intuitional means and should

tend more and more to assume arithmetic form. Depend upon it, the universe

will never really be understood unless it may be sometime resolved into an

ordered  multiplicity  and  made  to  own  itself  an  everlasting  drama  of  the

calculus.

  Let  us,  then,  trust  the  arithmetic  instinct  as  fundamental  and,  for

instruments of thought that shall not

  fail,  repair  at  once  to  the  domain  of  number.  Every  one  who  may

reasonably aspire to a competent knowledge of the subject in hand is more or

less familiar with the system of real numbers, composed of the positive and

negative integers and fractions, such irrational numbers as V? and TT and

countless hosts of similar numbers similarly definable. He may know that, for

reasons  which  need  not  be  given  here,  the  system  of  real  numbers  is

commonly described as the analytical continuum of second order. He knows,

too, at any rate it is a fact which he will assume and readily appreciate, that

the distance between any two points of a right line is exactly expressible by a

number of the continuum; that, conversely, given any number, two points

may be found whose distance apart is expressed by the numerical value of

that number; that, therefore, it is possible to establish a unique and reciprocal,

or one-to-one, correspondence between the real numbers and the points of a

straight line, namely, by assuming some point of the line as a fixed point of

reference or origin of distances, by agreeing that a distance shall be positive

or negative according as it proceeds from the origin in this sense or in the

other and by agreeing that a point and the number which by its magnitude

reckoned in terms of a chosen finite unit however great or small serves to

express the distance of the point from the origin and by its sign indicates on

which  side  of  the  origin  the  point  is  situated,  shall  be  a  pair  of

correspondents.  Accordingly,  if  the  point  P  glides  along  the  line,  the

corresponding number v will vary in such a way that to each position of the

geometric  there  corresponds  one  value  of  the  arithmetic  element,  and

conversely. P represents v; and v, P. No two P's represent a same p; and no

two c's, a same P. By

  virtue of the correlation thus established with the analytical continuum,

we  may  describe  the  line  as  a  simple  or  one-fold  geometric  continuum,namely, of points. The like may in general be said, and for the same reason,

of any curve whatever, but we select the straight line as being the simplest,

for in matters fundamental we should prefer clearness to riches of illustration,

in the faith that, if first we seek the former, the latter shall in due course be

added  unto  it.  The  straight  line,  when  it  is  regarded  as  the  domain  of

geometric operation, as the region or room containing the configurations or

sets of elements with which we deal, is and is called a space; and this space,

viewed  as  the  manifold  or  assemblage  of  its  points,  is  said  to  be  0w£-

dimensional for the reason that, as we have seen, in order to determine the

position of a point in it, in order, i.e., to pick out or distinguish a point from

all the other points of the manifold, it is necessary and sufficient to know one

fact about the point, as, e.g., its distance from an assumed point of reference.

In other words, the line is called a one-dimensional space of points because in

that  space  the  point  has  one  and  but  one  degree  of  freedom  or,  what  is

tantamount, because the position of the point depends upon the value of a

single v, known as its coordinate.

    Herewith is immediately suggested the generic concept of dimensionality:

if an assemblage of elements of any given kind whatsoever, geometric or

analytic  or  neither,  as  points,  lines,  circles,  triangles,  numbers,  notions,

sentiments, hues, tones, be such that, in order to distinguish every element of

the assemblage from all the others, it is necessary and sufficient to know

exactly n independent facts about the element, then the assemblage is said to

be n-dimensional in the elements of the given kind. It appears,

    therefore, that the notion of dimensionality is by no means exclusively

associated with that of space but on the contrary may often be attached to the

far more generic concept of assemblage, aggregate or manifold. For example,

duration, the total aggregate of time-points, or instants, is a simple or one-

fold  assemblage.  On  the  other  hand,  the  assemblage  of  colors  is  three-

dimensional as is also that of musical notes, for in the former case, as shown

by Clerk Maxwell, Thomas Young and others, every color is composable as a

definite  mixture  of  three  primary  ones  and  so  depends  upon  three

independent  variables  or  coordinates  expressing  the  amounts  of  the

fundamental components. And in the latter case a similar scheme obtains, one

note  being  distinguishable  from  all  others  when  and  only  when  the  three

general marks, pitch, length, and loudness, are each of them specified. In

passing it seems worth while to point out the possibility of appropriating the

name  soul  to  signify  the  manifold  of  all  possible  psychic  experiences,  inwhich  event  the  term  would  signify  an  assemblage  of  probably  infinite

dimensionality, and the assemblage would be continuous, too, if Oswald ! be

right  in  his  contention  that  every  manifold  of  experience  possesses  the

character of continuity. That contention, however, if the much abused term

continuity be allowed to have its single precise definitely seizable scientific

meaning,  is  far  less  easy  to  make  good  than  that  eminent  chemist  and

courageous philosopher seems to think.

    Returning to the concept of space, an n-fold assemblage will be an n-

dimensional space if the elements of the assemblage are geometric entities of

any given kind. We have seen that the straight line is a 0ni-dimensional space

of  points.  But  in  studying  the  right  line  conceived  >  Cf.  his  Natw-

PkUotopkU.

  as a space, we are not compelled to employ the point as element. Instead

we may choose to assume as element the point pair or triplet or quatrain, and

so on. The line would then be for our thought primarily a space, not of points,

but of point pairs or triplets and so on, and it would accordingly be strictly a

space of two dimensions or of three, and so on; for, obviously, to distinguish

say  a  point  pair  from  all  other  such  pairs  we  should  have  to  know  two

independent  facts  about  the  pair.  The  pair  would  have  two  degrees  of

freedom in the line, its determination would depend upon two independent

variables as v\ and DZ- These variables might be the two independent ratios

of the coefficients and absolute term in a quadratic equation in one unknown,

as x, for to know the ratios is to know the equation and therewith its two

roots, the two values of x. These being laid off on the line give the point pair.

Conversely,  a  point  pair  gives  two  values  of  x,  hence  definite  quadratic

equation and so values of v\ and %. On its arithmetic side the shield presents

a precisely parallel doctrine. The simple analytical continuum composed of

the real numbers immediately loses its simplicity and assumes the character

of a 2- or 3- ... or w-fold analytical continuum if, instead of thinking of its

individual numbers, we view it as an aggregate of number pairs or triplets or,

in general, as the totality of ordered systems of n numbers each.

  In the light of the preceding paragraph it is seen that the dimensionality of

a given space is not unique but depends upon the choice of geometric entity

for primary or generating element. A space being given, its dimensionality is

not therewith determined but depends upon the will of the investigator, who

by a proper choice of generating elements may endow the space with any

    dimensionality he pleases. That fact is of cardinal significance alike forscience and for philosophy. I reserve for a little while its further consideration

in order to present at once a kind of complementary fact of equal interest and

of scarcely less importance. It is that two spaces which in every other respect

are  essentially  unlike,  thoroughly  disparate,  may,  by  suitable  choice  of

generating elements, be made to assume equal dimensionalities. Consider, for

example, the totality of lines contained in a same plane and containing a point

in common. Such a totality, called a pencil, of lines is a simple geometric

continuum, namely, of lines. It is, then, and may be called, a 0n«-dimensional

space of lines just as the line or range of points is a one-dimensional space of

points. The two spaces are equally rich in their respective elements. And if,

following Desargues and his successors, we adjoin to the points of the range

a so-called "ideal" point or point at infinity, thus rendering the range like the

pencil,  closed,  it  becomes  obvious  that  two  intelligences,  adapted  and

confined respectively to the two simple spaces in question, would enjoy equal

freedom;  their  analytical  experiences  would  be  identical,  and  their

geometries,  though  absolutely  disparate  in  kind,  would  be  equally  rich  in

content. Just as the range-dweller would discover that the dimensionality of

his space is two in point pairs, three in triplets, and so on, so the pencil-

inhabitant would find his space to be of dimensionality two in line pairs,

three in triplets, and so on without end. It was indicated above that any line,

straight or curved, is a one-dimensional space of points. In that connection it

remains  to  say  that,  speaking  generally,  any  curve,  literally  and  strictly

conceived as the assemblage of its (tangent) lines and so including the point

or pencil

  as  a  special  case,  is  also  a  0w0-dimensional  space  of  lines.  It  is,

moreover, obvious that the foregoing considerations respecting the range of

points and the pencil of lines are, mutatis mutandis, equally valid for any one

of an infinite variety of other analogous spaces, as, e. g., the axal pencil, a

one-fold space of planes, consisting of the totality of planes having a line in

common.

  If perchance some reader should feel an ungrateful sense of impropriety

in our use of the term space to signify such common geometric aggregates as

we have been considering, I gladly own that his state of mind is a perfectly

natural  one.  But  it  is,  besides  and  on  that  account,  a  source  of  real

encouragement.  Dictional  sensibility  is  a  hopeful  sign,  being  conclusive

evidence of life, and, while there is life, there remains the possibility and

therewith the hope of readjustment. In the present case, £ venture to assurethe reader, on grounds both of personal experience and of the experience of

others,  that  whatever  sense  he  may  have  of  injury  received  will  speedily

disappear  in  the  further  course  of  his  meditations.  Only,  let  him  not  be

impatient. Larger meanings must have time to grow; the smaller ones, those

that are most natural and most provincial, being also the most persistent. In

the process of clarification, expansion and readjustment, his fine old word,

space, early come into his life and gradually stained through and through with

the refracted partial lights and multi-colored prejudices of his youth, is not to

be robbed of its proper charms nor to be shorn of its proper significance.

More than it will lose of mystery, it shall gain of meaning. Of this last it has

hitherto had for him but little that was of scientific value, but little that was

not vague and elusive and ultimately unseizable. That was because the word

  stood  for  something  absolutely  sui  generis,  i.  e.,  for  a  genus  neither

including species nor being itself included in a class. But now, on the other

hand, both of these negatives are henceforth to be denied, and the hitherto

baffling term, perfect symbol of the unthinkable, always promising and never

presenting definable content, immediately assumes the characteristic twofold

aspect of a genuine concept, being at once included as member of a higher

class,  the  more  generic  class  of  manifolds,  and  including  within  itself  an

endless variety of individuals, an infinitude of species of space.

  Of  these  species,  the  next  in  order  of  simplicity,  to  those  above

considered, is the plane. To distinguish a point of a plane from all its other

points, it is necessary and sufficient to know two independent facts about its

position, as, e. g., its distances from two assumed lines of reference, most

conveniently taken at right angles. Viewed as the ensemble of its points, the

plane is, therefore, a space of two dimensions. In that space, the point enjoys

a freedom exactly twice that of a point in a range or of a line in a pencil, and

exactly equal to that of a pair of points or of lines in the last-mentioned

spaces. On the other hand, if the point pair be taken as element of the plane,

the latter becomes a space of four dimensions.

  What if the line be taken as generating element of the plane? It is obvious

that the plane is equally rich in pencils and in ranges. It contains as many

lines as points, neither more nor less. Two points determine a line; two lines,

a point; if the lines be parallel, their common point is a Desarguesian, a point

at infinity. We should therefore expect to find that in a plane the position of a

line  depends  upon  two  and  but  two  independent  variables.  And  the

expectation is realized, as  it is easy to see. For if the variables be taken to represent (say) distances

measured from chosen points along two lines of reference, it is immediately

evident that a given pair of values of the variables determines a line uniquely

and that, conversely, a given line uniquely determines such a pair. The plane

is, therefore, a too-dimensional space of lines as well as of points. In line

pairs, as in point pairs, its dimensionality is four. We may suppose the space

in question to be inhabited by two sorts of individuals, one of them capable of

thinking in terms of points but not of lines, the other in terms of lines but not

of  points.  Each  would  find  his  space  bi-dimensional.  They  would  enjoy

precisely  the  same  analytical  experience.  Between  their  geometries  there

would subsist a fact-to-fact correspondence but not the slightest resemblance.

For  example,  the  circle  would  be  for  the  former  individual  a  certain

assemblage  of  points  but  devoid  of  tangent  lines,  and,  for  the  latter,  a

corresponding assemblage of (tangent) lines but devoid of contact points.

  Passing from the plane to a curved surface, to a sphere, for example, a

little  reflection  suffices  to  show  that  the  latter  may  be  conceived  in  a

thousand and one ways, but most simply as the ensemble of its points or of its

(tangent) planes or of its (tangent) lines. These various concepts are logically

equivalent and in themselves are equally intelligible. And if to us they do not

seem  to  be  also  equally  good,  that  is  doubtless  because  we  are  but  little

traveled in the great domain of Reason and therefore naturally prefer our

familiar customs and provincial points of view to others that are strange. At

all events, it is certain that on purely rational grounds, none of the concepts in

question is to be preferred, while, from preference based on other

    grounds, it is the office alike of science and of philosophy to provide the

means of emancipation. Let us, then, detach ourselves from the vulgar point

of  view  and  for  a  moment  contemplate  the  three  concepts  as  coordinate

indeed but independent concepts of surface. And for the sake of simplicity,

we may think of a sphere. 1 Suppose it placed upon a plane and imagine its

highest point, which we may call the pole, joined by straight lines to all the

points of the plane. Each line pierces the sphere in a second point. It is plain

that thus a one-to-one correspondence is set up between the points of the

sphere and those of the plane, except that the pole corresponds at once to all

the Desarguesian points of the plane — an exception, however, which is here

of no importance. The plane and the sphere are, then, equally rich in points.

Accordingly, the sphere conceived as a plenum or locus or space of points is

a  space  of  two  dimensions.  In  that  space  the  point  has  two  degrees  offreedom. Its position depends upon two independent variables, as latitude and

longitude. But we may conceive the surface quite otherwise: at each of its

points there is a (tangent) plane, and now, disregarding points, we may think

only of the assemblage of those planes. These together constitute a sphere,

not, however, as a locus of points, but as an envelope (as it is called) of

planes. And what shall we say of the surface as thus conceived? The answer

obviously  is  that  it  is  a  taw-dimensional  space  of  planes,  admitting  of  a

geometry quite as rich and as definite as is the theory of any other space of

equal dimensionality. In each of the planes there is a pencil of lines of which

each is tangent to the sphere. Thus we are led to a third

  1 The term is here employed as in the higher geometry to denote, not a

solid, byt a surface.

    conception of our surface. We have merely to disregard both points and

planes and confine our attention to the assemblage of lines. The vision which

thus  arises  is  that  of  a  /Aree-dimensional  space  of  lines.  In  pencils,  its

dimensionality is two. In this space the pencil has two and the line three

degrees of freedom.

  But let us return to the plane. We have seen that at the geometrician's

bidding it plays the r61e of a twofold space either in points or in lines. It is

natural to ask whether it may be conceived as a space of three dimensions,

like the sphere in its third conception. The answer is affirmative: it may be so

conceived, and that in an infinity of ways. Of these the simplest is to assume

the circle as primary or generating element. Of circles the plane contains a

threefold infinity, an infinity of infinities of infinities. It is a circle continuum

of third order. To distinguish any one of its circles from all the rest, three

independent  data,  two  for  position  and  one  for  size,  are  necessary  and

sufficient.  In  the  plane  the  circle  has  three  degrees  of  freedom,  its

determination  depends  upon  three  independent  variables.  The  plane  is,

accordingly,  a  tri  :  dimensional  space  of  circles.  In  parabolas  its

dimensionality is four; in conies, five; and so on without limit.

  Before  turning  to  space,  ordinarily  so-called,  it  seems  worth  while  to

indicate another geometric continuum which, although it presents no likeness

whatever to the plane, nevertheless matches it perfectly in every conceptual

aspect. The reference is to the sheaf, or bundle, of lines, i. e., the totality of

lines having a point in common. The point is to be disregarded and the lines

viewed as non-decomposable entities, like points in a line or plane regarded

as an assemblage of points. Thus conceived, the sheaf is literally a space,namely, of lines.

  It is, in the vulgar sense of the term, just as big, occupies precisely as

much room, nay indeed the same room, as the space in which we live. The

sheaf as a space is taw-dimensional in lines, like the plane in points; two-

dimensional in pencils, like the plane in lines; four-dimensional in line or

pencil  pairs,  like  the  plane  in  point  or  line  pairs;  /Aree-dimensional  in

ordinary cones, like the plane in circles; and so on and on.

  In the light of the foregoing considerations, any hitherto uninitiated reader

will probably suspect that ordinary space is not, as it is commonly supposed

and  said  to  be,  an  inherently  and  uniquely  /Arce-dimensional  affair.  His

suspicion is completely justified by fact. The simple traditional affirmation of

tri-dimensionality is devoid of definite meaning. It is unconsciously elliptic,

requiring for its completion and precision the specification of an appropriate

geometric  entity  for  generating  element.  Merely  to  say  that  space  is  tri-

dimensional because a solid, e. g., a plank, has length, breadth and thickness,

is too crude for scientific purposes. Moreover, it betrays, quite unwittingly

indeed as we shall see, an exceedingly meager point of view. Not only does it

assume the point as element but it does so tacitly because unconsciously, as if

the point were not merely an but the element of ordinary space. An element

the point may obviously be taken to be, and in that element ordinary space is

indeed tri-dimensional, for the position of a point at once determines and is

determined by three independent data, as its distances from three assumed

mutually perpendicular planes of reference. It must be admitted, too, that the

point does, in a sense, recommend itself as the element par excellence, at

least for practical purposes. For example, we prefer to do our drawing with

the point of a pencil to doing it with a

  straight  edge.  But  that  is  a  matter  of  physical  as  distinguished  from

rational convenience. Preference for the point has, then, a cause: in the order

of  evolution,  practical  man  precedes  man  rational  and  determines  for  the

latter his initial choices. Causes, however, are extra-logical things, and the

preference  in  question,  though  it  has  indeed  a  cause,  has  no  reason.

Accordingly, when in these modern times, the geometrician became clearly

conscious that he was in fact and had been from time immemorial employing

the point as element and that it was this use that lent to space its traditional

triplicity of dimensions, he did not fail to perceive almost immediately the

logically equal possibility of adopting at will for primary element any one of

an  infinite  variety  of  other  geometric  entities  and  so  the  possibility  ofrationally  endowing  ordinary  space  with  any  prescribed  dimensionality

whatever.

  Thus, for example, the plane is no less available for generating element

than is the point. The plane is logically and intuitionally just as simple, for, if

from force of habit, we are tempted to analyze the plane into an assemblage

of points, the point is in its turn equally conceivable as or analyzable into an

assemblage of planes, the sheaf of planes containing the point. We may, then,

regard  our  space  as  primarily  a  plenum  of  planes.  To  determine  a  plane

requires  three  and  but  three  independent  data,  as,  say,  the  distances  to  it

measured along three chosen lines from chosen points upon them. It follows

that ordinary space is three-dimensional in planes as well as in points. But

now if (with Pliicker) we think of the line as element, we shall find that our

space has four dimensions. That fact may be seen in various ways, most

easily perhaps as follows. A line is determined by any two of its points.

  Every line pierces every plane. By joining the points of one plane to all

the points of another, all the lines of space are obtained. To determine a line it

is, then, enough to determine two of its points, one in the one plane and one

in the other. For each of these determinations, two data, as before explained,

are necessary and sufficient. The position of the line is thus seen to depend

upon four independent variables, and the four-dimensionality of our space in

lines is obvious. Again, we may (with Lie) view our space as an assemblage

of its spheres. To distinguish a sphere from all other spheres, we need to

know four and but four independent facts about it, as, say, three that shall

determine its center and one its size. Hence our space is four-dimensional

also in spheres. In circles its dimensionality is six; in surfaces of second order

(those that are pierced by a straight line in two points), nine; and so on ad

infinitum.

    Doubtless the reader is prepared to say that, if the foregoing account of

hyperspace be correct, the notion is after all a very simple one. Let him be

assured, the account is correct and his judgment is just: the notion is simple.

That  property,  as  said  in  the  beginning,  is  indeed  one  of  its  merits.  As

presented the concept is entirely free from mystery. To seize upon it, it is

unnecessary to pass the bounds of the visible universe or to transcend the

limits of intuition. Its realization is found even in the line, in the pencil, in the

plane, in the sheaf, here, there and yonder, everywhere, in fact. The account,

however, though quite correct, is not yet complete. The term hyperspace has

yet another meaning and yet in strictness not another, as we shall see. It willbe  noticed  that  among  the  foregoing  examples  of  hyperepace,  none  is

presented of dimensionality exceed-

  ing three in points. It is precisely this variety of hyper-space that the term

is  commonly  employed  to  signify,  particularly  in  popular  enquiry  and

philosophical  speculation.  And  it  is  this  variety,  too,  that  just  because  it

baffles  the  ordinary  visual  imagination,  proves  to  be,  for  the  non-

mathematician  at  any  rate,  at  once  so  tantalizing,  so  mysterious  and  so

fascinating.

  It remains, then, to ask, what is meant by a hyper-space of points? How is

the notion formed and what is its motivity and use? The path of enquiry is a

familiar one and is free from logical difficulty. Granted that a one-to-one

correspondence can be established between the real numbers and the points

of  a  right  line,  so  that  the  geometric  serve  to  represent  the  arithmetic

elements;  granted  that  all  (ordered)  pairs  of  numbers  are  similarly

representable by the points of a plane, and all (ordered) triplets by the points

of ordinary space; the suggestion then naturally presents itself that, whether

there really is or not, there ought to be a space whose points would serve to

represent,  as  in  the  preceding  cases,  all  ordered  systems  of  values  of  n

independent variables; and especially to an analyst with a strong geometric

predilection,  to  one  who  is  a  born  Vorstellender  for  whom  analytic

abstractions naturally tend to take on figure and assume the exterior forms of

sense, that suggestion comes with a force which he alone perhaps can fully

appreciate. And what does he do? Not finding the desiderated hyperspace

present to his vision or intuition or visual imagination, he posits it, or if you

prefer, he creates it, in thought. The concept of hyperspace of points is thus

seen to be off-spring of Arithmetic and Geometry. It is legitimate fruit of the

indissoluble union of the fundamental sciences.

  Does such hyperspace exist? It does exist genuinely.

  If not for intuition, it exists for conception; if not for imagination, it exists

for thought; if not for sense, it exists for reason; if not for matter, it exists for

mind.  These  if's  are  ifs  in  fact.  The  question  of  imaginability  is  really  a

question. We shall return to it presently.

  The concept of hyperspace of points is generable in various other ways.

Of all ways the following is perhaps the best because of its appeal at every

stage to intuition. Let there be two points and grant that these determine a

line, point-space of one dimension. Next posit a point outside of this line and

suppose it joined by lines to all the points of the given line. The points of thejoining lines together constitute a plane, point-space of two dimensions. Next

posit a point outside of this plane and suppose it joined by lines to all the

points of the plane. The points of all the joining lines together constitute an

ordinary space, point-space of three dimensions. The clue being now familiar

to our hand, let us boldly pursue the opened course. Let us overleap the limits

of common imagination, transcend ordinary intuition as being at best but a

non-essential auxiliary, and in thought posit an extra point that, for thought at

all events, shall be outside the space last generated. Suppose that point joined

by lines to all the points of the given space. The points of the joining lines

together  constitute  a  point-space  of  four  dimensions.  The  process  here

applied is perfectly clear and obviously admits of endless repetition.

    Moreover, the process is equally available for generating hyperspaces of

other elements than points. For example, let there be two intersecting lines

and grant that these determine a pencil, line-space of one dimension. Next

posit a line (through the vertex) outside of the given pencil and suppose it

joined by pencils to all

  the lines of the given pencil. The lines of the joining pencils together

constitute a sheaf, line-space of two dimensions. Next posit a line (through

the vertex) outside of the sheaf and suppose it joined by pencils to all the

lines of the sheaf. The lines of the joining pencils constitute a hypersheaf,

line-space of three dimensions. The next step plainly leads to a line-space of

four dimensions; and so on ad infinitum.

  And  now  as  to  the  question  of  imaginability.  Is  it  possible  to  intuit

configurations in a hyperspace of points? Let it be understood at the outset

that that is not in any sense a mathematical question, and mathematics as

such is quite indifferent to whatever answer it may finally receive. Neither is

the  question  primarily  a  question  of  philosophy.  It  is  first  of  all  a

psychological question. Mathematicians, however, and philosophers are also

men  and  they  may  claim  an  equal  interest  perhaps  with  others  in  the

profounder questions concerning the potentialities of our common humanity.

The question, as stated, undoubtedly admits of affirmative answer. For the

lower spaces, with which the imagination is familiar, exist- in the higher, as

the line in the plane, and the plane in ordinary space. But that is not what the

question means. It means to ask whether it is possible to imagine hyper-

configurations  of  points,  i.e.,  point-configurations  that  are  not  wholly

contained in a point-space (like our own) of three dimensions. It is impossible

to answer with absolute confidence. One reason is that the term imaginationstill  awaits  precision  of  definition.  Undoubtedly  just  as  three-dimensional

figures may be represented in a plane, so four-dimensional figures may be

represented in space. That, however, is hardly what is meant by imagining

them. On the other hand, a four-dimensional figure

    MATHEMATICAL EMANCIPATIONS

  may be rotated and translated in such a way that all of its parts come one

after another into the threefold domain of the ordinary intuition. Again, the

structure of a fourfold figure, every minutest detail of its anatomy, can be

traced  out  by  analogy  with  its  three-dimensional  analogue.  Now  in  such

processes, repetition yields skill, and so they come ultimately to require only

amounts of energy and of time that are quite inappreciable. Such skill once

attained, the parts of a familiar fourfold configuration may be made to pass

before the eye of intuition in such swift and effortless succession that the

configuration seems present as a whole in a single instant. If the process and

result are not, properly speaking, fourfold imagination and fourfold image, it

remains for the psychologist to indicate what is lacking.

    Certainly there is naught of absurdity in supposing that under suitable

stimulation the human mind may in course of time even speedily develop a

spatial intuition of four or more dimensions. At present, as the psychologists

inform  us  and  as  every  teacher  of  geometry  discovers  independently,  the

spatial imagination, in case of very many persons, comes distinctly short of

being strictly even tri-dimensional. On the contrary, it is flat. It is not every

one, even among scholars, that with eyes closed can readily form a visual

image of the whole of a simple solid like a sphere, enveloping it completely

with  bent  beholding  rays  of  psychic  light.  In  such  defect  of  imagination,

however, there is nothing to astonish. In the first place, man as a race is only

a child. He has been on the globe but a little while, long indeed compared

with the fleeting evanescents that constitute the most of common life, but

very short, the merest fraction of a second, in the infinite stretch of time. In

the second place, circumstances have not, in

  general, favored the development of his higher potentialities. His chief

occupation has been the destruction and evasion of his enemies, contention

for mere existence against hostile environment. Painful necessity, then, has

been the mother of his inventions. That, and not the vitalizing joy of self-

realization, has for the most part determined the selection of the fashion of his

faculties. But it would be foolish to believe that these have assumed their

final form or attained the limits of their potential development. The imperiousrule of necessity will relax. It will never pass quite away but it will relax. It is

relaxing.  It  has  relaxed  appreciably.  The  intellect  of  man  will  be

correspondingly quickened. More and more will joy in its activity determine

its modes and forms. The multi-dimensional worlds that man's reason has

already created, his imagination may yet be able to depict and illuminate.

  It  remains  to  ask,  finally,  what  purpose  the  concept  of  hyperspace

subserves. Reply, partly explicit but chiefly implicit, is not, I trust, entirely

wanting in what has been already said. Motivity, at all events, and raison

d'etre are not far to seek. On the one hand, the great generalization has made

it possible to enrich, quicken and beautify analysis with the terse, sensuous,

artistic,  stimulating  language  of  geometry.  On  the  other  hand,  the

hyperspaces are in themselves immeasurably interesting and inexhaustibly

rich fields of research. Not only does the geometrician find light in them for

the illumination of many otherwise dark and undiscovered properties of the

ordinary spaces of intuition, but he also discovers there wondrous structures

quite unknown to ordinary space. These he examines. He handles them with

the delicate instruments of his analysis. He beholds them with the eye

  of the understanding and delights in the presence of their supersensuous

beauty.

  Creation of hyperspaces is one of the ways by which the rational spirit

secures release from limitation. In them it lives ever joyously, sustained by an

unfailing sense of infinite freedom.

  THE  UNIVERSE  AND  BEYOND:  THE  EXISTENCE  OF  THE

HYPERCOSMIC l

  Ni  la  contradiction  n'est  marque  de  faussete,  ni  I'incontradiction  n'est

marque de verite. — PASCAL

  THE inductive proof of the doctrine of evolution seems destined to be

ultimately  judged  as  the  great  contribution  of  Natural  Science  to  modern

thought. Among the presuppositions of that doctrine, among the axioms, as

one may call them, of science, are found the following: —

  (1)  The  assumption  of  the  universal  and  eternal  reign  of  law:  the

assumption that the universe, the theatre of evolution, the field of natural

science, is and eternally has been a genuine Cosmos, an incarnate rational

logos, an embodiment of reason, an organic affair of order, a closed domain

of invariant uniformities, in which waywardness and chance have had nor

part  nor  lot:  an  infinitely  intricate  garment,  ever  changing,  yet  always

essentially the same, woven, warp and weft alike, of mathetic relationships.  (2) The assumption, not merely that the universe is cosmic through and

through, but that it is the all conjunctively — the all, that is, in the sense of

naught excluded; the assumption, in other words, that it is not merely a but

the cosmos, the sole system of law and order and harmony, the complete and

perfect embodiment of the whole of truth.

  Such, I take it, are among the principles, the articles of faith, more or less

consciously  held  by  the  great  majority  of  the  men  of  science  and  their

adherents.

  As  for  myself,  I  am  unable  to  hold  these  tenets  either  as  self-evident

truths, or as established facts, or as propositions the proof of which may be

confidently awaited. Truth, for example, especially when contemplated in its

relations to curiosity — at once the psychic product and psychic agency of

evolution — less seems a completed thing coeval with the world than a thing

derived  and  still  becoming.  Again,  while  the  assumption  of  the  cosmic

character of our universe is of the greatest value as a working hypothesis, I

am unable to find in the method of natural science or in that of mathematics

any ground, even the slightest, for expecting conclusive proof of its validity.

In striking contrast, on the other hand, with this negative thesis, there is found

in the realm of pure thought, in the domain of mathematics, very convincing

evidence,  not  to  say  indubitable  proof  of  the  proposition,  that  no  single

cosmos, whether our universe be such or not, can enclose every rationally

constructive system of truth, but that any universe is a component of an extra-

universal, that above every nature is a super-natural, beyond every cosmos a

hypercosmic.

  These are among the theses presented in the following pages, not in a

controversial spirit, let me add, nor accompanied by the minuter arguments

upon which they ultimately rest.

  We  all  must  allow  that  truth  is.  To  deny  it  denies  the  denial.  Such

scepticism is cut away by the sweeping blade of its own unsparing doubt. But

what it is — that is another matter. The assumption that truth is an agreement

or correspondence between concepts and

  things, between thought and object, is of very great value in practical

affairs; it very well serves, too, the immediate purposes of natural science,

especially in its cruder stage, before it has learned by critical reflection on its

own processes and foundations to suspect its limitations, and while, like the

proverbial "chesty" youth who disdains the meagre wisdom of his father, it is

apt to proclaim, innocently enough if somewhat boastfully, a lofty contemptfor  all  philosophy  and  metaphysics.  Although  the  assumption  has  the

undoubted merit of being thus useful in high degree, it is, when regarded as a

definitive formulation of what we mean by truth, hardly to be accepted. For,

not only does it imply — what may indeed be quite correct, but is far from

being demonstrated, and far from being universally allowed — namely, that

"thing" is one and "concept" another, that "object" and "thought" are twain,

but even if we grant such ultimate implied duality, it remains to ask what that

"agreement" is, or "correspondence," that mediates the hemispheres and gives

the  whole  its  truth.  The  assumption  is  slightly  too  na'ive  and"

unsophisticated, a little too redolent of an untamed soil and primitive stage of

cultivation.  Much  profounder  is  that  insight  of  Hegel's,  that  truth  is  the

harmony  which  prevails  among  the  objects  of  thought.  If,  with  that

philosopher, we identify object and thought, we have at once the pleasing

utterance that truth is the harmony of ideas. But here, again, easy reflection

quickly finds no lack of difficulties. For what should we say an idea is? And

is there really nothing else, except, of course, their harmony? And what is

that? And is there no such thing as contradiction and discord? Is that, too, a

kind of truth, a kind of harmonious jangling, a melody of dissonance?

  The fact seems to be that truth is so subtle, diverse, and manifold, so

complex  of  structure  and  rich  in  aspect,  as  to  defy  all  attempt  at  final

definition. Nay, more, the difficulty lies yet deeper, and is in fact irre-soluble.

Being a necessary condition thereto, truth can not be an object of definition.

To  suppose  it  defined  involves  a  contradiction,  for  the  definition,  being

something new, is something besides the truth defined, but it must itself be

true, and, if it be, in that has failed — the enclosing definition is not itself

enclosed, and straightway asks a vaster line to take it in, and so ad in fin it

urn. To define truth would be to construct a formula that should include the

structure,  to  conceive  a  water-compassed  ocean,  bounded  in  but  shutting

nothing out, a self-immersing sea, without bottom or surface or shore.

    Happily,  to  be  indefinable  is  not  to  be  unknowable  and  not  to  be

unknown. And we are absolutely certain that truth, whatever it may be, is

somehow the complement of curiosity, is the proper stuff, if I may so express

it, to answer questions with. Now a question, once one comes to think of it, is

a rather odd phenomenon. Half the secret of philosophy, said Leibnitz, is to

treat the familiar as unfamiliar. So treated, curiosity itself is a most curious

thing. How blind our familiar assumptions make us! Among the animals,

man, at least, has long been wont to regard himself as a being quite apartfrom  and  not  as  part  of  the  cosmos  round  about  him.  From  this  he  has

detached himself in thought, he has estranged and objectified the world, and

lost the sense that he is of it. And this age-long habit and point of view,

which  has  fashioned  his  life  and  controlled  his  thought,  lending  its

characteristic mark and colour to his whole philosophy and art and

  learning, is still maintained, partly because of its convenience no doubt,

and partly by force of inertia and sheer conservatism, in the very teeth of the

strongest  probabilities  of  biologic  science.  Probably  no  other  single

hypothesis  has  less  to  recommend  it,  and  yet  no  other  so  completely

dominates the human mind. Suppose we deny the assumption, as we seem

indeed compelled to do, in the name of science, and readjoin ourselves in

thought, as we have ever been joined in fact, to this universe in which we live

and  have  our  being;  the  other  half  of  the  secret  of  philosophy  will  be

revealed, or illustrated at all events, in the strangeness of aspect presented by

things before familiar. Note the radical character of the transformation to be

effected. The world shall no longer be beheld as an alien thing, beheld by

eyes that are not its own. Conception of the whole and by the whole shall

embrace us as part, really, literally, consciously, as the latest term, it may be,

of an advancing sequence of developments, as occupying the highest rank

perhaps  in  the  ever-ascending  hierarchy  of  being,  but,  at  all  events,  as

emerged and still emerging natura • naturata from some propensive source

within. I grant that the change in point of view is hard to make — old habits,

like walls of rock, tending to confine the tides of consciousness within their

accustomed channels — but it can be made and, by assiduous effort, in the

course  of  time,  maintained.  Suppose  it  done.  By  that  reunion,  the  whole

regains, while the part retains, the consciousness the latter purloined. I cannot

pause to note even the most striking consequences of such a change in point

of view. Time would fail me to follow far the opening lines of speculation

that issue thence and invite pursuit. But I cannot refrain from pointing out

how exceedingly curi-

  ous a thing curiosity itself becomes when beheld and contemplated from

the mentioned point of view. For it is now the whole that meditates, the

universe  that  contemplates  —  a  once  mindless  universe  according  to  its

present understanding of the term, not then knowing that it was, unwittingly

unwitting throughout a beginningless eternal past what it had been or was or

was to be; lawless, too, perhaps, could the stream of events be reascended,

though blindly and slowly becoming lawful through habit-taking tendence: aself-transforming  insensate  mass  composed  of  parts  without  likeness  or

distinction,  continually  undergoing  change  without  a  purpose,  devoid  of

passion, and neither ignorant nor having knowledge. At length a wondrous

crisis came, an event momentous — when or how is yet unknown, perhaps

through fortuitous concourse of part-less, lawless, wayward elements. At all

events, the un-intending tissues formed a nerve, the universe awoke alive

with wonder, mind was born with curiosity and began to look about and

make report of part to part and thence to whole, the age of interrogation was

at hand, and what had been an eternal infinity of mindless being began to

question,  and  know  itself,  and  have  a  sense  of  ignorance.  In  the  whole

universe of events, none is more wonderful than the birth of wonder, none

more curious than the nascence of curiosity itself, nothing to compare with

the dawning of consciousness in the ancient dark and the gradual extension of

psychic life and illumination throughout a cosmos that before had only been.

An eternity of blindly acting, transforming, unconscious existence, assuming

at length, through the birth of sense and intellect, without loss or break of

continuity, the abiding form of fleeting time/ Another eternity remains to

follow, and one

  cannot  but  wonder  whether  there  shall  issue  forth  in  future  from  the

marvel-weaving loom another event, or form or mode of being, that shall be

to  the  modern  universe  that  both  is  and  knows,  as  the  birth  of  soul  and

curiosity to the ancient universe that was but did not know. A speculation by

no means idle, but let it pass.

  I wish to point out next, briefly, that curiosity is not only a principle that

leads to knowing, but a principle and process of growing. By it the universe

comes not merely to understand itself, but actually to get bigger thereby. For

if there be an invariant amount of matter, there is also mind increasing; if

there be objects that total a constant sum, there are also ideas that multiply. A

new query and a new answer are new elements in the world, by which the

latter  is  added  unto  and  enriched.  Curiosity  is  the  aspect  of  the  universe

seeking  to  realise  itself,  and  the  fruit  of  such  activity  is  new  reality,

stimulating to new research. Imagine a body with an inner core of outward-

striving impulses producing buds at every radial terminus. Such is knowledge

—  a  kind  of  proliferating  sphere,  expanding  along  divergent  lines  by  the

outward-seeking of an inner life of wonder. Wherefore, it appears again that

truth, the complement of curiosity, itself grows with the latter's growth, and,

being never a finished thing, but one that both is and is becoming, is not to becompassed by definition nor fully solved in knowledge.

  In  respect  to  truth,  then,  the  upshot  is:  we  are  certain  that  it  is;  not,

however, as a closed or completed scheme of relationships, but as a kind of

reality characterised by the phenomena of growth and of becoming; it does

not admit of ultimate definition; we know, however, in a super-verbal sense,

through myriad manifestations of it to a faculty in us of feeling for it, what

  it is; we recognise it as the motive power, the elixir vita, the sustaining

spring  of  wonder;  it  discovers  itself  as  the  wherewithal  for  the  proper

fulfilment of the implicit predictions and intimations of curiosity; as the thing

presaged in a spiritual craving, confidently, persistently proclaiming its needs

by an infinitude of questionings.

  And now as to the remainder of my subject, the tale is quite too long to be

told in full. But room must be found for a partial account, for important

fragments at all events.

  What, then, shall we say mathematics is? A question much discussed by

philosophers and mathematicians in the course of more than two thousand

years, and especially with deepened interest and insight in our own time.

Many an answer has been given to it, but none has approved itself as final.

Naturally enough, conception of the science has had to grow with the science

itself. For it must not be imagined that mathematics, because it is so old, is

dead. Old it is indeed, classic already in Euclid's day, being surpassed in

point of antiquity by only one of the arts and by none of the sciences; but it is

also  living  and  new,  flourishing  to-day  as  never  before,  advancing  in  a

thousand  directions  by  leaps  and  bounds.  It  is  not  merely  as  a  giant  tree

throwing out and aloft myriad branching arms in the upper regions of clearer

light, and plunging deep and deeper roots in the darker soil beneath. It is

rather an immense forest of such oaks, which, however, literally grow into

each other, so that, by the junction and intercresence of root with root and

limb with limb, the manifold wood becomes a single living organic whole. A

vast complex of interlacing theories — that the science now is actually, but it

is far more wondrous still poten-

  tially,  its  component  theories  continuing  more  and  more  to  grow  and

multiply beyond all imagination, and beyond the power of any single genius,

however  gifted.  What  is  this  thing  so  marvellously  vital?  What  does  it

undertake? What is its motive? How is it related to other modes and interests

of the human spirit?

  One of the oldest and at the same time the most familiar of the definitionsconceived mathematics to be the science of magnitude, where magnitude,

including multitude as a special kind, was whatever was capable of increase

and decrease and measurement. This last — capability of measurement —

was the essential thing. That was a most natural definition of the science, for

magnitude  is  a  singularly  fundamental  notion,  not  only  inviting  but

demanding consideration at every stage and turn of life. The necessity of

finding  out  how  many  and  how  much  was  the  mother  of  counting  and

measurement, and mathematics, first from necessity and then from joy, so

busied itself with these things that they came to seem its whole employment.

But now the notion of measurement as the repeated application of a constant

unit has been so refined and generalised, on the one hand through the creation

of imaginary and irrational numbers, and on the other by use of a scale, as in

non-Euclidian geometry, where the unit suffers a lawful change from step to

step of its application, that to retain the old words and call mathematics the

science of measurement seems quite inept as no longer telling what the spirit

of mathesis is really bent upon. Moreover, the most striking measurements,

as of the volume of a planet, the swiftness of thought, the valency of atoms,

the velocity of light, the distance of star from star, are not achieved by direct

repeated application of a unit. They are all accomplished by indirection.

  And it was perception of this fact which led to the famous definition by

the philosopher and mathematician, Auguste Comte, that mathematics is the

science of indirect measurement. Doubtless we have here a finer insight and a

larger view, but the thought is yet too narrow, nor is it deep enough. For it is

obvious that there is much mathematical activity which is not at all concerned

with  measurement,  either  direct  or  indirect.  In  projective  geometry,  for

example, it was observed that metric considerations were by no means chief.

As a simplest illustration, the fact that two points determine a line, or the fact

that a plane cuts a sphere in a circle, is not a metric fact, being concerned

with neither size nor magnitude. Here it was position rather than size that

seemed  to  some  to  be  the  central  idea,  and  so  it  was  proposed  to  call

mathematics the science of magnitude, or measurement, and position.

  Even as thus expanded, the definition yet excludes many a mathematical

realm of vast, nay, infinite extent. Consider, for example, that immense class

of things familiarly known as operations. These are limitless, alike in number

and in kind. Now it so happens that there are systems of operations such that

any two operations of a given system which follow one another produce the

same effect as some other single operation of the system. For an illustration,think of all possible straight motions in space. The operation of going from A

to B followed by the operation of going from B to C is equivalent to the

single operation of going from A to C. Thus, the system of such straight

operations is a closed system. Combination of any two of them yields another

operation, not without, but within the system. Now the theory of such closed

systems — called groups of operations — is a mathematical theory,

    already  of  colossal  proportions,  and  still  growing  with  astonishing

rapidity. But, and this is the point, an abstract operation, though a very real

thing, is neither a position nor a magnitude.

  This way of trying to come at an adequate conception of mathematics,

viz., by naming its different domains, or varieties of content, is not likely to

prove successful. For it demands an exhaustive enumeration not only of the

fields now occupied by the science, but also of the realms destined to be

conquered  by  it  in  the  future,  and  such  an  achievement  would  require  a

prevision that none perhaps could claim.

    Fortunately there are other paths of approach that seem more promising.

Everyone has observed that mathematics, whatever it may be, possesses a

certain mark, namely, a degree of certainty not found elsewhere. So it is,

proverbially, the exact science par excellence. Exact, you say, but in what

sense? To this an excellent answer is contained in a definition given by an

American  mathematician,  Professor  Benjamin  Peirce:  Mathematics  is  the

science which draws necessary conclusions, a formulation something more

than finely paraphrased by one l of my own teachers thus: Mathematics is the

universal  art  apodictic.  These  statements,  though  neither  of  them  may  be

entirely satisfactory, are both of them telling approximations. Observe that

they place the emphasis on the quality of being correct. Nothing is said about

the conclusions being true. That is another matter, to which I will return

presently. But why are the conclusions of mathematics correct? Is it that the

mathematician has an essentially different reasoning faculty from other folks?

By no means. What, then, is the secret? Reflect that conclusion im-

  1 Professor W. B. Smith.

  plies premises, and premises imply terms, and terms stand for ideas or

concepts, and that these, namely, concepts, are the ultimate material with

which the spiritual architect, which we call the Reason, designs and builds.

Here,  then,  we  may  expect  to  find  light.  The  apodictic  quality  of

mathematical thought, the certainty and correctness of its conclusions, are

due,  not  to  a  special  mode  of  ratiocination,  but  to  the  character  of  theconcepts with which it deals. What is that distinctive characteristic? I answer:

precision,  sharpness,  completeness,  of  definition.  But  how  comes  your

mathematician by such completeness? There is no mysterious trick involved;

some ideas admit of such precision, others do not; and the mathematician is

one who deals with those that do. Law, says Blackstone, is a rule of action

prescribed by the supreme power of a state commanding what is right and

prohibiting what is wrong. But what are a state and supreme power and right

and wrong? If all such terms admitted of complete determination, then the

science of law would be a branch of pure, and its practice a branch of applied,

mathematics.  But  does  not  the  lawyer  sometimes  arrive  at  correct

conclusions? Undoubtedly he does sometimes, and, what may seem yet more

astonishing,  so  does  your  historian  and  even  your  sociologist,  and  that

without  the  help  of  accident.  When  this  happens,  however,  when  these

students arrive, I do not say at truth, for that may be by lucky accident or

happy chance or a kind of intuition, but when they arrive at conclusions that

are  correct,  then  that  is  because  they  have  been  for  the  moment  in  all

literalness  acting  the  part  of  mathematician.  I  do  not  say  that  for  the

aggrandisement of mathematics. Rather is it for credit to all thinkers that

none can show you any considerable gar-

  ment of thought in which you may not find here and there, rarely enough

sometimes, a golden fibre woven in some, it may be, exceptional moment, of

precise  conception  and  rigorous  reasoning.  To  think  right  —  that  is  no

characteristic striving of a class of men. It is a common aspiration. Only, the

stuff of thought is mostly intractable, formless, like some milky way waiting

to be analysed into distinct star-forms of definite ideas. All thought aspires

towards the character and condition of mathematics.

  The reality of this aspiration and the distinction it implies admit of many

illustrations,  of  which  here  a  single  one  must  suffice.  There  is  no  more

common  or  more  important  notion  than  that  of  function,  the  term  being

applied to either of two variable things such that to any value or state of

either there correspond one or more values or states of the other. Of such

function pairs, examples abound on every hand, as the radius and the area of

a circle, the space traversed and the rate of going, progress of knowledge and

enthusiasm of study, elasticity of medium and velocity of sound or other

undulation, -the amount of hydrogen chloride formed and the time occupied,

the prosperity of a given community and the intelligence of its patriotism.

Indeed, it may very well be that there is nothing which is not in some sense afunction of every other. Be that as it may, one thing is very certain, namely, a

very great part and probably all of our thinking is concerned with functional

relationships, deals, that is, with pairs of systems of corresponding values or

states  or  changes.  Behold,  for  example,  how  the  parallelistic  psychology

searches  for  correlations  between  psychical  and  physical  phenomena.

Witness, too, the sociologist trying to determine the correspondence between

the peacefulness

  and the homogeneity of a population, or, again, between manifestations of

piety or the spread of populism and the condition of the crops. It is then here,

in the wondrous domain of correspondence, the answering of value to value,

of  change  to  change,  of  condition  to  condition,  of  state  to  state,  that  the

knowing activity finds its field.

  What is it precisely that we seek in a correlation? The answer is: when

one or more facts are given, to pass, with absolute certainty, to the correlative

fact  or  facts.  To  do  this  obviously  requires  formulae  or  equations  which

precisely define the manner of correlation, or the law of interdependence.

Where do such formulae come from? I answer that, strictly speaking, they are

never found, they are always assumed. Now, nothing is easier than to write

down  a  perfectly  definite  formula  that  does  not  tell,  for  example,  how

cheerfulness depends on climate, or how pressure affects the volume of a gas.

Nay, a given formula may be perfectly intelligible in itself, it may state, that

is, a perfectly intelligible law of correspondence, which, nevertheless, may

have no validity at all in the physical universe and none elsewhere than in the

formula itself. What, then, guides in the choice of formulae? That depends

upon your kind of curiosity, and curiosity is not a matter of choice.

  Just here we are in a position where we have only to look steadily a little

in order to see the sharp distinction between mathematics and natural science.

These  are  discriminated  according  to  the  kind  of  curiosity  whence  they

spring. The mathematician is curious about definite abstract correspondences,

about  perfectly-defined  functional  relationships  in  themselves.  These  are

more numerous than the sands of the seashore, they are as multitudinous as

the points of space. It is this as-

    semblage  of  pure,  precisely-defined  relationships  which  constitute  the

mathematician's universe, an indefinitely infinite universe, worlds of worlds

of wonders, inconceivably richer than the outer world of sense. This latter is

indeed immense and marvellous, with its rolling seas and stellar fields and

undulating ether, but, compared with the hyperspaces explored by the geniusof  the  geometrician,  the  whole  vast  extent  of  the  sensuous  universe  is  a

merest point of light in a blazing sky.

  Now this mere speck of a physical universe, in which the chemist and the

physicist, the biologist and the sociologist, and the rest of nature devotees,

find their great fields, may be, as it seems to be, an organic thing, connected

into an ordered whole by a tissue of definable functional relationships, and it

may  not.  The  nature  devotee  assumes  that  it  is  and  tries  to  find  the

relationships. The mathematician does not make that assumption and does not

seek for relationships in the outer world. Is the assumption correct? As man,

the  mathematician  does  not  know,  although  he  greatly  cares.  As

mathematician, man neither knows nor cares. The mathematician does know,

however, that, if the assumption be correct, every definite relationship that is

valid in nature, every type of order and mode of correlation obtaining there,

is, in itself, a thing for his thought, an essential element in his domain of

study.  He  knows,  too,  that,  if  the  assumption  be  not  correct,  his  domain

remains  the  same  absolutely.  The  two  realms,  of  mathematics,  of  nature

science,  are  fundamentally  distinct  and  disparate  forever.  To  think  the

thinkable  —  that  is  the  mathematician's  aim.  To  assume  that  nature  is

thinkable,  an  incarnate  rational  logos,  and  to  seek  the  thought  supposed

incarnate there — these are at once the principle and the hope of the nature

student. Sci-

  ence, said Riemann, 1 is the attempt to comprehend nature by means of

concepts. Suppose the nature student is right, suppose the physical universe

really is an enfleshed logos of reason, does that imply that all the thinkable is

thus incorporated? It does not. A single ordered universe, one that through

and through is self-compatible, cannot be the whole of reason materialised

and objectified. There is many a rational logos, and the mathematician has

high  delight  in  the  contemplation  of  inconsistent  systems  of  consistent

relationships. There are, for example, a Euclidean geometry and more than

one species of non-Euclidean. As theories of a given space, these are not

compatible. If our universe be, as Plato thought, and nature science takes for

granted, a space-conditioned, geometrised affair, one of these geometries may

be, none of them may be, not all of them can be, valid in it. But in the vaster

world of thought, all of them are valid, there they co-exist, and interlace

among themselves and others, as differing component strains of a higher,

strictly supernatural, hyper-cosmic, harmony.

  It is, then, in the inner world of pure thought, where all entia dwell, whereis every type of order and manner of correlation and variety of relationship, it

is in this infinite ensemble of eternal verities whence, if there be one cosmos

or many of them, each derives its character and mode of being, — it is there

that the spirit of mathesis has its home and its life.

  Is it a restricted home, a narrow life, static and cold and grey with logic,

without artistic interest, devoid of emotion and mood and sentiment? That

world, it is true, is not a world of solar light, not clad in the colours that

  1  C/.  Riemann:  "Fragmcnte  Philosophischcn  Inhalts,"  in  GtsammeUt

Werke. These fragments, which are published in English by the Open Court

Pub. Co., Chicago, are exceedingly suggestive.

  liven and glorify the things of sense, but it is an illuminated world, and

over it all and everywhere throughout are hues and tints transcending sense,

painted there by radiant pencils of psychic light, the light in which it lies. It is

a silent world, and, nevertheless, in respect to the highest principle of art —

the  interpenetration  of  content  and  form,  the  perfect  fusion  of  mode  and

meaning — it even surpasses music. In a sense, it is a static world, but so,

too, are the worlds of the sculptor and the architect. The figures, however,

which reason constructs and the mathematical vision beholds, transcend the

temple and the statue, alike in simplicity and in intricacy, in delicacy and in

grace, in symmetry and in poise. Not only are this home and this life thus rich

in  aesthetic  interests,  really  controlled  and  sustained  by  motives  of  a

sublimed and supersensuous art, but the religious aspiration, too, finds there,

especially in the beautiful doctrine of invariants, the most perfect symbols of

what it seeks — the changeless in the midst of change, abiding things in a

world of flux, configurations that remain the same despite the swirl and stress

of countless hosts of curious transformations. The domain of mathematics is

the sole domain of certainty. There and there alone prevail the standards by

which every hypothesis respecting the external universe and all observation

and  all  experiment  must  be  finally  judged.  It  is  the  realm  to  which  all

speculation and all thought must repair for chastening and sanatation — the

court of last resort, I say it reverently, for all intellection whatsoever, whether

of demon or man or deity. It is there that mind as mind attains its highest

estate,  and  the  condition  of  knowledge  there  is  the  ultimate  object,  the

tantalising goal of the aspiration, the Anders-Streben, of all other knowledge

of every kind.

  THE  AXIOM  OF  INFINITY:  A  NEW  PRESUPPOSITION  OF

THOUGHT. 1  IT  so  happened  that  when  the  first  number  of  The  Hibbcrt  Journal

appeared, containing an article by Professor Royce on the Concept of the

Infinite, I had been myself for some time meditating on the logical bearings

and philosophical import of that concept, and was actually then engaged in

marking out the course which it seemed to me a first discussion of the matter

might best follow. The order and scope of his treatment were so like those I

had myself decided upon that I should naturally have felt a pardonable pride

in the coincidence, had not this feeling been at the same time quite lost in a

stronger one, namely, that of the evident superiority of his manner to any

which I could have hoped to attain. Indeed, so patient is his exposition of

elements,  so  rich  is  it  in  suggestiveness,  so  intimately  and  instructively,

according to his wont, has he connected the most abstruse and recondite of

doctrines  with  the  most  obvious  and  seemingly  trivial  of  things,  and  so

luminous  and  stimulating  is  it  all,  that  one  must  admire  the  ingenuity  it

betrays, and cannot but wonder whether after all there really are in science or

philosophy any notions too remote and obscure to be rendered intelligible

even to common sense, if only a sufficiently cunning pen be engaged in the

service.

  While his paper is thus replete with inspiring intimations of the "glorious

depths" and near-lying interests of the doctrine treated, and is, in point of

clearness and vivid portrayal of its central thought, a model beyond the art of

most, it is not, I believe, equally happy when judged on the severer ground of

its critico-logical estimates. Even on this ground, I do not hesitate, after close

examination, to adjudge it the merit of general soundness. That, however, it is

thoroughly  sound,  completely  mailed  against  every  possible  assault  of

criticism, is a proposition I am by no means prepared to maintain. Quite the

contrary,  in  fact.  Nor  can  the  defects  be  counted  as  trivial.  One  of  them

especially,  which  it  has  in  common  with  other  both  earlier  and  later

discussions  of  the  subject,  notably  that  by  Dede-kind  himself  and,  more

recently,  that  by  Mr.  Bertrand  Russell  in  his  imposing  treatise  on  The

Principles of Mathematics, is of the most radical nature, concerning as it does

no less a question than, I do not say merely that of the validity, but that of the

possibility, of existence-proofs of the infinite.

  And  here  I  may  as  well  state  at  once,  lest  there  should  be  some

misapprehension  in  respect  to  purpose,  that  the  present  writing  is  not

primarily designed to be a review of Professor Royce's or of other recent

discussions of the infinite. Reviewed to some extent they will be, but onlyincidentally, and mainly because they have declared themselves, erroneously

as I think, upon that most fundamental of questions, namely, whether it is

possible, by aid of the modern concept, to demonstrate the existence, of the

infinite. Argument would seem superfluous to show the immeasurable import

of this problem, whether it be viewed solely in its immediate logical bearings,

or also mediately, through the latter,

  in its bearings upon philosophy, upon theology, and, only more remotely,

upon religion itself. It is chief among the aims of this essay, to open that

problem anew, to appeal from the prevailing doctrine concerning it, in the

hope of securing, if possible, a readjudication of the matter which shall be

final.

  This subject of the infinite, how it baffles approach! How immediate and

how remote it seems, how it abides and yet eludes the grasp, how familiar it

appears, mingling with the elemental simplicities of the heart, continuously

weaving itself into the intimate texture of common life, and yet how austere

and  immense  and  majestic,  outreaching  the  sublimest  flights  of  the

imagination,  transcending  the  stellar  depths,  immeasurable  by  the

beginningless,  endless  chain  of  the  ages!  Comprehend  the  infinite!  No

wonder  we  hear  that  none  but  the  infinite  itself  is  adequate  to  that.  Du

gleichst dem Gtist, den du begreifsl. Be it so. Perhaps, then, we are infinite. If

not,

  "'Wie' fass' ich dich, unendliche Natur?"

  Or is it finally a mere illusion? And is there after all no infinite reality to

be seized upon? Again, if not, what signifies the finite? Is that to be for ever

without definition, except as reciprocal of that which fails to be? Is the All

really enclosed in some vast ellipsoid, without a beyond, incircumscriptible,

devoid alike of tangent plane and outer point? Are we eternally condemned to

seek therein for the meaning and end of processes that refuse to terminate?

And is, then, this region, too, but a locus of deceptions, "of false alluring

jugglery"? Is analysis but the victim of hallucination when it thinks to detect

the existence of realms that underlie and overarch and compass about the

domain of

  the countable and measurable? And does the spirit, in its deeper musings,

in its pensive moods, only seem to feel the tremulous touch of transfinite

waves, of vitalising undulations from beyond the farthest shore of the sea of

sense?

  One fact at once is clear, namely, that, whatever ultimate justification thehypothesis may find, thought has never escaped the necessity of supposing

the universe of things to be intrinsically somehow cleft asunder into the two

Grand  Divisions,  or  figured,  if  you  will,  under  the  two  fundamental

complementary  all-inclusive  Forms,  which,  from  motives  more  or  less

distinctly felt and also just, as we shall see, though not quite justified, have

been, from time immemorial, designated as the Finite and the Infinite. And

these great terms or their verbal equivalents — for concepts in any strict

sense  they  have  not  been  —  though  always  vague  and  shifting,  for  ever

promising but never quite delivering the key to their identities into the hand

of Definition, have, nevertheless, in every principal scene, together played the

gravest role in the still unfolding drama of speculation. Or, to change the

figure,  they"  have  been  as  Foci,  one  of  them  seemingly  near,  the  other

apparently  remote,  neither  of  them  quite  itself  determinate,  but  the  two

conjointly serving always to determine the ever-varying eccentricity of the

orbit of thought; and doubtless the vaster lines that serve to bind the differing

epochs of speculation into a single continuous system can best be traced by

reference to these august terms as co-ordinate poles of interest.

  As  a  simple  historical  fact,  then,  philosophy  has  indeed,  with  but

negligible exception, throughout assumed the existence of both the finite and

the infinite. That is one thing. Another fact of distinct and equal weight, no

  matter whether or how we may account for it, is that man, in accord with

the deeper meaning of the Pro-tagorean maxim, has always felt himself to

have within, or to be somehow, the potential measure of all that is. Is it

insignificant that this faith — for that is what it seems to be — as if an

indestructible character of the race, as if an invariant defining property of the

germ  plasm  itself  whence  man  springs  and  derives  his  continuity,  should

have survived every vicissitude of human fortune? that it should have been

indeed, if not the substance, at least the promise, of things hoped for, the

evidence,  too,  of  things  not  seen,  marking  and  sustaining  metaphysical

research  from  the  earliest  times?  And,  what  is  more,  the  spirit  of  such

research,  curiosity  I  mean,  fit  companion  and  counterpart  of  that  abiding

faith, unlike "experience and observation," has known no bounds, but, on the

contrary,  finding  within  itself  no  fatal  principle  of  limitation,  it  has  ever

disdained the scale of finite things as competent to take its measure, and

boldly asserted claim to the entire realm of being.

  These questions, however, have been something more than fascinating.

Perhaps  their  rise,  but  not  their  manifold  development,  much  less  theirprofound significance for life and thought, is to be adequately explained on

the  hypothesis  of  insatiate  curiosity  alone.  It  must  be  granted  that  their

presence, especially in the arena of dialectic, has been often due simply to

their intrinsic magical charm for "summit-intellects." And doubtless the play-

instinct, deep-dwelling in the constitution of the mind, has often made them

serve  the  higher  faculties  merely  as  intricate  puzzles,  to  beguile  the  time

withal. But, in general, the questions have worn a sterner aspect. Philosophy

has been not merely allured, it has been constrained, to their consideration;

constrained not

  only because of their inherence in problems of the conscience, especially

in that most radical problem of finding the simplest system of postulates that

shall be at once both necessary and sufficient to explain the moral feeling; but

constrained still more powerfully by the insistent demands that issue from the

religious consciousness. But this is yet not all. For man cannot live by these

august interests alone. And it is profoundly significant, both as witnessing to

the  final  inter-blending,  the  fundamental  unity,  of  all  the  concerns  of  the

human  spirit,  and  as  revealing  the  ultimate  depth  and  dignity  of  all  its

interests, that questions about the infinite quite similar to those that claim so

illustrious parentage in Ethics and Philosophy, admit elsewhere of humbler

derivation, and readily own to the lowliest of origins. Man, indeed, merely to

live, has had to measure and to count, and this homely necessity, fruitful

mother  of  mystery  and  doubt,  independently  set  the  problems  of  the

indefinitely small and the indefinitely great; and so it was that needs quite as

immediate  and  austere  as  those  of  Morals  and  Religion  —  I  mean  the

exigencies of Science, arid especially of Mathematics — demanded on their

own  ground,  in  the  very  beginnings  of  exact  knowledge,  that  the

understanding transcend every possible sequence of observations, pass the

uttermost  limit  of  "experience,"  which,  refine  and  enlarge  it  as  you  may,

remains but finite, and literally lay hold on infinity itself.

  To  this  ancient  irrevocable  demand,  thus  urged  upon  the  reason  from

every cardinal point of human interest, genius has responded as to a challenge

from the gods, and I submit that the response, the endeavour of the reason

actually to subjugate extra-finite being and compel surrender of its secrets by

the organon of thought,

    constitutes the most sublime and strenuous and inspiring enterprise of the

human intellect in every age.

  What of it? Long centuries of gigantic striving, age on age of philosophictoil, immeasurable devotion of time and energy and genius to a single end,

the intellectual conquest of transfmite being — what has it all availed? What

triumphs have been won? I speak, narrowly, of the conquest, and demand to

know, not whether it has been accomplished — for that were a foolish query

— but whether, strictly speaking, it has been begun. Let not the import of the

question  be  mistaken.  No  answer  is  sought  in  terms  of  such  moral  or

"spiritual"  gains  as  may  be  incident  even  to  efforts  that  miss  their  aim.

Everyone knows that seeking has compensations of its own, which indeed are

ofttimes  better  than  any  which  finding  itself  can  give.  And  it  seems

sometimes  as  if  the  higher  life  were  chiefly  sustained  by  unsought  gains

incident to the unselfish pursuit of the unattainable. The circle has not been

squared, nor the quintic equation solved, 1 nor perpetual motion invented;

neither indeed can be; yet it would show but meagre understanding of the

ways  of  truth  to  men,  did  one  suppose  all  the  labour  devoted  to  such

problems to have been without reward. So, conceivably, it might be with this

problem of the infinite. It may be granted that, even supposing no solution to

be attainable, the ceaseless search for one, the unwearied high endeavor of

the reason through the ages, presents a spectacle ennobling to behold, and of

which mankind, it may be, could ill afford to be deprived. It may be granted

that incidentally many insights have been won which, though not solutions,

have nevertheless permanently enriched the literature of the world and are

destined to improve 1 That is, by means of radicals.

  its life. It may be granted that in every time some doctrine of infinity,

some philosophy of it, has been at least effective, has helped, that is, for

better or worse, to fashion the forms of human institutions and to determine

the  course  of  history.  Concerning  none  of  these  things  is  there  here  any

question. As to what the question precisely is, there need not be the slightest

misapprehension.  The  fact  is  that  for  thousands  of  years  philosophy  has

recognised  the  presence  of  a  certain  definite  Problem,  namely,  that  of

extending the dominion of logic, the reign of exact thought, out beyond the

utmost reach of finite things into and over, the realm of infinite being, and

this  problem,  by  far  the  greatest  and  most  impressive  of  her  strictly

intellectual concernments, philosophy has, for thousands of years, arduously

striven to solve. And now I ask — not, has it been worth while? for that is

conceded, but — has she advanced the solution in any measure, and, if so, in

what respect, and to what extent?

  We are here upon the grounds of the rational logos. The whole force andcharge  of  the  question  is  directed  to  matter  of  concept  and  inference.

Fortunately, the answer is to be as unmistakable as the question. It must be

recognised, of course, that the "problem," as stated, is exceedingly, almost

frightfully, generic, comprising a host of interdependent problems. One of

these, however, is pre-eminent: without its solution none other can be solved;

with its solution, any other may be eventually. That problem is the problem

of conception, of definition in the unmitigated rigour of its severest meaning;

it is the problem of discovering a certain principle, of finding, without the

slightest possibility of doubt or indetermination, the intrinsic line of cleavage

that parts the universe of being into its

  two grandest divisions, and so of telling finally and once for all precisely

what, for thought, the infinite is and what, for thought, the finite is.

  And now, thanks to the subtle genius of the modern Teutonic mind, this

ancient problem, having baffled the thought of all the centuries, has been at

last completely solved, and therein our original question finds its answer: The

conquest has been begun. Bernhard Riemann, profound mathematician and

— important fact, of which, strangely enough, too many philosophers seem

invincibly unaware — profound metaphysician too, having pointed out, in his

famous  Habilitationschrift*  the  epoch-making  distinction  between  mere

boundlessness and infinitude of manifolds similar to that of space, the greater

glory was reserved for three contemporary compatriots of his — Bernhard

Bolzano,* Richard Dede-kind,* and Georg Cantor, 4 the first an acute and

learned philosopher and theologian, with deep mathematical insight, the other

two brilliant mathematicians, with a strong bent for metaphysics — to win

independently  and  about  the  same  time  the  long-coveted  insight  into  the

intrinsic nature of infinity. And thus it is a distinction of our own time that

within the memory of living men the defining mark of the infinite first failed

to elude the grasp, and that that august term, after the most marvellous career

of any in the history of speculation, has been finally made to assume the

prosaic form of an exact and completely determined concept, and so at length

to become available for the purposes of rigorously logical discourse.

  1 "Ueber die Hypothesen, wclche die Geometric zu Grande liegen," Gts.

Werhe. Also in English by W. R. Clifford. * "Paradoxicn ties Unendlichen." i

""Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen." 4 Memoirs in Ada Mathematics, vol.

ii., and elsewhere.

  Pray,  then,  what  is  this  concept?  Of  various  equivalent  forms  of

statement,  I  choose  the  following:  An  assemblage  (ensemble,  collection,group, manifold) of elements (things, no matter what] is infinite or finite

according  as  it  has  or  has  not  a  PART  to  which  the  whole  is  just

EQUIVALENT in the sense that between the elements composing that part

and those composing the whole there subsists a unique and reciprocal (one-

to-one) correspondence.

  If we may trust to intuition in questions about reality, assemblages, 1

infinite  as  defined,  actually  abound  on  every  hand.  I  need  not  pause  to

indicate examples. Those pointed out in Professor Royce's mentioned paper

may suffice; they will, at all events, furnish the reader with the "clew, which,

once familiar to his hand, will lengthen as he goes, and never break." The

concept itself I regard as a great achievement, one of the very greatest in the

history of thought. Not only does it mark the successful eventuation of a long

and toilsome search; it furnishes criticism with a new standard of judgment, it

at  once  creates,  and  gives  the  means  of  meeting,  the  necessity  for  a  re-

examination and a juster evaluation of historic doctrines of infinity; and it is

greater still, I believe, as a destined instrument of exploration in that realm

which it has opened to the understanding and whose boundary it defines.

  Is that judgment not extravagant? For the concept seems so simple, is so

apparently  independent  of  difficult  presuppositions,  that  one  cannot  but

wonder why it was not formed long ago. Had the concept in question been

early formed, the history and present status of philoso-

  1 The very simplest possible example of such a manifold is that of the

count-numbers.  The  whole  collection  can  be  paired  in  one-to-one  fashion

with, for example, half the collection, thus: i, 2; 2, 4; 3, 6; . . . ; the totality of

even and odd being just equivalent to the even.

  phy and theology, and of science too, had doubtless been different. But it

was not then conceived. Now that we have it, is it too unbewildering to be

impressive? Shall we esteem it lightly just because we can comprehend it,

because it does not mystify? Simple it is indeed, almost as simple as the

Newtonian law of gravitation, nearly as easy to understand as the geometric

interpretation of imaginary quantities, hardly more difficult to grasp than the

notion of the conservation of energy, the Mendelian principle of inheritance,

or than a score of other central concepts of science. But shallow indeed and

foolish is that criticism which values ideas according to their complexity, and

confounds the simple with the trivial.

  As an immense city or a vast complex of mountain masses, seen too near,

is obscured as a whole by the prominence of its parts, so the larger truthabout any great subject is disclosed only as one beholds it at a certain remove

which permits the assembling of principal features in a single view, and a

proportionate  mingling  of  reflected  light  from  its  grander  aspects.

Accordingly it has seemed desirable, in the foregoing preliminary survey, to

hold somewhat aloof, to conduct the movement, in the main, along the path

of perspective centres, in order to allow the vision at every point the amplest

range. It is now proposed to draw a little closer to the subject and to examine

some  of  its  phases  more  minutely.  In  respect  to  the  modern  concept  of

infinity, we desire to know more fully what it really signifies, we wish to be

informed  how  it  orients  itself  among  cardinal  principles  and  established

modes of thought. But recently born to consciousness, it has already been

advanced  to  conspicuous  and  commanding  station  among  fundamental

notions, and we are concerned to know what, if

  any, transformations of existing doctrine, what readjustments of attitude

towards the universe without us or within, what changes in our thought on

ultimate problems of knowledge and reality, it seems to demand and may be

destined to effect. In a word, and speaking broadly, we wish to know not

merely in a narrow sense what the new idea is, but, in the larger meaning of

the term, what it "can."

  I  shall  first  speak  briefly  of  the  so-called  "positive"  character  of  the

definition,  an  alleged  essential  quality  of  it,  a  seeming  property  which

criticism is wont to signalise as a radical or intrinsic virtue of the concept

itself. Quite independently of the mathematicians Dedekind and Cantor, who,

we have seen, were the independent originators of the new formulation, the

then  old  philosopher,  Bolzano,  bringing  to  the  subject  another  order  of

training and of motive, arrived at notions of the finite and infinite, which on

critical examination are found to be essentially the same as theirs, though

greatly differing in point alike of view and of form. Bolzano's procedure is

virtually as follows:— Suppose given a class C of elements, or things, of any

kind whatsoever, as the sands of the seashore, or the stars of the firmament,

or the points of space, or the instants in a stretch of time, or the numbers with

which we count, or the total manifold of truths known to an omniscient God.

Out of any such class C, suppose a series formed by taking for first term one

of the elements of C, for second term two of them, and so on. Any term so

obtainable is itself obviously a class or group of things, and is defined to be

finite. The indicated process of series formation, if sufficiently prolonged,

will either exhaust C or it will not. If it will, C is itself demonstrably finite; ifit will not, C is, on

  that account, defined to be infinite. Now, say Professor Royce and others,

a  definition  like  the  latter,  being  dependent  on  such  a  notion  as  that  of

inexhaustibility or endlessness or boundlessness, is negative; a certain innate

craving of the understanding remains unsatisfied, we are told, because the

definition presents the notion, not in a positive way by telling us what the

infinite actually is, but merely in a negative fashion by telling us what it is

not. Undoubtedly the claim is plausible, but is it more? Bolzano affirmed and

exemplified  a  certain  proposition,  in  itself  of  the  utmost  importance,  and

throwing half the needed light upon the question in hand. That proposition is:

Any  class  or  assemblage  (of  elements),  if  infinite  according  to  kis  own

definition of the term, enjoys the property of being equivalent, in the sense

above explained, to some proper part of itself. Though he did not himself

demonstrate the proposition, it readily admits of demonstration, and, since his

time, has in fact been repeatedly and rigorously proved. Not only that, but the

converse  proposition,  giving  the  other  half  of  the  needed  light,  has  been

established too: Every assemblage that HAS a part "equivalent" to the whole,

is infinite in the Bolzano sense of the term.

  It so appears, in the conjoint light of those two theorems, that the property

seized upon and pointed out by the ingenious theologian is in all strictness a

characteristic, though derivative, mark of the infinite as he conceived and

defined it. It is sufficiently obvious, therefore, that this derivative property

might logically be regarded as primitive, made to serve, that is, as a ground of

definition.  Precisely  this  fact  it  is  which  was  independently  perceived  by

Dedekind and Cantor, with the result that, as they have presented the matter,

a collection, or manifold, is infinite if it has a certain

  property, and finite if it has it not. And now, the critics tell us, it is the

infinite which is positive and the finite which is negative.

  The distinction appears to me to be entirely devoid of essential merit. It

seems  rather  to  be  only  another  interesting  example  of  that  verbal

legerdemain for which a certain familiar sort of philosophising has long been

famous. For what indeed is positive and what negative? Are we to understand

that these terms have absolute as distinguished from relative meaning? The

distinction,  I  take  it,  is  without  external  validity,  is  entirely  subjective,  a

matter quite at will, being dependent solely on an arbitrary ordering of our

thought. That which is first put in thought is positive: the opposite, being

subsequently put, is negative; but the sens of the time-vector joining the twomay be reversed at the thinker's will. It is sometimes contended that that

which  generally  happens  in  the  world,  and  so  constitutes  the  rule,  is

intrinsically  positive.  As  a  matter  of  fact  a  moving  body  "in  general"

continuously changes its distance from every object. Such change of distance

from every other object would accordingly be a positive something. Then it

would follow that the classic definition of a sphere-surface as the locus of a

moving point which does not change its distance from a certain specified

point, is really negative. Obviously it avails nothing essential to disguise the

negativity by some such seemingly positive phrase as "constant" distance.

The trick is an easy one. If, again, it be allowed that, a process being once

started, its continuation is positive, its termination negative, then it would

result that inexhaustibility is positive and exhaustibility negative, whence we

should have to own that it is Bolzano's definition which is positive and that

by Dedekind and

  Cantor negative. It hardly admits of doubt that the matter is purely one of

an arbitrarily chosen point of view. The distinction is here of no importance.

What is important is that, no matter which of the definitions be adopted as

such, the other then states a derivable property of the thing defined. In either

case the concept of the infinite remains the same, it is merely its garb that is

changed.  I  am  very  far  from  intending,  however,  to  assert  herewith  that,

because the definitions are logically equivalent, they must needs be or indeed

are so practically, that is, as instruments of investigation. That is another

matter, which, I regret to say, our somewhat pretentious critiques of scientific

method furnish no better means of settling than the wasteful way of trial.

Everyone will recall from his school-days Euclid's definition of a plane as

being a surface such that a line joining any two points of the surface lies

wholly in the surface. Logically that is equivalent to saying: A plane is such

an assemblage of points that, any three independent points of the assemblage

being given, one and only one third point of the assemblage can be found

which  is  equidistant  from  the  given  three.  But,  despite  their  logical

equivalence,  who  would  contend  that,  for  elementary  purposes,  the  latter

notion is "practically" as good as the Greek? And so in respect to the infinite,

I am free to admit, or rather I affirm, that, on the score of usability, the

Dedekind-Cantor definition is greatly superior to its Bolzanoan equivalent.

Professor Roycc has indeed ingeniously shown how readily it lends itself to

philosophic and even to theologic uses.

  I turn now to the current assertion by Professor Royce and Mr. Russell,that the modern concept of the infinite, of which I have given above in italics

an exact statement, to which the reader is referred, in fact denies

  a certain ancient axiom of common sense, namely, the axiom of whole

and  part.  I  am  not  about  to  submit  a  brief  in  behalf  of  the  traditional

conception  of  axioms  as  self-evident  truths.  That  conception,  as  is  well

known, has been once for all abandoned by philosophy and science alike,

while to mathematicians in particular no phenomenon is more familiar than

that  of  the  coexistence  of  self-coherent  bodies  of  doctrine  constructed  on

distinct and self-consistent but incompatible systems of postulates. The co-

ordination of such incompatible theories is quite legitimate and presents no

cause for regret or alarm. The forced recession of the axioms from the high

ground of absolute authority, so far from indicating chaos of intellection or

ultimate dissolution of knowledge, signifies a corresponding deepening of

foundation; it means an ascension of mind, the proclamation of its creative

power,  the  assertion  of  its  own  supremacy.  And  henceforth  the  denial  of

specific axioms, or the deliberate substitution of one set for another, is to be

rightly  regarded  as  an  inalienable  prerogative  of  a  liberated  spirit.  The

question before us, then, is one merely x>f fact, namely, whether a certain

axiom is indeed denied or contradicted by the modern concept of the infinite.

  It  is  in  the  first  place  to  be  observed  that  the  statement  itself  of  that

concept avoids the expression, " equality of whole and part," but instead of it

deliberately  employs  the  term  "equivalence."  The  word  actually  used  by

Dedekind  himself  is  dhnlichkeit  (similarity).  But,  says  Professor  Royce,

"equivalence" is just what the axiom really means by equality. It is precisely

this statement which I venture to draw in question. If we know that each

soldier of a company marching along the street has one and but one gun on

his shoulder, then, we are

  told, even if we do not know how many soldiers or guns there are, we do

know  that  there  are  "as  many"  soldiers  as  guns.  What  the  definition  in

question, taken severely, itself affirms in this case, is that the assemblage of

guns is "equivalent or similar" to that of the soldiers. Let us now suppose that

in place of soldiers we write, for example, "all positive integers," and in place

of guns, "all even positive integers" -the integers are plainly susceptible of

unique  and  reciprocal  association  with  the  even  integers,  —  then  the

definition again asserts, as before, "equivalence" of these assemblages. Note

that thus far nothing has been said about number as an expression of how

many.  If  there  be  a  number  that  tells  how  many  things  there  are  in  oneassemblage, that same number doubtless tells how many there are in any

"equivalent" assemblage, and just because the number, if there be one, is the

same for both, the two are said to be equal by axiom. In this view, equality of

groups means more than mere "equivalence"; it means, besides, sameness of

their numbers, and so applies only in case there be numbers. But common

sense,  whose  axiom  is  here  in  court,  has  neither  found,  nor  affirmed  the

existence of, a number telling, for example, how many integers there are. On

the other hand, in case of assemblages for which common sense has known a

number, the axiom of whole and part is admittedly valid without exception. It

thus appears that the axiom supposed, regarded, however unconsciously but

nevertheless in intention, as applicable only in case there be a number telling

how  many,  is,  in  all  strictness,  not  denied  by  the  concept  in  question.

Numbers designed to tell how many elements there are in an assemblage

having a part "equivalent" to the whole are of recent invention, and it may be

remarked in

  passing  that  this  invention  bears  immediate  favourable  witness  to  the

fruitfulness of the new idea. Such trans-finite numbers once created, then

undoubtedly, and not before, the question naturally presents itself whether

"equivalence" shall be translated "equality," or, what is tantamount, whether

the latter term shall be generalised into the former; "generalised," I say, for,

though it is true that, as soon as the transfinite numbers are created, there is,

in  case  of  an  infinite  collection  and  some  of  its  parts,  a  conjunction  of

"equivalence"  and  "sameness  of  number,"  yet  equality  does  not  of  itself

deductively attach, for the transfinite numbers are in genetic principle, 1 i.e.,

radically, different from the number notion which the concept of equality has

hitherto  connoted.  The  question  as  to  the  mentioned  translation  or

generalisation is, therefore, a question, and it is to be decided, not under spur

or stress of logic, but solely from motives of economy acting on grounds of

pure expedience. If the decision be, as seems likely because of its expedience

and economy favourable to such translation or generalisation, then indeed the

old  axiom,  as  above  construed,  still  remains  uncontradicted,  is  yet  valid

within the domain of its asserted validity. It is merely that a new number-

domain has been adjoined which the old verity never contemplated, and in

which, therefore, though it does not apply, it never essentially pretended to;

but  on  account  of  which  adjunction,  nevertheless,  for  the  sake  of  good

neighbourship, it is constrained, not indeed to retract its ancient claims, but

merely to assert them more cautiously and diplomatically, in preciser terms.Even then, in case of quarrel, it is the generaliser who should explain, and not

a defender of the generalised.

  1 Cf. Couturat, L'Infini mathtmatiqiw. Appendix.

  And  now  to  my  final  thesis  I  venture  to  invite  the  reader's  special

attention,  and  beg  to  be  held  with  utmost  strictness  accountable  for  my

words. The question is, whether it is possible, by means of the new concept,

to demonstrate the existence of the infinite; whether, in other words, it can be

proved that there are infinite systems. That such demonstration is possible is

affirmed by Bolzano, by Dedekind, by Professor Royce, by Mr. Russell, and

in fact by a large and swelling chorus of authoritative utterance, scarcely

relieved by a dissenting voice. After no little pondering of the matter, I have

been forced, and that, too, I must own, against my hope and will, to the

opposite conviction. Candour, then, compels me to assert, as I have elsewhere

1 briefly done, not only that the arguments which have been actually adduced

are  all  of  them  vitiated  by  circularity,  but  that,  in  the  very  nature  of

conception and inference, by virtue of the most certain standards of logic

itself,  every  potential  argument,  every  possible  attempt  to  prove  the

proposition, is foredoomed to failure, destined before its birth to take the fatal

figure of the wheel.

  The alleged demonstrations are essentially the same, being all of them but

variants under a single type. It is needless, therefore, in support of my first

contention, to present separate examination of them all. Analysis of one or

two specimens will suffice. I will begin with one from Bolzano's offering,

both because it marks the beginning of the new era of thought about the

subject and because subsequent writers have nearly all of them either cited or

quoted it, and that, as far as I am aware, always with approval. Bolzano'

undertakes to demon-

  1 "The Axiom of Infinity and Mathematical Induction," BuUftin of tkt

Amrruqn Mathematical Society, vol. ix., May, 1003. * "Paradoxien," sect. 14.

  strate, among similar statements, the proposition that die Menge der Satze

und  Wahrheiten  an  sich  is  infinite  (unendlicti),  this  latter  term  being

understood, of course, in accordance with his own definition above given.

The  attempt,  as  anyone  may  find  who  is  willing  to  examine  it  minutely,

informally postulates as follows: the proposition, There are such truths (as

those contemplated in the proposition), is such a truth, T; T is true, is another

such truth, T; so on; and, the indicated process is inexhaustible. Now, these

assumptions,  which  are  essential  to  the  argument,  and  which  any  carefulreader cannot fail to find implicit in it, are, possibly, all of them, correct, but

the last is so evident a petitio principii as to make one look again and again

lest his own thought should have played him a trick.

  In case of Dedekind's demonstration, which has been heralded far and

wide, the fallacy is less glaring. The argument is far subtler, more complicate,

and the ver-steckter Zirkel lies deeper in the folds. But it is undoubtedly

there,  and  its  presence  may  be  disclosed  by  careful  explication.  Let  the

symbol t stand for thought, any thought, and denote by t' the thought that t is

a thought. For convenience, t' may be called the image of t. On examination,

Dedekind's proof is found to postulate as certainties: (i) If there be a t, there is

a /', image of /; (2) if there be two distinct t's, the corresponding t"s are

distinct; (3) there is a /; (4) there is a t which is not a t'; (5) every t is other

than its t'. These being granted, it is easy to see, by supposing each t to be

paired with its /', as object with image, that the assemblage 6 of all the t's and

the assemblage 6' of all t"s are "equivalent." But by (4) there is a t not in 6',

which latter is, therefore, a part of 6. Hence 6 is infinite, by definition of the

term.

  Let  this  matter  be  scrutinised  a  little.  Assuming  only  the  mentioned

postulates and, of course, the possibility of reflection, it is obvious that by

pairing the t of (4) with its image /', then the latter with its image, and so on, a

sequence 5 of /'s is started which, because of (i) and (5), is incapable of

termination.  This  S,  too,  by  Dedekind's  proof,  is  an  infinite  assemblage.

Accordingly,  postulate  (i),  without  which,  be  it  observed,  the  proof  is

impossible, postulates, in advance of the argument, certainty which, if the

argument's conclusion be true, transcends the finite before the inference that

an infinite exists either is or can be drawn. The reader may recall how the

Russian mathematician Lobatschewsky said, "In the absence of proof of the

Euclidian postulate of parallels, I will assume that it is not true"; and how

thereupon there arose a new science of space. Suppose that, in like manner,

we say here, "In the absence 6f proof that an act once found to be mentally

performable is endlessly so performable, we will assume that such is not the

case," then, whatever else might result — and of that we shall presently speak

— one thing is at once absolutely certain: Dedekind's "argument" would be

quite impossible. The fact is that a more beautiful circle than his is hardly to

be found in the pages of fallacious speculation, or admits of construction by

the subtlest instruments of self-deceiving dialectic, though it must be frankly

allowed that Mr. Russell's ! more recent movement about the same centre isequally round and exquisite.

  And  this  disclosure  of  the  fatal  circle  in  the  attempted  demonstration

serves at once to introduce and exemplify the truth of my second contention,

which is that all logical discourse, of necessity, ex w termini, presupposes

  1 Principles of Mathematics, chap, xliii.

    certainty that transcends the finite, where by logical discourse I mean

such  as  consists  of  completely  determined  concepts  welded  into  a

concatenated system by the ancient hammer of deductive logic. The fact of

this  presupposition,  of  course,  cannot  be  proved,  but,  and  that  is  good

enough, it can be exhibited and beheld. To attempt to "prove" it would be to

stultify oneself by assuming the possibility of a deductive argument A to

prove  that  the  conclusion  of  A  cannot  be  drawn  unless  it  is  assumed  in

advance. The fact, then, if it be a fact, and of that there need not be the

slightest doubt, is to be added to that small group of fundamental simplicities

which can at best be seen, if the eye be fit.

    Consider, for example, this simplest of syllogistic forms: Every element e

of the class c is an element e of the class c' ; every e of c' is an element e of

the class c"; .'. every e of c is an e of c". I appeal now to the reader's own

subjective  experience  to  witness  to  the  following  facts:  (i)  Our  apodictic

feeling  is  the  sole  justification  of  the  inference  as  such;  (2)  that  felt

justification is absolute, neither seeking nor admitting of appeal; (3) that sole

and absolute justification, namely, the apodictic feeling, is in no slightest

degree contingent upon the answer to any question whether the multitude of

elements e or e or e is or is not, may or may not be found to be, "equivalent"

to some part of itself. The feeling of validity here undoubtedly transcends the

finite,  undoubtedly  holds  naught  in  reserve  against  any  possibility  of  the

inference  failing  as  an  act  should  the  system  of  elements  turn  out  to  be

infinite.  At some risk of excessive clearness and accentuation, for the matter is

immeasurably  important,  I  venture  to  ask  the  reader  to  witness  how  the

transcendence or transfiniteness of certainty shows itself in yet another

  way, not merely in formal deductive inference, but also in conception.

When any concept, as that of Parabola, for example, is formed or defined, it

is found that the concept contains implicitly a host of properties not given

explicitly in the definition. Properly speaking, the thing defined is a certain

organic  assemblage  of  properties,  of  which  the  totality  is  implied  in  a

properly selected few of them. Now the act which it is decisive here to note is

that by conception we mean, among other things, that whenever the definition

may  present  itself,  even  though  it  may  be  endlessly,  a  certain  invariant

assemblage of properties implicitly accompanies the presentation. Without

such  transfinite  certainty  of  such  invariant  uncontingent  implication,

conception would be devoid of its meaning.

  The  upshot,  then,  is  this:  that  conception  and  logical  inference  alike

presuppose absolute certainty that an act which the mind finds itself capable

of  performing  is  intrinsically  performable  endlessly,  or,  what  is  the  same

thing,  that  the  assemblage  of  possible  repetitions  of  a  once  mentally

performable act is equivalent to some proper part of the assemblage. This

certainty  I  name  the  Axiom  of  Infinity,  and  this  axiom  being,  as  seen,  a

necessary presupposition of both conception and deductive inference, every

attempt to "demonstrate" the existence of the infinite is a predestined begging

of the issue.

  What follows? Do we, then, know by axiom that the infinite is? That

depends upon your metaphysic. If you are a radical a-priorist, yes; if not, no.

If the latter, and I am now speaking as an a-priorist, then you are agnostic in

the deepest sense, being capable, in utmost rigour, of the terms, of neither

conceiving nor inferring. But if we do not know the axiom to be true, and so

  cannot deductively prove the existence of the infinite, what, then, is the

probability of such existence? The highest yet attained. Why? Because the

inductive  test  of  the  axiom,  regarded  now  as  a  hypothesis,  is  trying  to

conceive and trying to infer, and this experiment, which has been world-wide

for aeons, has seemed to succeed in countless cases, and to fail in none not

explainable  on  grounds  consistent  with  the  retention  of  the  hypothesis.

Finally, to make briefest application to a single concrete case. Do the stars

constitute an infinite multitude? No one knows. If the number be finite, that

fact may some time be ascertained by actual enumeration, and, if and only ifthere be infinite ensembles of possible repetitions of mental processes, it may

also be known by proof. But if the multitude of stars be infinite, that can

never be known except by proof; this last is possible only if the axiom of

infinity  be  true,  and  even  if  this  be  true,  the  actual  proof  may  never  be

achieved.

  THE PERMANENT BASIS OF A LIBERAL EDUCATION l

  Is it possible to find a principle or a set of principles qualified to serve as

a  permanent  basis  for  a  theory  of  liberal  education?  If  so,  what  is  the

principle or set of principles? These are old questions. We are living in a time

when they must be considered anew.

  If our world were a static affair, if our environment, physical, spiritual

and institutional, were stable, then we should none of us have difficulty in

agreeing  that  a  liberal  education  would  be  one  that  gave  the  student

adjustment and orientation in the world through disciplining his faculties in

their relation to its cardinal static facts. Such a world could be counted upon.

No one doubts that in such a world it would be possible to find a permanent

basis for a theory of liberal education — a principle or a set of principles that

would be adequate and sound, not merely to-day, but to-day, yesterday and

to-morrow.

  But we are reminded by certain rather numerous educational philosophers

that our world is not a static affair. We are told that it is a scene of perpetual

change, of endless and universal transformation — physical flux, institutional

flux, social flux, spiritual flux: all is flux. These philosophers tell us of the

rapid and continued advancement and multiplication of knowledge. They, do

not cease to remind us that knowledge goes

  164 PERMANENT BASIS OP LIBERAL EDUCATION

  on building itself out, not only in all the old directions, but also in an

endlessly increasing variety of new directions. They remind us that the ever-

augmenting  volume  of  knowledge  is  continually  breaking  up  into  new

divisions or kinds, and that each of these quickly asserts, and sooner or later

demonstrates,  its  parity  with  any  other  division  in  respect  of  utility  and

dignity and disciplinary value. They remind us that a striking concomitant

phenomenon,  which  is  partly  the  effect  of  the  multiplication  and

differentiation of knowledge, partly a cause of it and partly owing to other

agencies and influences, is the fact that new occupations constantly spring

into being on every hand and that the needs, the desires and the habits of

men, and therewith the drifts and forms of social and institutional life, sufferperpetual mutation. Nothing, they tell us, is permanent except change itself.

All  things,  material,  mental,  moral,  social,  institutional,  are  tossed  in  an

infinite  and  endless  welter  of  transformations  —  evolution,  involution,

revolution, all going on at once and forever.

  It is evident, we are assured, that in such a world the search for abiding

principles is vain, whether we seek a permanent basis for a liberal education

or a permanent basis for anything else. The doctrine is that in our world

permanent  bases  do  not  exist.  Permanence,  stability,  invariance,

immutability, there is none. It exists only in rationalistic dreams. It exists

only in the insubstantial musings of the tender-minded. It exists only in the

cravings of such as have not the prag-matistic courage or constitution to deal

with reality as it is in the welter and the raw. We are told that there is in

matters educational no such thing as eternal wisdom. Wisdom is at best a

transitory thing, depending on time and place, and constantly changing with

    PERMANENT BASIS OP LIBERAL EDUCATION 16$

  them. A prescription that is wise to-day will be foolish to-morrow. What

was a liberal education is not such now. What is a liberal education to-day

will not be liberal in the future. Greek has gone, theology is gone, religion is

gone, Latin is almost gone, mathematics, we are told, is going, and so on and

on. Each branch of knowledge will have its day, and then will cease to be

essential. Liberal curricula, it is contended, must change with the times.

  This doctrine, logically conceived and carried out, means that as the years

and  generations  follow  endlessly,  time  and  change  will  beget  an  endless

succession of so-called liberal curricula. It means that, if, in this unending

sequence,  we  observe  a  finite  number  of  successive  curricula,  these  will

indeed be found to resemble each other, overlapping, interpenetrating, and

thus seeming to be held together in a kind of unity by a more or less vague

and elusive bond; but that this must be appearance only. For if the observed

succession be prolonged, as it is bound to be, the seeming principle of unity

must  become  dimmer  and  dimmer;  the  terms  or  curricula  of  the  endless

succession of them can have, in fact, nothing in common, no lien, no unity

whatever,  save  that  pale  variety  which  serves  merely  to  constitute  the

succession of curricula an infinite series of terms. It is not unlikely that the

educational philosophers in question may not be aware that this is what their

doctrine means. Nevertheless, that is what it does mean.

  Is the doctrine sound? To me it seems not to be so. The question is a

question of fact. The denial of permanent principle and the assertion of itsconcomitant theory of education seek to justify themselves by pointing to the

fluctuance of the world. I do not deny the

  166 PERMANENT BASIS OF LIBERAL EDUCATION

  fluctuance of the world. One must be blind to do that. Here, there and

yonder, in the world of matter, in the world of mind, in thought, in religion,

in morals, in conventions, in institutions, everywhere are evident the driftings

and shiftings of events: everywhere course the hasting streams of change. I

admit the storm and stress, the tumult and hurly-burly of it all. I do not deny

that impermanence is a permanent and mighty fact in our world. What I do

deny is that impermanence is universal. Its sweep is not clean. Far from it. If

it is, man has indeed been a colossal fool, for the quest of Constance, the

search  for  invari-ance,  for  things  that  abide,  for  forms  of  reality  that  are

eternal, has been in all times and places the dominant concern of man, uniting

his philosophy, his religion, his science, his art and his jurisprudence into one

manifold enterprise of mankind. Not permanence alone, nor impermanence

alone, but the two together, one of them drawing and the other driving, it is

these two working together that have shaped the course of human history and

moulded the form of its content. I admit that impermanence is more evident

and obtrusive than permanence, but I contend that a philosophy which finds

in  the  world  nothing  but  change  is  a  shallow  philosophy  and  false.  The

instinct  that  perpetually  drives  man  to  seek  the  fixed,  the  stable,  the

everlasting, has its root deep in nature. It is a cosmic thing. Must we say that

this instinct, this most imperious of human cravings, has no function except

that of qualifying man to be eternally mocked? It cannot be admitted. The

sweep of mutation is indeed deep and wide, but it is not universal. It would

be possible, in a contest before a committee of competent judges, to show

that temporalities are, in respect of number, more than matched

    PERMANENT BASIS OF LIBERAL EDUCATION 167

  by eternalities, and that, in respect of relative importance, changes are as

dancing wavelets on an infinite and everlasting sea.

  In our environment there exist certain great invariant massive facts that

now are and always will be necessary and sufficient to constitute the basis of

a curriculum or a theory of liberal education. These facts are obvious and on

that account they require to be pointed out, just because, in the matter of

escaping attention, what is very obvious is a rival of what is obscure.

  What are these facts? One of them is the fact that every human being has

behind him an immense human past, the past of mankind. Of course, I do notmean that what we call the human past is itself a fixed or permanent thing. It

is not. It is a variable, constantly changing by virtue of perpetual additions to

it  as  the  years  and  centuries  empty  the  volume  of  their  events  into  that

limitless sea. What is permanent is the fact — it was so yesterday and it will

be so to-morrow — that behind each one of us there is a human past so

immense as to be practically infinite. That fact, I say, is permanent. It can be

counted on. It is as nearly eternal as the race of man. Out of that past we have

come.  Into  it  we  are  constantly  passing.  Meanwhile,  it  is  of  the  utmost

importance to our lives. It contains the roots of all we are, and of all we have

of wisdom, of science, of philosophy, of art, of jurisprudence, of customs and

institutions. It contains the record or ruins of all the experiments that man has

made during a quarter or a half million years in the art of living in this world.

This great stable fact of an immense human past behind every human being

that now is or is to be, obviously makes it necessary for any theory of liberal

education to provide for discipline in human history

  168 PERMANENT BASIS OF LIBERAL EDUCATION

  and in the literature of antiquity. How much? A reasonable amount —

enough, that is, to orient the student in relation to the past, to give him a fair

sense of the continuity of the life of mankind, a decent appreciation of ancient

works of genius, and sense and knowledge enough to guide his energies and

to control his enthusiasms in the light of human experience. As the centuries

go by, ancient literature and human history will increase more and more.

What is a reasonable prescription will, therefore, become less and less in its

relation to the increasing whole, but it will never vanish. It will never cease to

be indispensable.

  In this connection, the following question is certain to be asked. From the

point of view of this inquiry, which aims at indicating an enduring basis for a

theory of liberal education, does it follow that Greek or Latin or any other

language  that  may  be  destined  to  become  "classic"  and  "dead"  at  some

remote future time, — does it follow that these or any of them must enter as

essential into the curriculum of a liberal education? It does not. It would

indeed be a grave misfortune if there should ever come a time when there

were no longer a goodly number of scholars devoted to the great languages of

antiquity. Some of the thought, of the science, of the wisdom, of the beauty

originally expressed in these tongues, is, we have said, essential; but it is

precisely the chief function of those who master the ancient languages to

make  their  precious  content  available,  through  translations  and  criticalcommentaries, for the great body of their fellow men to whom the languages

themselves  must  remain  unknown.  It  is  not  denied  that  the  scholars  in

question will know and appreciate such content as no others can, but neither

will these scholars continue forever to deny the possi-

    PERMANENT BASIS OP LIBERAL EDUCATION 169

  bility  of  rendering  most  of  the  content  reasonably  well  in  the  living

languages  of  their  fellow  men.  The  contrary  cannot  be  much  longer

maintained. Indeed the layman already knows that Euclid, Plato, Aristotle,

Aeschylus,  Sophocles,  Euripides,  Demosthenes,  Virgil,  Cicero,  Lucretius,

and  many  others,  have  already  learned,  or  are  rapidly  learning,  to  speak,

beautifully and powerfully, all the culture languages of the modern world.

  Another of the massive facts that transcends the flux of the world, and

that, therefore, must contribute basically to any permanent theory of liberal

education, is the fact that every human being is encompassed by a physical or

material universe. Again I do not mean, of course I do not mean, that the

universe remains always the same. What is permanent is the fact that human

beings always have been, now are, and always will be, surrounded on every

hand by an infinite objective world of matter and force. In that world we are

literally  immersed.  Our  bodies  are  parts  of  it;  they  are  composed  of  its

elements and will be resolved into them again. If our minds, too, be not part

of  it,  they  must  at  all  events,  on  pain  of  our  physical  incompetence  or

extinction, gain and maintain continuous and intelligent relations with it. The

great fact in question, like the fact of the human past, can be counted on. It

survives  all  vicissitudes.  The  immersing  universe  may  be  a  chaos  or  a

cosmos, or partly chaotic and partly cosmic, preserving its character in that

regard or tending along an asymptotic path to chaos complete or to cosmic

perfection. But if it is chaotic, we humans sufficiently match it in that regard

to be able to treat it more and more successfully as if it were an infinite locus

of order and law. And we know that to do this

  170 PERMANENT BASIS OF LIBERAL EDUCATION

  is  immensely  advantageous.  In  a  strict  sense,  it  is  absolutely

indispensable. Merely to live, it is necessary to treat nature as having some

order.

  These  considerations  show  that  any  theory  which  aims  to  orient  and

discipline  the  faculties  of  men  and  women  in  their  relation  to  the  great

permanent facts of the world must make basal provision for discipline in

what  we  call  natural,  or  physical,  science.  Again,  how  much?  Again  theanswer is, a reasonable amount. But how much, pray, is that? Enough to give

the  student  a  fair  acquaintance  with  the  heroes  of  natural  science,  a  fair

understanding of what scientific men mean by natural order or law, a decent

insight into scientific method, the role of hypothesis, and the processes of

experimentation and verification. But there are so many branches of natural

science and their number is increasing. A liberal curriculum cannot require

them all. Which shall be chosen? It does not matter much. These branches

differ a good deal in content and in a less degree in method, but they have

enough in common to make a claim of superiority for any one of them mainly

a partisan claim. The spirit of science, its methods, some of its chief results,

these are the essentials. To give these, physics is competent, so is chemistry,

so is botany, so is zoology, and so on. The choice is a temporal detail, but the

principle requiring the choice is everlasting. A hundred or a thousand years

hence, there will be other details to choose from — scientific branches not yet

named, nor even dreamed of. But — and this is the point — a theory of

liberal education will not cease to demand some discipline in natural science

so long as human beings are immersed in an infinite world of matter and

force.

  Nor will such a theory fail to take account funda-

    PERMANENT BASIS OF LIBERAL EDUCATION 171

  mentally of a third great fact that persists despite the flux of things and

the law of death. I refer to the fact that every human being's fortune depends

vitally upon what may be called the world of ideas. It is evident that of the

total  environment  of  man,  the  human  Gedankenwelt  is  a  stupendous  and

mighty  component.  Like  the  other  great  components  already  named,  or

namable, the world of ideas is, in respect of its existence, a permanent datum

amid the weltering sea of change. Not only may it be counted on, but it must

be  reckoned  with.  Some  thinking  everyone  must  do.  The  formation  and

combination  of  ideas  is  not  merely  indispensable  to  welfare,  it  is  more

fundamental  than  that:  it  is  essential  to  human  life.  The  world  of  ideas

contains countless possibilities that are not actualized or realized or validated

or  incarnated,  as  we  say,  in  the  order  of  the  material  world,  nor  in  any

existing social or institutional order. It is plain that discipline in the ways and

forms of abstract thinking, of dealing with ideas as ideas, is essential to a

liberal education, not merely because the world of ideas is itself a thing of

supreme  and  eternal  worth,  but  because  those  who  are  incapable  of

constructing ideal orders may not hope to have the imagination requisite forascertaining or for appreciating the frame and order actualized in external

nature. From all of this it is clear that any enduring theory of liberal education

must provide for the discipline of logic and mathematics, for it is in these and

these  alone  that  rigorous  or  cogent  thinking  finds  its  standard  and  its

realization.  It  is  true  that  most  of  the  thinking  that  the  exigencies  of  life

compel us to do is not cogent thinking. We are obliged constantly to deal

with ideas that are too nebulous to admit of rigorously logical handling. But

to argue

  172 PERMANENT BASIS OF LIBERAL EDUCATION

  that consequently discipline in rigorous thinking is not essential, is stupid.

It is to ignore the value of standards and ideals. It is, in other words, to be

spiritually  blind.  I  am  making  no  partisan  plea  for  my  own  subject.

Mathematics  happens  to  be  the  name  that  time  has  given  to  rigorous  or

cogent thinking, and so it happens that mathematics is the name of the one art

or science that is qualified to give men and women a perfect standard of

thinking and to bring them into the thrilling presence of indestructible bodies

of  thought.  Call  the  science  by  any  other  name  —•  anathematics  or

logostetics. The thing itself and its functions would be the same.

  Another cardinal fact among the permanent considerations that a theory

of liberal education must rest upon is the fact that human beings are social

beings. It is only in dreams and romances that a human being lives apart in

isolation.  Men,  said  Aristotle,  are  made  for  co-operation.  Every  man  and

every  woman  is  a  born  member  of  a  thousand  teams.  Not  one  is  pure

individual. Each one is many. None can extricate himself from the generic

web of man. This fact survives the flux. It is as nearly everlasting as the

human race. It is a rock to build upon. And so it was true yesterday, is true to-

day, and will be true to-morrow, that an education whose function it is to

discipline the faculties of man in their relation to the great abiding facts of

life and the world, must provide for discipline in the fundamentals of political

science. Moreover, as it is essential to the health and to the effectiveness of

the  individual,  and  also  essential  to  the  welfare  of  society  that  men  and

women be able to express themselves acceptably and effectively, a liberal

education will provide for discipline in the greatest of all the arts

    PERMANENT BASIS OF LIBERAL EDUCATION 173

  -  the  art  of  rhetoric.  No  term  has  been  more  abused,  especially  by

amorphous men of science. Yet the late Henri Poincar6 was made a member

of  the  French  Academy,  not  because  he  was  a  great  mathematician,astronomer, physicist and philosopher, but because of his masterful control of

the resources of the French language as an instrument of human expression.

  I have spoken of the invariant fact of the human past. Its complement is

the  fact  of  the  human  future.  That,  too,  is  a  great  abiding  fact.  It  is,  in

practice,  to  be  treated  as  eternal,  for,  if  the  race  of  man  be  doomed  to

extinction, then, in that far off event, human education itself will cease. Does

it follow that a theory of liberal education must provide for instruction in

prophecy?  It  does  follow.  But  is  it  not  foolish  to  speak  of  instruction  in

prophecy? For is not prophecy a thing of the past? Is it not a dead or a dying

office of priests? It is not foolish, it is not a thing of the past, it is not a dead

or dying office of priests. Prophecy is a thing of the present, destined to

increase with the advancement of knowledge. Every department of study is a

department of prophecy. It is the function of science to foretell. Prophecy is

not the opposite of history, it is history's main function. As W. K. Clifford

long ago pointed out, every proposition in physics or astronomy or chemistry

or zoology or mathematics, or other branch of science, is a rule of conduct

facing the future — a rule saying that, if such-and-such be true, then such-

and-such must be true; if such-and-such a situation be present, then such-and-

such  things  will  happen;  if  we  do  thus-and-thus,  then  certain  statable

consequences  may  be  expected.  Foretelling,  indeed,  is  not  the  exclusive

office  of  knowledge,  for  musing,  meditation,  pensiveness,  pure

contemplation, have their

  174 PERMANENT BASIS OF LIBERAL EDUCATION

    legitimate place; but man is mainly and primarily an active animal; and in

relation to action, the business of knowledge is prophecy, forecasting what to

do and what to expect.

  Finally  it  remains  to  mention  another  fundamental  matter  that  must

contribute in a paramount measure to any just theory of a liberal education. It

is not a matter strictly co-ordinate with the other matters mentioned, but it

touches them all, penetrates them all and transfigures them all. I refer to the

discipline of beauty. Beauty is the most vitalizing thing in the world. It is

beauty  that  makes  life  worth  living  and  makes  it  possible.  If,  by  some

fiendish cataclysm, all the beauty of art and all the beauty of nature were to

be  suddenly  blotted  out,  the  human  race  would  quickly  perish  through

depression caused by the ubiquitous presence of ugliness. Does it follow that

a liberal curriculum must provide for the instruction of every student in all

the arts? No. Like the natural sciences, the arts are enough alike to make anyone of them a representative of them all. Besides, all subjects of study are

penetrated with beauty, and any one of them may be so administered as to

enlarge and refine the sense of what is beautiful in life and the world.

  Such  I  take  to  be  major  considerations  among  the  great  permanent

massive facts that together suffice and are essential to constitute an enduring

basis for a theory of liberal education. Ought discipline to be prescribed in all

the indicated fields? The answer would seem to be that a liberally educated

man or woman is one who has been instructed in them all. It follows that

there be seekers who are by nature not qualified to find. But in the case of

these, as in the

  case of their more gifted fellows, it must be remembered that not the least

service a program of liberal study should render, is that of disclosing to men

and women and to their fellows their respective powers and limitations.

    GRADUATE  MATHEMATICAL  INSTRUCTION  FOR  GRADUATE

STUDENTS NOT INTENDING TO BECOME MATHEMATICIANS 1

  IN his "Annual Report" under date of November last, the President of

Columbia University speaks in vigorous terms of what he believes to be the

increasing  failure  of  present-day  advanced  instruction  to  fulfil  one  of  the

chief purposes for which institutions of higher learning are established and

maintained.

  In the course of an interesting section devoted to college and university

teaching, President Butler says:

  A matter that is closely related to poor teaching is found in the growing

tendency of colleges and universities to vocationalize all their instruction. A

given department will plan all its courses of instruction solely from the point

of  view  of  the  student  who  is  going  to  specialize  in  that  field.  It  is

increasingly difficult for those who have the very proper desire to gain some

real knowledge of a given topic without intending to become specialists in it.

A university department is not well organized and is not doing its duty until it

establishes  and  maintains  at  least  one  strong  substantial  university  course

designed primarily for students of maturity and power, which course will be

an end in itself and will present to those who take it a general view of the

subject-matter of a designated field of knowledge, its methods, its literature

and its results. It should be possible for an advanced student specializing in

some  other  field  to  gain  a  general  knowledge  of  physical  problems  and

processes without becoming a physicist; or a general knowledge of chemical

problems and processes without becoming a chemist; or a general knowledgeof  zoological  problems  and  processes  without  becoming  a  zoologist;  or  a

general  knowledge  of  mathematical  problems  and  processes  without

becoming a mathematician.

  1 An address delivered before Section A of the American Association for

the Advancement of Science, December 30, 1914. Printed in Science, March

26, 1915.

  This is a large matter, involving all the cardinal divisions of knowledge. I

have neither time nor competence to deal with it fully or explicitly in all its

bearings. As indicated by the title of this address it is my intention to confine

myself,  not  indeed  exclusively  but  in  the  main,  to  consideration  of  the

question in its relation to advanced instruction in mathematics. The obvious

advantages of this restriction will not, I believe, be counterbalanced by equal

disadvantages. For, much as the principal subjects of university instruction

differ among themselves, it is yet true that as instruments of education they

have  a  common  character  and  for  their  efficacy  as  such  depend

fundamentally upon the same educational principles. A discussion, therefore,

of an important and representative part of the general question will naturally

derive no little of whatever interest and value it may have from its implicit

bearing upon the whole. It is not indeed my intention to depend solely upon

such implicit bearings nor upon the representative character of mathematics

to intimate my opinion respecting the question in its relation to other subjects.

On the contrary, I am going to assume that specialists in other fields will

allow me, as a lay neighbor fairly inclined to minding his own affairs, the

privilege of some quite explicit preliminary remarks upon the larger question.

  I suspect that my interest in the matter is in a measure temperamental; and

my conviction in the premises, though it is not, I believe, an unreasoned one,

may be somewhat colored by inborn predilection. At all events I own that a

good many years of devotion to one field of knowledge has not destroyed in

me a certain fondness for avocational studies, for books that deal with large

subjects in large ways, and for men who, uniting the

    generalist with the specialist in a single gigantic personality, can show

you perspectives, contours and reliefs, a great subject or a great doctrine in its

principal aspects, in its continental bearings, without first compelling you to

survey it pebble by pebble and inch by inch. I can not remember the time

when it did not seem to me to be the very first obligation of universities to

cherish instruction of the kind that is given and received in the avocational as

distinguished from the vocational spirit — the kind of instruction that has forits aim, not action but understanding, not utilities but ideas, not efficiency but

enlightenment, not prosperity but magnanimity. For without intelligence and

magnanimity — without light and soul — no form of being can be noble and

every species of conduct is but a kind of blundering in the night. I could

hardly say more explicitly that I agree heartily and entirely with the main

contention of President Butler's pronouncement. Indeed I should go a step

further than he has gone. He has said that a university department is not well

organized and is not doing its duty until it establishes and maintains the kind

of instruction I have tried to characterize. To that statement I venture to add

explicitly — what is of course implicit in it — that a university is not well

organized  and  is  not  doing  its  duty  until  it  makes  provision  whereby  the

various  departments  are  enabled  to  foster  the  kind  of  instruction  we  are

talking about. That in all major subjects of university instruction there ought

to  be  given  courses  designed  for  students  of  "maturity  and  power"  who,

whilst specializing in one subject or one field, desire to generalize in others,

appears  to  me  to  be  from  every  point  of  view  so  reasonable  and  just  a

proposition  that  it  would  not  occur  to  me  to  regard  it  as  questionable  or

debatable were it

  not for the fact that it actually is questioned and debated by teachers of

eminence and authority.

  What is there in the contention about which men may differ? Dr. Butler

has  said  that  there  is  a  "growing  tendency  of  college  and  university

departments  to  vo-cationalize  all  their  instruction."  Is  the  statement

erroneous? It may, I think, be questioned whether the tendency is growing. I

hope it is not. Of course specialization is not a new thing in the world. It is far

older  than  history.  Let  it  be  granted  that  it  is  here  to  stay,  for  it  is

indispensable to the advancement of knowledge and to the conduct of human

affairs.  Every  one  knows  that.  There  is,  however,  some  evidence  that

specialization is becoming, indeed that it has become, wiser, less exclusive,

more temperate. The symptoms of what not long ago promised to become a

kind  of  specialism  mania  appear  to  be  somewhat  less  pronounced.

Recognition of the fact that specialization is in constant peril of becoming so

minute and narrow as to defeat its own ends is now a commonplace among

specialists themselves, many of whom have learned the lesson through sad

experience, others from observation. Specialists are discoverers. One of our

recent discoveries is the discovery of a very old truth: we have discovered

that no work can be really great which does not contain some element ortouch of the universal, and that is not exactly a new insight. Leonardo da

Vinci says:

  We may frankly admit that certain people deceive themselves who apply

the title "a good master" to a painter who can only do the head or the figure

well. Surely it is no great achievement if by studying one thing only during

his whole lifetime he attain to some degree of excellence therein!

  The conviction seems to be gaining ground that in the republic of learning

the ideal citizen is neither

  the ignorant specialist, however profound he may be, nor the shallow

generalist, however wide the range of his interest and enlightenment. It is not

important,  however,  in  this  connection  to  ascertain  whether  the

vocationalizing tendency is at present increasing or decreasing or stationary.

What is important is to recognize the fact that the tendency, be it waxing or

waning, actually exists, and that it operates in such strength as practically to

exclude  all  provision  for  the  student  who,  if  I  may  so  express  it,  would

qualify  himself  to  gaze  into  the  heavens  intelligently  without  having  to

pursue courses designed for none but such as would emulate a Newton or a

Laplace. If any one doubts that such is the actual state of the case, the remedy

is very simple: let him choose at random a dozen or a score of the principal

universities and examine their bulletins of instruction in the major fields of

knowledge.

  Another  element  —  an  extremely  important  element  —  of  President

Butler's  contention  is  present  in  the  form  of  a  double  assumption:  it  is

assumed  that  in  any  university  community  there  are  serious  and  capable

students whose primary aim is indeed the winning of mastery in a chosen

field  of  knowledge  but  who  at  the  same  time  desire  to  gain  some

understanding of other fields — some intelligence of their enterprises, their

genius, their methods and their achievements; it is further assumed that this

non-vocational or avocational propensity is legitimate and laudable. Are the

assumptions correct? The latter one involves a question of values and will be

dealt  with  presently.  In  respect  of  the  former  we  have  to  do  with  what

mathematicians call an existence theorem: Do the students described exist?

They do. Can the fact be demonstrated — deductively proved? It can not.

How, then, may we know it to be

  true? The answer is: partly by observation, partly by experience, partly by

inference and partly by being candid with ourselves. Who is there among us

that is unwilling to admit that he himself now is or at least once was a studentof the kind? Where is the university professor to whom such students have

not  revealed  themselves  as  such  in  conversation?  Who  is  it  that  has  not

learned of their existence through the testimony of others? No doubt some of

us not only have known students of the kind, but have tried in a measure to

serve them. We may as well be frank. I have myself for some years offered in

my subject a course designed in large part for students having no vocational

interest in mathematics. I may be permitted to say, for what the testimony

may be worth, that the response has been good. The attendance has been

composed about equally of students who were not looking forward to a career

in  mathematics  and  of  students  who  were.  And  this  leads  me  to  say,  in

passing, that, if the latter students were asked to explain what value such

instruction could have for them, they would probably answer that it served to

give them some knowledge about a great subject which they could hardly

hope  to  acquire  from  courses  designed  solely  to  give  knowledge  of  the

subject. Every one knows that it often is of great advantage to treat a subject

as an object. One of the chief values of //-dimensional geometry is that it

enables us to contemplate ordinary space from the outside, as even those who

have  but  little  imagination  can  contemplate  a  plane  because  it  does  not

immerse them. Returning from this digression, permit me to ask: if, without

trying to discover the type of student in question, we yet become aware, quite

casually, that the type actually exists, is it not legitimate to infer that it is

much more

    numerously  represented  than  is  commonly  supposed?  And  if  such

students occasionally make their presence known even when we do not offer

them  the  kind  of  instruction  to  render  their  wants  articulate,  is  it  not

reasonable  to  infer  that  the  provision  of  such  instruction  would  have  the

effect of revealing them in much greater numbers?

  Indeed it does not seem unreasonable to suppose that a "strong substantial

course"  of  the  kind  in  question,  in  whatever  great  subject  it  were  given,

would be attended not only by considerable numbers of regular students but

in a measure also by officers of instruction in other subjects and even perhaps

by other qualified residents of an academic community. Only the other day

one of my mathematical colleagues said to me that he would rejoice in an

opportunity to attend such a course in physics. The dean of a great school of

law not long ago expressed the wish that some one might write a book on

mathematics in such a way as would enable students like himself to learn

something of the innerness of this science, something of its spirit, its range,its ways, achievements and aspiration. I have known an eminent professor of

economics to join a beginner's class in analytical geometry. Very recently one

of the major prophets of philosophy declared it to be his intention to suspend

for a season his own special activity in order to devote himself to acquiring

some  knowledge  of  modern  mathematics.  Similar  instances  abound  and

might be cited by any one not only at great length, but in connection with

every cardinal division of knowledge. Their significance is plain. They are

but additional tokens of the fact that the race of catholic-minded men has not

been extinguished by the reigning specialism of the time, but that among

  students and scholars there are still to be found those whose curiosity and

intellectual interests surpass all professional limits and crave instruction more

generic in kind, more liberal, if you please, and ampler in its scope, than our

vocationalized programs afford.

  As to the question of values, I maintain that the desire of such men is

entirely legitimate, that it is wholesome and praiseworthy, that it deserves to

be stimulated, and that universities ought to meet it, if they can. Indeed, all

this seems to me so obvious that I find it a little difficult to treat it seriously

as a question. If the matter must be debated, let it be debated on worthy

ground.  To  say,  as  proponents  sometimes  say,  that,  inasmuch  as  all

knowledge turns out sooner or later to be useful, students preparing for a

given vocation by specializing in a given field may profitably seek some

general acquaintance with other fields because such general knowledge will

indirectly  increase  their  vocational  equipment,  is  to  offer  a  consideration

which, though in itself it is just enough, yet degrades the discussion from its

appropriate level, which is that of an ideal humanity, down to the level of

mere  efficiency  and  practicianism.  No  doubt  one  engaged  in  minutely

studying the topography of a given locality because he intends to reside in it

might be plausibly advised to study also the general geography of the globe

on  the  ground  that  his  special  topographical  knowledge  would  be  thus

enhanced, and that, moreover, he might some time desire to travel. But if we

ventured to counsel him so, he might reply: What you say is true. But why do

you  ply  me  with  such  low  considerations?  Why  do  you  regard  me  as

something crawling on its belly? Don't you know that I ought to acquire a

general knowledge, of geography, not primarily because it may be

  useful to me as a resident here or as a possible traveler, but because such

knowledge is essential to me in my character as a man? The rebuke, if we

were  fortunately  capable  of  feeling  it,  would  be  well  deserved.  A  manbuilding a bridge is greater than the engineer; a man planting seed is greater

than the farmer; a man teaching calculus is greater than the mathematician; a

man presiding at a faculty meeting is greater than the dean or the president.

We may as well remember that man is superior to any of his occupations. His

supreme vocation is not law nor medicine nor theology nor commerce nor

war nor journalism nor chemistry nor physics nor mathematics nor literature

nor any specific science or art or activity; it is intelligence, and it is this

supreme  vocation  of  man  as  man  that  gives  to  universities  their  supreme

obligation. It is unworthy of a university to conceive of man as if he were

created to be the servant of utilities, trades, professions and careers: these

things are for him: not ends but means. It is said that intelligence is good

because it prospers us in our trades, industries and professions; it ought to be

said  that  these  things  are  good  because  and  in  so  far  as  they  prosper

intelligence. Even if we do not conceive the office of intelligence to be that of

contributing to being in its highest form, which consists in understanding,

even if we conceive its function less nobly as that of enabling us to adjust

ourselves to our environment, the same conclusion holds. For what is our

environment? Is it wholly or mainly a matter of sensible circumstance — sea

and land and sky, heat and cold, day and night, seasons, food, raiment, and

the like? Far from it. It is rather a matter of spiritual circumstances — ideas,

sentiments, doctrines, sciences, institutions, and arts. It is in respect of this

ever-changing and ever-devel-

  oping  world  of  spiritual  things,  it  is  in  respect  of  this  invisible  and

intangible  environment  of  life,  that  universities,  whilst  aiming  to  give

mastery in this part or that, are at the same time under equal obligation to

give to such as can receive it some general orientation in the whole.

  And now as to the question of feasibility. Can the thing be done? So far

as mathematics is concerned I am confident that it can, and I have a strong

lay suspicion that it can be done in all other subjects.

  It is my main purpose to show, with some regard to concreteness and

detail, that the thing is feasible in mathematics. Before doing so, however, I

desire to view the matter a little further in its general aspect and in particular

to deal with some of the considerations that tend to deter many scientific

specialists from entering upon the enterprise.

  One of the considerations, and one, too, that is often but little understood,

and so leads to wrong imputations of motive, though it is in a sense distinctly

creditable to those who are influenced by it, is the consideration that relates tointricacy  and  technicality  of  subject-matter  and  doctrine.  Every  specialist

knows  that  the  principal  developments  in  his  branch  of  science  are  too

intricate, too technical and too remote from the threshold of the matter to be

accessible  to  laymen,  whatever  their  abilities  and  attainments  in  foreign

fields. Not only does he know that there is thus but relatively little of his

science which laymen can understand but he knows also that the portions

which  they  can  not  understand  are  in  general  precisely  those  of  greatest

interest and beauty. And knowing this, he feels, sometimes very strongly, that

were he to endeavor by means of a lecture course to give laymen a general

    acquaintance with his subject, he could not fail to incur the guilt of giving

them,  not  merely  an  inadequate  impression,  but  an  essentially  false

impression,  of  the  nature,  significance  and  dignity  of  a  great  field  of

knowledge. His hesitance, therefore, is not due, as it is sometimes thought to

be, to indifference or to selfishness. Rather is it due to a sense of loyalty to

truth, to a sense of veracity, to an unwillingness to mislead or deceive. Of

course strange things do sometimes happen, and it is barely conceivable that

once  in  a  long  time  nature  may,  in  a  sportive  mood,  produce  a  kind  of

specialist whose subject affects him much as the possession of an apple or a

piece of candy affects the boy who goes round the corner in order to have it

all  himself.  But  if  the  type  exist,  not  many  men  could  claim  the  odd

distinction of belonging to it. Specialists are as generous and humane as other

men. Their subjects affect them as that same boy is affected when, if he

chance to come suddenly upon some strange kind of flower or bird, he at

once summons his sister or brother or father or mother or other friend to

share  in  his  surprise  and  joy.  There  is  this  difference,  however  —  the

specialist must, unfortunately, suffer his joy in solitude unless and until he

finds a comrade in kind. I admit that the deterrent consideration in question is

thoroughly  intelligible.  I  contend  that  the  motive  it  involves  presents  an

attractive aspect. But I can not think it of sufficient weight to be decisive. It

involves, I believe, an erroneous estimate of values, a fallacious view of the

ways  of  truth  to  men.  A  few  years  ago,  when  making  a  railway  journey

through  one  of  the  most  imposing  parts  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,  I  was

tempted like many another passenger to procure some photographs of the

scenery in order to convey to far-away

  friends some notion of the wonders of it. So far, however, did the actual

scenery surpass the pictures of it, excellent as these were, that I decided not to

buy them, feeling it were better to convey no impression at all than to giveone so inferior to my own. No doubt the decision might be defended on the

ground  of  its  motive.  Did  it  not  originate  in  a  certain  laudable  sense  of

obligation to truth? Nevertheless, as I am now convinced, the decision was

silly. For in accordance with the same principle it is plain that I ought to have

wished to have my own impressions erased, seeing that they must have been

quite inferior to those of a widely experienced mountaineer as those which

the pictures could have given were inferior to mine. Who is so foolish as to

argue that no one should learn anything about, say London, unless he means

to master all its plans, its architecture and its history in their every phase,

feature  and  detail?  Who  would  contend  that  because  we  are  permitted  to

know only so little of what is happening in the European war, we ought to

remain  in  total  ignorance  of  it?  Who  would  say  that  no  one  may  with

propriety seek to learn something about ancient Rome unless he is bent on

becoming a Gibbon or a Mommsen? It is undoubtedly true that an endeavor

to present a body of doctrine or a science to such as can not receive it fully

must result in giving a false impression of the truth. But the notion that such

an  endeavor  is  therefore  wrong  is  a  notion  which,  if  consistently  and

thoroughly  carried  out,  would  put  the  human  mind  entirely  out  of

commission. All impressions, all views, all theories, all doctrines, all sciences

are false in the sense of being partial, imperfect, incomplete. "II n'y a plus des

problemes  resolus  et  d'autres  qui  ne  le  sont  pas,  il  y  a  seulement  des

probldmes

  plus ou mains resolus," said Henri Poincare. Every one must see that, but

for the helpfulness of views which because incomplete are also in a measure

false,  even  the  practical  conduct  of  life,  not  to  say  the  advancement  of

science,  would  be  impossible.  There  is  no  other  choice:  either  we  must

subsist upon fragments or perish.

  Again, many a specialist shrinks from trying to present his subject to

laymen because he looks upon such activity as a species of what is called

popularization of science, and he believes that such popularization, even in its

best sense, closely resembles vulgarization in its worst. He fancies that there

is  a  sharp  line  bounding  off  knowledge  that  is  mere  knowledge  from

knowledge that is scientific. In his view science is for specialists and for

specialists only. He declines, on something like moral and esthetic grounds,

to engage in what he calls playing to the gallery. It might, of course, be said

that there is more than one way of playing to the gallery. It could be said that

one way consists in acting the role of one who imagines that his intellectualinterests are so austere and elevated and his thought so profound that a just

sense  of  the  awful  dignity  of  his  vocation  imposes  upon  him,  when  in

presence  of  the  vulgar  multitude,  the  solemn  law  of  silence.  It  would  be

ungenerous,  however,  if  not  unfair,  to  insist  upon  the  justice  of  such  a

possible retort. Rather let it be granted, for it is true, that much so-called

popularization of science is vicious, relieving the ignorant of their modesty

without  relieving  them  of  their  ignorance,  equipping  them  with  the

vocabulary of knowledge without its content and so fostering not only a vain

and empty conceit, but a certain facility of speech that is seemly, impressive

and valuable only when, as is too

  seldom  the  case,  it  is  accompanied  by  solid  attainments.  To  say  this,

however,  is  not  to  lay  an  indictment  against  that  kind  of  scientific

popularization which was so happily illustrated by the very greatest men of

antiquity,  which  was  not  disdained  even  by  Galileo  in  the  beginnings  of

modern science nor by Leonardo da Vinci, and which in our own time has

engaged  the  interest  and  skill  of  such  men  as  Clifford  and  Helmholtz,

Haeckel and Huxley, Mach, Ostwald, Enriques and Henri Poin-car6. It is not

to arraign that variety of popularization which any one may behold in the

constant movement of ideas, once reserved exclusively for graduate students,

down into undergraduate curricula and which has, for example, made the

doctrine of limits, analytical geometry, projective geometry, and the notions

of  the  derivative  and  the  integral  available  for  presentation  to  college

freshmen or even to high-school pupils. It is not to condemn that kind of

popularization  which  is  so  natural  a  process  that  it  actually  goes  on  in  a

thousand ways all about us without our deliberate cooperation, without our

intention or our consent, and has enriched the common sense and common

knowledge  of  our  time  with  countless  precious  elements  from  among  the

scientific and philosophic discoveries made by other generations of men.

  Finally it remains to mention the important type of specialist in whom

strongly  predominates  the  predilection  for  research  as  distinguished  from

exposition.  He  knows,  as  every  one  knows,  that  through  what  is  called

practical applications of science many a scientific discovery is made to serve

innumerable human beings who do not understand it and innumerable others

who never can. He may or may not believe in a vocational instruction; he

may or may not regard intelligence as an ultimate

    GRADUATE MATHEMATICAL INSTRUCTION

  good and an end in itself; he may or may not think that the arts andagencies  for  the  dissemination  of  knowledge,  as  distinguished  from  the

discovery and practical applications of truth, are important; he may or may

not know that the art and the gifts of the great expositor are as important and

as rare as those of the great investigator and less often owe their success to

the favor of accident or chance. He may not even have seriously considered

these  things.  He  does  know  his  own  predilection;  and  so  strong  is  his

inclination towards research that for him to engage in exposition, especially

in popular exposition, in avocational instruction for laymen, would be to sin

against the authority of his vocation. This man, if he have intellectual powers

fairly corresponding to the seeming authority and ur-gence of his inner call,

belongs to a class whose rights are peculiarly sacred and whose freedom must

be  guarded  in  the  interest  of  all  mankind.  It  is  not  contended  that  every

representative of a given subject is under obligation to expound it for the

avocational interest and enlightenment of laymen. The contention is that such

exposition is so -important a service that any university department should

contain at least one man who is at once willing and qualified to render it.

  I come now to the keeping of my promise. It is to be shown that the

service is practicable in the subject of mathematics and how it is so. Let us

get clearly in mind the kind of persons for whom the instruction is to be

primarily designed. They are to be students of "maturity and power"; they do

not intend to become teachers, much less producers, of mathematics; they are

probably  specializing  in  other  fields;  they  do  not  aim  at  becoming

mathematicians;  their  interest  in  mathematics  is  not  vocational,  it  is

avocational; it is

  the interest of those whose curiosity transcends the limits of any specific

profession or any specific form or field of activity; each of them knows that,

whatever his own field may be, it is penetrated, overarched, compassed about

by an infinitely vaster world of human interests and human achievements;

they feel its immense presence, the poignant challenge of it all; as specialists

they  will  win  mastery  over  a  little  part,  but  they  have  heard  the  call  to

intelligence and are seeking orientation in the whole; this they know is a

thing of mind; they are aware that the essential environment of a scholar's life

is  a  spiritual  environment  —  the  invisible  and  intangible  world  of  ideas,

doctrines, institutions, sciences and arts; they know or they suspect that one

of  the  great  components  of  that  world  is  mathematics;  and  so,  not  as

candidates for a profession or a degree, but in their higher capacity as men

and women, they desire to learn something of this science viewed as a humanenterprise, as a body of human achievements; and they are willing to pay the

price; they are not seeking entertainment, they are prepared to work — to

listen, to read and to think.

  And now we must ask: What measure of mathematical training is to be

required of them as a preparation? In view of what has just been said it is

evident that such training is not to be the whole of their equipment nor even

the principal part of it, but it is an indispensable part. And the question is:

How  much  mathematical  knowledge  and  mathematical  discipline  is  to  be

demanded?  I  have  no  desire  to  minimize  my  present  task.  I,  therefore,

propose that only so much mathematical preparation shall be demanded as

can be gained in a year of collegiate study. Most of them will, of course, have

had more; but I propose as a hy-

  pothesis that the amount named be regarded as an adequate minimum.

But it does not include the differential and integral calculus. And is it not

preposterous  to  talk  of  offering  graduate  instruction  in  mathematics  to

students  who  have  not  had  a  first  course  in  the  calculus?  I  am  far  from

thinking so. A little reflection will suffice to show that in the case of such

students as I have described it is very far from preposterous. In my opinion

the absurdity would rather lie in demanding the calculus of them. No one is

so  foolish  as  to  contend  that  a  first  course  in  the  calculus  is  a  sufficient

preparation for undertaking the pursuit of graduate mathematical study. But

to suppose it necessary is just as foolish as to suppose it sufficient. There was

a time when it was necessary, and the belief that it is necessary now owes its

persistence  and  currency  to  the  inertia  then  acquired.  Formerly  it  was

necessary, because formerly all advanced courses, at least all initial courses

of  the  kind,  were  either  prolongations  of  the  calculus,  like  differential

equations,  for  example,  or  else  courses  in  which  the  calculus  played  an

essential instrumental role as in rational mechanics, or the usual introductions

to  function  theory  or  to  higher  geometry  or  algebra.  But,  as  every

mathematician knows, that time has passed. It is true that courses for which a

preliminary  training  in  the  calculus  is  essential  still  constitute  and  will

continue to constitute the major part of the graduate offer of any department

of mathematics. And quite apart from that consideration, it seems wise, in the

case  of  intending  graduate  students  who  purpose  to  specialize  in

mathematics, to enforce the usual calculus requirement as affording some

slight protection against immaturity and the lack of seriousness. But every

mathematician knows that it is now    practicable to provide a large and diversified body of genuinely graduate

mathematical instruction for which the calculus is strictly not prerequisite.

    Fortunately it is just the material that is thus available which is in itself

best  suited  for  the  avocational  instruction  we  are  contemplating.  As  the

calculus is not to be presupposed it goes without saying that this subject must

find a place in the scheme. For evidently an advanced mathematical course

devised and conducted in the interest of general intelligence can not be silent

respecting "the most powerful weapon of thought yet devised by the wit of

man." Technique is not sought and can not be given. The subject is not to be

presented as to undergraduates. For the most part these gain facility with but

little comprehension. It is to be presented to mature and capable students who

seek,  not  facility,  but  understanding.  Their  desire  is  to  acquire  a  general

conception of the nature of the calculus and of its place in science and the

history  of  thought  —  such  a  conception  as  will  at  least  enable  them  as

educated men to mention the subject without a feeling of sham or to hear it

mentioned without a feeling of shame. A few well-considered lectures should

suffice.  At  all  events  it  would  not  require  many  to  show  the  historical

background  of  the  calculus,  to  explain  the  nascence  and  nature  of  the

scientific  exigencies  that  gave  it  birth,  to  make  clear  the  concepts  of

derivative and integral as the two central notions of its two great branches,

and  to  present  a  few  simple  applications  of  these  notions  to  intelligible

problems  of  typical  significance.  Even  the  idea  of  a  differential  equation

could  be  quickly  reached,  the  nature  of  a  solution  explained,  and  simple

examples given of physical and geometric interpretations. As to the range and

power of the

  calculus, a sense and insight can be given, in some measure of course by

a reference to its literature, but much more effectively by a few problems

carefully selected from various fields of science and skillfully explained with

a view to showing wherein the methods of the calculus are demanded and

how they serve. Is not all this elementary and undergraduate? In point of

nomenclature, yes. It is not necessary, however, to let words deceive us. We

teach whole numbers to young children, but even Weierstrass was not aware

of the logico-mathematical deeps that underlie cardinal arithmetic.

  The calculus, however, is hardly the topic with which the course would

naturally  begin.  A  principal  aim  of  the  course  should  be  to  show  what

mathematics, in its inner nature, is — to lay bare its distinctive character. Its

distinctive  character,  its  structural  nature,  is  that  of  a  "  hypothetico-deductive" system. Probably, therefore, it would be well to begin with an

exposition of the nature and function of postulate systems and of the great

role  such  systems  have  always  played  in  the  science,  especially  in  the

illustrious  period  of  Greek  mathematics  and  even  more  consciously  and

elaborately in our own time. It is plain that such an exposition can be made to

yield fundamental insight into many matters of interest and importance not

only in mathematics, but in logic, in psychology, in philosophy, and in the

methodology of natural science and general thought. The material is almost

superabundant, so numerous are the postulate systems that have been devised

as foundations for many different branches of geometry, algebra, analysis,

Mengenlehre and logic. A general survey of these, were it desirable to pass

them all in review, would not be sufficient. It will be necessary

  to select a few systems of typical importance for minute examination with

reference  to  such  capital  points  as  convenience,  simplicity,  adequacy,

independence, compatibility and categoricalness. The necessity and presence

of undefined terms in any and all systems will afford a suitable opportunity to

deal with the highly important, much neglected and little understood subject

of definition, its nature, varieties and function, in light of the recent literature,

especially the suggestive handling of the matter by Enriques in his "Problems

of Science." A given system once thus examined, the easy deduction of a few

theorems will suffice to show the possibility and the process of erecting upon

it a perfectly determinate and often imposing superstructure. And so will arise

clearly the just conception of a mathematical doctrine as a body of thought

composed of a few undefined together with many defined ideas and a few

primitive  or  postulated  propositions  with  many  demonstrated  ones,  all

concatenated  and  welded  into  a  form  independent  of  will  and  temporal

vicissitudes. Revelation of the charm of the science will have been begun. A

new  revelation  will  result  when  next  the  possibility  is  shown  of  so

interchanging undefined with defined ideas and postulates with demonstrated

propositions  that,  despite  such  interchange  of  basal  with  super-structural

elements,  the  doctrine  as  an  autonomous  whole  will  remain  absolutely

unchanged. But this is not all nor nearly all. It is only the beginning of what

may be made a veritable apocalypse. Of great interest to any intellectual man

or  woman,  of  very  great  interest  to  students  of  logic,  psychology,  or

philosophy, should be the light which it will be possible in this connection to

throw upon the economic role of logic and upon the constitution of mind or

the world of thought. I refer  especially to the recently discovered fact that in interpreting a system of

postulates  we  are  not  restricted  to  a  single  possibility,  but  that,  on  the

contrary, such a system admits in general of a literally endless variety of

interpretations; which means, for such is the makeup of our Gedankenwelt,

that  an  infinitude  of  doctrines,  widely  different  in  respect  of  their

psychological  character  and  interest,  have  nevertheless  a  common  form,

being isomorphic, as we say, logically one, though spiritually many, reposing

on a single base. And how foolish the instructor would be not to avail himself

of  the  opportunity  of  showing,  too,  in  the  same  connection,  how  various

mathematical  doctrines  that  differ  not  only  psychologically,  but  logically

also, are yet such that, by virtue of a partial agreement in their bases, they

intersect one another, owning part of their content jointly, whilst being, in

respect of the rest, mutually exclusive and incompatible. If, for example, it be

some Euclidean system that he has been expounding, he will be able readily

to show upon how seemingly slight changes of base there arise now this or

that  variety  of  non-Euclidean  geometry,  now  a  projective  or  an  inversion

geometry or some species or form of higher dimensionality. I need not say

that analogous phenomena will in like manner present themselves in other

mathematical fields. And it is of course obvious that as various doctrines are

thus made to pass along in deliberate panorama it will be feasible to point out

some  of  their  salient  and  distinctive  features,  to  indicate  their  historic

settings,  and  to  cite  the  more  accessible  portions  of  their  respective

literatures.  Naturally  in  this  connection  and  in  the  atmosphere  of  such  a

course the question will arise as to why it is that, or wherein, the hypothetico-

deductive method fails of universal

  applicability. So there will be opportunity to teach the great lesson that

this method is not rudimentary 7 , but is an ideal, the ideal of intellect and

science;  to  teach  that  mathematics  is  but  the  name  of  its  occasional

realization;  and  that,  though  the  ideal  is,  relatively  speaking,  but  seldom

attained,  yet  its  lure  is  universal,  manifesting  itself  in  the  most  widely

differing domains, in the physical and mechanical assumptions of Newton, in

the ethical postulates of Spinoza, in our federal constitution, even in the ten

commandments, in every field where men have sought a body of principles to

serve them as a basis of doctrine, conduct or achievement. And if it shall thus

appear that mathematics is very high-placed as being, in respect of its method

and its form, the ideal and the lure of thought in general, the fault must be

imputed, not to the instructor, but to the nature of things.  In all this study of the postulational method the impression will be gained

that the science of mathematics consists of a large and increasing number of

more or less independent, somewhat closely related and often interpenetrating

branches,  constituting,  not  a  jungle,  but  rather  an  immense,  diversified,

beautifully  ordered  forest;  and  that  impression  is  just.  At  the  same  time

another impression will be gained, namely, that the various branches rest,

each of them, upon a foundation of its own. This impression will have to be

corrected. It will have to be shown that the branch-foundations are not really

fundamental in the science but are literally and genuinely component parts of

the superstructure. It will have to be shown that mathematics as a whole, as a

single unitary body of doctrine, rests .upon a basis of primitive ideas and

primitive propositions that lie far below the so-called branch-

    foundations  and,  in  supporting  the  whole,  support  these  as  parts.  The

course will, therefore, turn to the task of acquainting its students with those

strictly fundamental researches which we associate with such names as C. S.

Peirce, Schroeder, Peano, Frege, Russell, Whitehead and others, and which

have  resulted  in  building  underneath  the  traditional  science  a  logico-

mathematical  sub-structure  that  is,  philosophically,  the  most  important  of

modern mathematical developments.

  It must not be supposed, however, that the instruction must needs be, nor

that  it  should  preferably  be,  confined  to  questions  of  postulate  and

foundation, and I will devote the remainder of the time at my disposal to

indicating briefly how, as it seems to me, a large or even a major part of the

course may concern itself with matters more traditional and more concrete.

  Any one can see that there is an abundance of available material. There is,

for example, the history and significance of the great concept of function, a

concept which mathematics has but slowly extracted and gradually refined

from out the common content and experience of all minds and which on that

account can be not only defined precisely and intelligibly to such laymen as

are here concerned, but can also be clarified in many of its forms by means of

manifold examples drawn from elementary mathematics, from the elements

of other sciences, and from the most familiar phenomena of the work-a-day

world.

  Another available topic is the nature and role of the sovereign notion of

limit.  This,  too,  as  every  mathematician  knows,  admits  of  countless

illustration and application within the radius of mathematical knowl-

  edge here presupposed. In this connection the structure and importance ofwhat Sylvester called "the Grand Continuum," which so many scientific and

other folk talk about unintelligently, will offer itself for explanation. And if

the  class  fortunately  contain  students  of  philosophic  mind,  they  will  be

edified  and  a  little  astonished  perhaps  when  they  are  led  to  see  that  the

method and the concept of limits are but mathematicized forms of a process

and  notion  familiar  in  all  domains  of  spiritual  activity  and  known  as

idealization.  Not  improbably  some  of  the  students  will  be  sufficiently

enterprising to trace the mentioned similitude in some of its manifestations in

natural science, in psychology, in philosophy, in jurisprudence, in literature

and in art.

  I  have  not  mentioned  the  modern  doctrine  variously  known  as

Mengenlehre, Mannigfaltigkeitslekre, the theory of point-sets, assemblages,

manifolds, or aggregates: a live and growing doctrine in which expert and

layman are about equally interested and which, like a subtle and illuminating

ether, is more and more pervading mathematics in all its branches. For the

avocational instruction of lay students of "maturity and power" how rich a

body of material is here, with all its fascinating distinctions of discrete and

continuous, finite and infinite, denumerable and non-denumerable, orderless,

ordered,  and  well-ordered,  and  with  its  teeming  host  of  near-lying

propositions, so interesting, so illuminating, often so amazing.

  Finally, but far from exhausting the list, it remains to mention the great

subjects of invariants and groups. Both of them admit of definition perfectly

intelligible  to  disciplined  laymen;  both  admit  of  endless  elementary

illustration, of having their mutual relations simply

    exemplified,  of  being  shown  in  historic  perspective,  and  of  being

strikingly connected, especially the notion of invariance, with the dominant

enterprise of man: his ceaseless quest for the changeless amid the turmoil and

transformation of the cosmic flux.

  THE SOURCE AND FUNCTIONS OF A UNIVERSITY 1

  IN returning hither from near and far to join in celebrating the seventy-

fifth anniversary of the founding of their academic birthplace and home, the

alumni,  the  sons  and  daughters  of  this  institution,  have  not  come  to

congratulate an eld-worn mother upon the continuance of her years beyond

the  Psalmist's  allotment  of  three  score  and  ten  nor  to  comfort  her  in  the

sorrows of age. Their assembling is due to other sentiments and owns another

mood. They have come as beneficiaries in order to pay, for themselves and

for the many absent ones whom they have the honor to represent, a tribute ofgratitude, loyalty and love to a noble benefactress who, notwithstanding her

wisdom and fame, yet is literally in the early morning of her life. For it is not

written, nor ordained in the scheme of things, that, in respect of years, the life

of a university shall be as a tale that is told or a watch in the night. It is

indeed a living demonstration of the greatness of man, bearing witness to his

superiority even over death, that men and women, though they themselves

must die, yet may, whilst they live, create ideals and institutions that survive.

A college or a university may indeed have been as a benignant mother to a

thousand academic

  1 An address delivered June 3, 1014, at the celebration of the seventy-

fifth anniversary of the founding of the University of Missouri. Printed in The

Columbia University Quarterly, March,

  202 SOURCE AND FUNCTIONS OF A UNIVERSITY

    generations and yet be younger than her youngest child. Unlike man the

individual, a university is, like man the race, immortal. The age of three score

and  fifteen  in  the  life  of  an  immortal  institution  is  a  mere  beginning.  In

emphasizing this consideration it is not my intention to suggest or imply that

the services rendered by the University of Missouri have necessarily been,

because of her youth, meagre or ineffectual or immature. On the contrary I

maintain  that  her  services  to  the  people  of  this  state  have  been  beyond

computation and that already her spiritual achievements constitute the chief

glory of a great commonwealth. Is it the alumni only who owe her grateful

allegiance? Is the beneficence of an institution of learning exclusively or even

mainly  confined  to  the  relatively  few  who  dwell  for  a  season  in  her

immediate presence, who touch the hem of her garment, come into personal

contact with her scholars and teachers and receive her degrees? Far from it.

Far from being the sole or the principal beneficiaries of a university, the

alumni are simply among the more potent instrumentalities for extending her

ministrations to ever wider and wider circles. The sun, we say, is far off

yonder in the heavens. But strictly speaking the sun really is wherever he

shines. Where is the University of Missouri? At Columbia, we say, and the

speech is convenient. But it is juster to say that, owing to the pervasiveness of

her light and inspiration, the University of Missouri in a measure now is, and

in larger and larger measure will come to be, in every home and school, in

every factory and field, in every mine and shop, in every council chamber, in

every office of charity, or medicine, or law, in all the places near or remote

where within the borders of this beautiful state children play and men andwomen

  SOURCE AND FUNCTIONS OF A UNIVERSITY 203

  think and love, suffer and hope, aspire and toil. Nay, by the researches

and  publications  of  her  scholars  and  by  the  migrations  of  those  she  has

inspired and disciplined, the University of Missouri to-day lives and moves

abroad,  mingling  her  presence  with  that  of  kindred  agencies,  not  only  in

every state of the union but in many other quarters of the civilized world.

  It is not my purpose to review the history of her aspirations and struggles

nor to relate the thrilling story of her triumphs. I conceive that the central

motive of our assembling here is not so much to praise the University for

what she has already accomplished as to renew our devotion to her high

emprize,  to  congratulate  her  upon  her  solid  attainments,  to  rejoice  in  her

divine discontent and spirit of progressiveness, to deepen and enlarge our

conception of her mission and destiny, and especially to remind ourselves of

the principles, the faith and, above all, the ideals to which she owes her birth,

her continuity, her responsibilities, and her power.

  What is a university? How shall we conceive that marvelous thing which,

though having a local habitation and a name and seeming to dwell in houses

made by human hands, yet contrives to be omnipresent; pervading the abodes

of men everywhere throughout a state, a nation or a world, like a divine ether;

subtly, gently, unceasingly, increasingly ministering to their hearts and minds

healing counsels and the mysterious grace of light and understanding? What

is it? Is it something, an agency or an influence, that can be denned? We

know that it is not. We know that the really great things of the world, the

things that live and grow and shine, the things that give to life its interests

and its worth, one and all elude formulation.

  204 SOURCE AND FUNCTIONS OF A UNIVERSITY

  Yet it is just these things, beauty and love, poetry and thought, religion

and truth and mind, it is precisely these great indefinables of life that we may

learn, through experience and discipline, to know best of all. And so it is with

what we mean or ought to mean by a university. What a university is no one

can  define,  but  all  may  in  a  measure  come  to  know.  •  By  pondering  its

principles, by contemplating its ideals, by examining its aims, activities and

fruits, above all by sharing in its spirit and aspiration, we may at length win a

conception  of  it  that  will  fill  our  minds  with  light  and  our  hearts  with

devotion.

  Where such a conception reigns a university will flourish. But there is noconception more difficult for a people to acquire. It is not a spontaneous

growth,  springing  up  like  a  weed,  but  requires  careful  planting  and

cultivation. Such is the husbandry to which a university must perpetually

devote  itself  as  the  essential  precondition  to  the  prosperous  exercise  and

advancement  of  all  its  other  functions,  and  the  husbandry  is  not  easy.

Especially in our American communities where universities must appeal for

support to the intelligence of a democratic people, there is no service more

important or more difficult to render than that which consists in teaching us

to know what a university really is and what it signifies alike for developing

the material resources of the world and for the spiritualizing of man. And

thus  there  devolves  upon  a  university,  especially  in  the  beginning  of  its

career,  the  necessity  of  performing  a  kind  of  miracle:  without  adequate

support, either material or moral, it must yet find strength to teach us to give

it both. The lesson is one that takes long and long to teach because it is one

that takes long and long to learn.

  SOURCE AND FUNCTIONS OP A UNIVERSITY 2O$

  It is a great mistake to imagine that a university is an essentially modern

thing. In spirit, in idea and essence, it is modern only in the sense in which

forces  and  ideals  that  are  eternal  are  always  modern,  as  they  are  always

ancient. We should not forget that even the name University — so suggestive

of the infinite-world which it is the aim of these institutions to subjugate to

the understanding and uses of man — even the name, in its modern scholastic

sense, has had a history of more than a thousand years. But we know that the

institution itself, the thing that bears the name, owns an antiquity far more

remote.  A  few  years  ago,  standing  upon  the  Acropolis  of  Athens,  gazing

pensively about upon the hallowed scene where culminated the genius of the

ancient world, a friend, pointing towards the spot near by where for fifty

years Plato taught in the grove of Academe, said to me, yonder, yonder is the

holy ground where was made the first attempt to organize higher education in

the  western  world.  The  remark,  which  was  just  enough,  was  indeed

impressive.  It  is  easy,  however,  to  misunderstand  its  significance  and  to

exaggerate its importance. So many of the most precious elements of our

civilization trace their lineage back to the creative activity of ancient Greece

that we are naturally tempted to imagine we may find there also the source

and origin of those aims, activities and ideals which constitute what we today

call a university. Such imagining, however, is vain. The originals, the first

organizations, we may possibly find there at a definite time and place, but notthe  origin,  not  the  source,  not  the  nascence  of  the  birth-giving  and  life-

sustaining power. For this must account, not only for the universities of our

time, but for the great school of Plato as well. What, then, and where is the

secret spring?

  206 SOURCE AND FUNCTIONS OF A UNIVERSITY

  Shall we seek it in a sense of need? Necessity is indeed a keen spur to

invention and is the mother of many things. But necessity is not the mother of

universities. The beasts flourish and propagate their kind without the help of

institutions of learning, and without such help a similar existence is possible

to men. Universities are not essential to life nor to animal prosperity. They

are not creatures, they are creators, of need. We do indeed nowadays hear

much of the services they render, and it is right that we should, for they

minister constantly and everywhere to countless forms of need. But the needs

they supply are in the main needs that they have first produced, multiplied

desires and aspirations, new propensions of mind awakened to new life, lifted

by education to higher levels and ampler possibilities of being. No, the origin,

the  source  we  are  seeking,  the  principle  of  explanation,  is  no  human

contrivance nor institution nor sense of need. It is that sovereign urgency, at

once so strange and so familiar, that drives us to seek it; it is the lure of

wisdom and understanding, of beauty and light; a certain divine energy in the

world, at once a cosmic force and a human faculty, constituting man divine in

constituting him a seeker of truth and a lover of harmony and illumination.

  Has it an epoch and a name? It has both. In accordance with the modern

doctrine of evolution the greatest events upon our planet occurred long before

the beginnings of recorded history. For according to that doctrine there must

have come a time, long, long ago, when in what was a world of matter there

began to be mind, in what was a world of motion there began to be emotion,

and the blind dominion of force was invaded by personality. Among all those

marvels of

  SOURCE AND FUNCTIONS OP A UNIVERSITY 207

    prehistoric history, the supreme event was that one but for which this

world had been a world devoid of mystery and devoid of truth — I mean the

advent of Wonder. With the advent of wonder came the sense of mystery, the

lure of truth, the sheen of ideality, the dream of the perfect and, with these,

the potence and promise of research and creativeness with all their endless

progeny of knowledge and wisdom and science and art and philosophy and

religion. These things, children of the spirit, offspring of wonder, these thingsare the interests which it is the divine prerogative of universities to serve, and

the universities ultimately derive their own existence, their sustenance and

their power from the same mother that gives their charges birth. A genuine

university  is  thus  the  offspring  and  the  appointed  agent  of  the  spirit  of

inquiry; it is the offspring, expression and servant of that imperious curiosity

which in a measure impels all men and women, but with an urgency like

destiny literally drives men and women of genius, to seek to know and to

teach to their fellows whatsoever is worthy in all that has been discovered or

thought, spoken or done in the world, and at the same time seeks to extend

the empire of understanding endlessly in all directions throughout the infinite

domain of the yet uncharted and unknown. That high commission is at once a

university's charter of freedom and the definition of her functions and her

obligations.  These  are,  on  the  one  hand,  to  teach  —  to  teach  with  no

restrictions save those prescribed by decency and candor — and, on the other

hand, to foster and prosecute research — research in any and all subjects or

fields to which the leading or the stress of curiosity may draw or impel. In so

far as the great commonwealth of Missouri makes ample pro-

  208 SOURCE AND FUNCTIONS OF A UNIVERSITY

  vision for the exercise of these functions and for the discharge of these

obligations, to that extent she may be said to cooperate with the divine energy

of the world in the maintenance of a genuine university.

  THE present writer has been asked to deal briefly with the question of

research in American universities. The subject is an immense one, and the

following discussion makes no pretense of being exhaustive. It aims merely

to present the problem again, to emphasize again its importance, and to point

out once more some of its harder conditions and some of the principles and

distinctions involved in any serious attempt at its solution.

  The problem may not be easy to appreciate, but it is at all events easy to

state. It is the problem of securing in our universities suitable provision for

the work of research or investigation and productivity. For a generation the

great  majority  of  the  ablest  men  in  our  universities  have  regarded  that

problem as the most urgent and important educational problem confronting

these institutions and the American people. Meanwhile, something has been

done towards a solution. But none of the universities has secured adequate

provision, and the majority of them but little or none at all. In the abstract, the

problem  is  simple  and  the  solution  is  easy:  given  a  body  of  able  and

enthusiastic men, provide them with proper facilities, afford them opportunityto devote their powers continuously to the prosecution of research, and the

thing is done. But in the concrete it is exceedingly difficult, being

  1 Printed in The Bookman, May, 1906.

  frightfully complicated with our whole institutional history and life, in

particular with our educational traditions and tendencies, with the prevailing

plan of university organisation, and especially with the characteristic temper,

ideals and ambitions of the American people.

    Somebody besides our foreign friends and critics ought to tell the truth

about American education and American universities. Our people have never

ceased to believe in education. Our belief has not always been intelligent. We

have been prone to ascribe to education efficacies and potencies that do not

belong to any human agency or institution. But our faith in it, though not

always critical or enlightened, has been deep, implicit and abiding; and we

have diligently pursued it, generally as a means no doubt, but sometimes as

an end, and occasionally as a thing in itself more precious than power and

gold.  In  all  this  we  have  been,  quite  unconsciously  and  contrary  to  all

appearances, very humble. We have been content to educate ourselves with

knowledge discovered by others and to nourish ourselves with doctrines and

truths produced only by the spiritual activity of other lands. We may have

been vain but we have not been proud. Besides a marvelous practical sense

we have had, in degree quite unsurpassed, two of the elements of genius, —

intellectual energy and intellectual audacity; and by means of these we have

created a material civilisation so obtrusive, so elaborate and so efficient as to

amaze  the  world.  But  now  at  length  there  begin  to  appear  the  indicia  of

change, of change for the better. A new day has dawned. The sun is not yet

risen high, but it is rising. We have begun to suspect that genuine civilisation

is essentially an a.ffair of the spirit, that it

  can not be borrowed nor imported nor improvised nor appropriated from

without, but that it is a growth from within, an efflorescence of mind and

soul,  and  that  its  highest  tokens  are  not  soldiers  but  savants,  not  the

purchasers and admirers of art but artists, not mere retailers of knowledge nor

teachers of the familiar and the known, but discoverers of the unknown, not

mere inventors but men of science. And so we have begun to feel our way

towards the establishment of true universities, that is to say of institutional

centres for the activity of the human spirit, and of organs, the most potent yet

invented by human society, for giving effect to the noblest instinct of man,

"the civilisation-producing instinct of truth for truth's sake."  Just here we encounter a great danger. For a generation our progress in

the matter has been so swift that both the universities themselves and the

educated public opinion upon which in our democratic society their support

and advancement ultimately depend, are in danger of greatly overestimating

it, and that would be a misfortune. Absolutely the progress has indeed been

great, but relatively and judged by the very highest standards, it has not. It is

not first nor mainly a question of achievements, of things done. It is a quesion

of ideals, of standards and aspirations. A clear concept of a great university

unconsciously serving the highest interests of man by absolute devotion to

Truth for its own sake and without extraneous motive, end or aim, does not

yet exist in the mind of the American public and is not yet incarnate in any of

its institutions. Our universities are young, strong and robust. They are full of

potence and promise. But they have not yet impressed their own imperfect

ideals upon the people; they have not yet given forth the light ncces-

  sary for their own proper beholding and appreciation. Their perfections

and their imperfections alike, remain obscure. The old colleges about which

as about nuclei some of our universities have been formed have done much to

leaven and temper the American mind and to subdue it to the influences of

beauty and truth. Corresponding services have not yet been rendered by our

universities as such. No one can doubt that they are destined to assume in

future  the  permanent  leadership,  and  to  exercise  a  controlling  formative

influence, in all that goes to deepen thought and to exalt and refine standards,

character,  and  taste.  At  present,  however,  they  are  themselves  in  the

formative  and  impressionable  stage,  resembling  improvisations  in  some

respects; and to understand them, to see clearly both what they are and what

they are not, it is necessary to regard them as being at the present time less

the producers than the products of our civilisation.

  So regarded, they are seen to embody and to reflect alike the merits and

the  defects  of  their  progenitor.  Like  the  latter  they  are  unsurpassed  in

boldness,  in  energy  and  in  enthusiasm,  and  their  genius  has  been  mainly

directed to material and outer ends. Their first and chief concern has been

with the physical and exterior, with buildings and grounds and instruments

and laboratories, and while their material equipment is still far from adequate,

it  has  already  evoked  astonished  and  admiring  commentary  from  visiting

scholars of European seats of learning. Like the civilisation whence they have

sprung, our universities are intensely modern and up-to-date, and they are

intensely democratic in everything but management; they set great store byorganisation, exalt the function of administration, and tend to be regarded, to

regard themselves, and in fact

  to  be,  as  vast  and  complicate  machines  or  industrial  plants  naturally

demanding  the  control  of  centralised  authority.  They  have  but  little

sentiment; they are almost devoid of sacred and hallowing traditions, of great

and illustrious recollections; there is in and about them nothing or but little of

"the shadow and the hush of a haunted past." They have no antiquity. In them

the utilitarian spirit, having learned the lingo of service, contrives to receive

an ample share of honour, and the Genius of Industry that has transformed

our land into an abode of wealth and for generations assigned an attainable

upper  limit  to  a  people's  aspiration,  shapes  educational  policy,  holds  and

wields the balance of power. The classic distinctions of good, better and best

in subjects and motives of study receive but slight regard. The traditional

hierarchy of educational values and the ascending scale of spiritual worths

have fallen into disrepute. All things have been leveled up or leveled down to

a  common  level;  so  that  the  workshop  and  the  laboratory,  schools  of

engineering, of agriculture and of the classics, the library, the model dairy

and departments of architecture and music, exist side by side. In at least one

institution, so it is reported, the professor of poetry rubs shoulders with the

professor of poultry. No wonder that a distinguished critic has said that some

of  our  biggest  universities  appear  as  hardly  more  than  episodes  in  the

wondrous maelstrom of our industrial life.

  Thus it appears that the American university, child of a predominantly

material  and  industrial  civilisation  half-blindly  aspiring  to  higher  things,

strikingly resembles its parent. Begotten in the hope that it would be as a

saviour  and  rescue  us  from  our  national  idols  and  respectable  sins,  it

straightway became their

  most enlightened servant and lent them the sanction and the support of its

honoured name. It is by no means contended that this fact is the whole truth.

Our universities are not entirely devoted to the service of industry; they are

not wholly committed to teaching youth the known from utilitarian motives

and for immediate and practical ends; they are not exclusively concerned

with  the  applications  of  science;  out  of  general  devotion  to  the  Useful,

something  is  saved  for  the  True;  science  is  not  always  regarded  as  a

commodity; the judgment of the great Jacobi is sometimes recognised as just:

"The unique end ot science is the honour of the human spirit." And it is a

pleasure  to  be  able  to  proclaim  the  fact  that  in  a  few  of  our  universitiessomething like a home has been provided for the spirit of research and that by

its activity there, American genius has had a share in extending the empire of

light, in enlarging the domain of the known, in astronomy, in physics, in

mathematics, in the science of mind, in biology, in criticism, in economics, in

letters, in almost all of the great fields where the instinct of truth for the sake

of  truth  contends  against  the  dark.  In  this  clear  evidence  of  our  growing

freedom and exaltation, let us rejoice; but let us be candid also. Let us admit

that we have only begun the higher service of the soul; let us confess in

becoming humility that, in comparison with our wealth, our numbers, our

energies  and  our  talents,  in  comparison,  too,  with  the  intellectual

achievements of some other peoples and other lands, the service we have

rendered to Science and Art and Truth is meagre.

  Why such emptiness, such poverty, such meagreness in the fruits of the

highest activity? The immediate cause is easy to find. It is not incompetence

nor lack

    RESEARCH IN AMERICAN UNIVERSITIES

  of genius in our university faculties. These are not inferior to the best in

the world. It is not mainly due, as is often said, to inadequacy of material

compensation, though one of the greatest of living physicists, Professor J. J.

Thompson,  has  told  us  truly  that  American  men  of  science  receive  less

remuneration than their colleagues in any other part of the world. The cause

in question is simple: lack of opportunity. The difficulty is near at hand. It

inheres in the composition and organisation of our universities. Most of these

are  built  about  and  upon,  and  largely  consist  of,  immense  undergraduate

schools thronged by young men mainly bent upon practical aims and neither

qualified nor intending to qualify for the work of investigation. The interests

of these schools are naturally the paramount concern. The great and growing

burdens of administration tend to distribute themselves among the professors.

These  have,  besides,  to  give  the  most  and  the  best  of  their  energies  to

elementary  teaching,  to  teaching,  that  is,  which  does  not  pertain  to  a

university  proper  but  to  gymnasia  and  Iyc6es  —  a  worthy,  important,

necessary  kind  of  work,  but  a  kind  that  drains  off  the  energy  in  non-

productive channels and tends to form and harden the mind of those engaged

in it about a small group of simpler ideas. What is left, what can be left, of

spirit, of energy, of opportunity, for the arduous work of research? One man

attempting  the  enterprise  of  three:  administration,  elementary  teaching,

discovery and creative work. Who can suitably characterise the absurdity?Who can compute the wickedness of the waste in the impossible attempt to

effect  daily  the  demanded  transition  from  mood  to  mood?  A  mind,  by

prolonged effort, at length immersed in the depths of a profound and difficult

investigation -

  how poignant the pain of interruption, the rending of continuity, the rude

disturbance of poise and concentration. How easy to fail of due respect for,

because it is so easy not to understand, the creative mood, oblivious to the

outer world, the brooding "maternity of mind," more delicate than fabric of

gossamer,  of  infinite  subtlety,  of  infinite  sensitiveness,  a  woven  psychic

structure finer than ether threads; and how easy to forget that a sudden alien

call may disturb and jar and even destroy the structure.

  Little excuse, then, have we to wonder at the recent words of Professor

Bjerknes,  of  the  chair  of  mechanics  and  mathematical  physics  in  the

University of Stockholm, and non-resident lecturer in mathematical physics

in  Columbia  University,  who,  in  his  farewell  address  to  his  American

colleagues, assembled to do him honour, spoke substantially as follows:

  "I  have  been  much  impressed  with  the  material  equipment  of  your

universities, with your splendid buildings, with the fine instruments you have

placed in them, and with the enthusiasm of the men I have found at work

there. But I hope you will pardon me, gentlemen, for saying, as I must say,

that, when I found you attempting serious investigation with the remnants of

energy left after your excessive teaching and administrative work, I could not

help thinking you did not appreciate the fact that the finest instruments in

those buildings are your brains. I heard one of you counsel his colleagues to

care for the astronomical instruments lest these become strained and cease to

give true results. Allow me to substitute brain for telescope, and to exhort you

to care for your brains. I have been astonished to find that some of you, in

addition to much executive work, teach from ten to fifteen and even more

hours per week. I myself teach two hours per week, and I can assure you that,

if I had been required to do so much of it as you do, you never would have

invited me to lecture here in a difficult branch of science. That, gentlemen, is

the most important message I can leave with you."

  Such, then, is the situation. No need that we should behold it in picture

drawn by foreign hand. We need no copy. The original lies before us in all its

proper-

  tions.  The  challenge  addresses  itself  at  once  to  our  pride  and  to  our

practical sense. Of all peoples, we, it would seem, should feel the challengemost  keenly,  for  the  problem  is  a  problem  in  freedom.  It  demands  the

emancipation of American genius; it demands provision of free and ample

opportunity for the highest activity of our highest talent.

  Hope  of  solution  lies  in  division  of  labour.  Our  universities  and  the

people  they  represent  must  reduce  their  exactions.  For  three  men's  work,

three must be provided. There must be men to administer and men to teach

and men to investigate. Three varieties of service, entirely compatible in kind,

entirely incompatible as co-ordinate vocations combined in one. Any one of

them may be as an avocation to another of the three, but only so of choice

and  not  by  compulsion.  No  invidious  comparisons  are  implied.  The

distinctions are not of greater and less; they are matters of economy in the

domain of mind. The great administrator is not a clerk nor an amanuensis; he

is  a  man  of  constructive  genius,  a  creator.  The  great  teacher  is  not  a

pedagogue; he is a source of inspiration and of aspiration, producing children

of  the  spirit  by  "the  urge  and  ardor"  of  a  deep  and  rich  and  enlightened

personality; he was in the mind of Goethe when he said of Winckelmann that

"from him you learned nothing, but you became something." And the great

investigator is not a mere collector and recorder of facts; he is a discoverer, a

dis-closer, of the harmonies and the invariance hid beneath the surface of

seeming  disorder  and  of  ceaseless  change.  The  three  great  powers  are

compatible, and are usually found united in a single gigantic personality, just

as the ordinary administrator and ordinary teacher and ordinary investigator

compose one unit of mediocrity.

  It is perfectly evident that the total service demanded of the universities

will not diminish. On the contrary, it will continue as now to increase in

response to growing need. The case, then, is clear: the number of servants

must be increased, the number of those who are to do the work must be

greatly  multiplied.  And  thus  the  problem  becomes  a  financial  one.  But  a

university is not a money-making institution. Its function is to convert the

physical into the spiritual, to transform the things of matter into the things of

mind.  It  has,  however,  a  physical  body,  without  which  it  may  not  dwell

among men; and, for the support of it, it depends and must depend, whether

through legislative appropriation or the benefaction of individuals, ultimately

upon the people. These now possess the means in ample measure, and the

promptings of generosity are in the hearts of many wealthy and sagacious

men.

  And so the problem revolves upon itself and once more turns full upon usits theoretic aspect. Its solution awaits public appreciation of its significance

and its terms. It is above all else a question of enlightenment. Just here, if I

am not mistaken, is the measureless opportunity of the university president.

Beyond all others, he is spokesman and representative before the people of

their  highest  spiritual  interests.  Their  ideals  and  aspirations  will  scarcely

surpass  his  own.  The  problem  must  be  conceived  boldly  in  truth  and

presented in its larger aspects. It must be seen and be felt to be the supreme

problem  of  our  civilisation.  As  a  people  we  have  yet  to  learn  the  lesson

deeply  that  research,  the  competent  application  in  any  field  whatever  of

human interest of any effective method whatever for the discovery of truth

and  enlarging  the  bounds  of  knowledge,  is  the  highest  form  of  human

activity. We

  have yet to learn that a nation, a state, a university without investigators,

is a community without men of profoundest conviction. For this can not be

gained by conning books; it can not be inherited; it is not merely a pious hope

or a pleasing superstition. It is not an obsession.

  As Helmholz has said, a teacher "who desires to give his hearers a perfect

conviction of the truth of his principles must, first of all, know from his own

experience how conviction is acquired and how not. He must have known

how to acquire conviction where no predecessor had been before him — that

is, he must have worked at the confines of knowledge and have conquered

new regions." We have yet to learn that the value of a university professor

can not be estimated by counting the hours he stands before his classes. We

have yet to learn to prefer standards of quality to units of quantity. We have

yet to learn that the spirit of pure research, the highest productive genius, has

no  direct  concern  whatever  with  the  useful;  that,  while  it  does  without

intention create an atmosphere in which utilities most greatly flourish, it is

itself concerned solely with the true; we have yet to learn that "the action of

faculty is imperious and always excludes the reflection why it acts." When

these and kindred lessons shall have been taken to heart, our emancipation,

now well begun, will advance towards completion; the American university

will come to its own; and our present civilisation will speedily pass to the

rank of the highest and best.

      MATHEMATICIANS, many philosophers, logicians and physicists, and

a  large  number  of  other  people  are  aware  of  the  fact  that  mathematical

activity, like the activity in numerous other fields of study and research, has

been in large part for a century distinctively and increasingly critical. Everyone  has  heard  of  a  critical  movement  in  mathematics  and  of  certain

mathematicians distinguished for their insistence upon precision and logical

cogency. Under the influence of the critical spirit of the time mathematicians,

having inherited the traditional belief that the human mind can know some

propositions to be true, convinced that mathematics may not contain any false

propositions, and nevertheless finding that numerous so-called mathematical

propositions were certainly not true, began to re-examine the existing body of

what was called mathematics with a view to purging it of the false and of thus

putting an end to what, rightly viewed, was a kind of scientific scandal. Their

aim was truth, not the whole truth, but nothing but truth. And the aim was

consistent with the traditional faith which they inherited. They believed that

there were such things as self-evident propositions, known as axioms. They

believed  that  the  traditional  logic,  come  down  from  Aristotle,  was  an

absolutely  perfect  machinery  for  ascertaining  what  was  involved  in  the

axioms. At this stage, therefore, they

  1 An account of Messrs. Whitehead and Russell's great work bearing this

title. Printed in Science, vol. XXV.

  believed that, in order that a given branch of mathematics should contain

truth and nothing but truth, it was sufficient to find the appropriate axioms

and then, by the engine of deductive logic, to explicate their meaning or

content. To be sure, one might have trouble to "find" the axioms and in the

matter of explication one might be an imperfect engineer; but by trying hard

enough all difficulties could be surmounted for the axioms existed and the

engine was perfect. But mathematicians were destined not to remain long in

this  comfortable  position.  The  critical  demon  is  a  restless  and  relentless

demon; and, having brought them thus far, it soon drove them far beyond. It

was  discovered  that  an  axiom  of  a  given  set  could  be  replaced  by  its

contradictory  and  that  the  consequences  of  the  new  set  stood  all  the

experiential tests of truth just as well as did the consequences of the old set,

that is, perfectly. Thus belief in the self-evidence of axioms received a fatal

blow. For why regard a proposition self-evident when its contradictory would

work just as well? But if we do not know that our axioms are true, what about

their consequences? Logic gives us these, but as to their being true or false, it

is indifferent and silent.

  Thus  mathematics  has  acquired  a  certain  modesty.  The  critical

mathematician  has  abandoned  the  search  for  truth.  He  no  longer  flatters

himself that his propositions are or can be known to him or to any otherhuman being to be true; and he contents himself with aiming at the correct, or

the  consistent.  The  distinction  is  not  annulled  nor  even  blurred  by  the

reflection that consistency contains immanently a kind of truth. He is not

absolutely  certain,  but  he  believes  profoundly  that  it  is  possible  to  find

various sets of a few propositions each such that the propositions of each set

are

    compatible, that the propositions of such a set imply other propositions,

and that the latter can be deduced from the former with certainty. That is to

say, he believes that there are systems of coherent or consistent propositions,

and he regards it his business to discover such systems. Any such system is a

branch of mathematics. Any branch contains two sets of ideas (as subject

matter, a third set of ideas are used but are not part of the subject matter) and

two sets of propositions (as subject matter, a third set being used without

being part of the subject): that is, any branch contains a set of ideas that are

adopted without definition and a set that are defined in terms of the others;

and a set of propositions adopted without proof and called assumptions or

principles or postulates or axioms (but not as true or as self-evident) and a set

deduced  from  the  former.  A  system  of  postulates  for  a  given  branch  of

mathematics — a variety of systems may be found for a same branch —• is

often  called  the  foundation  of  that  branch.  And  that  is  what  the  layman

should  think  when,  as  occasionally  happens,  he  meets  an  allusion  to  the

foundation  of  the  theory  of  the  real  variable,  or  to  the  foundation  of

Euclidean geometry or of projective geometry or of Mengenlehre or of some

other branch of mathematics. The founding, in the sense indicated, of various

distinct branches of mathematics is one of the great outcomes of a century of

critical activity in the science. It has engaged and still engages the best efforts

of men of genius and men of talent. Such activity is commonly described as

fundamental. It is very important, but fundamental in a strict sense it is not.

For one no sooner examines the foundations that have been found for various

mathematical branches and thereby as well as otherwise gains

  a  deep  conviction  that  these  branches  are  constituents  of  something

different from any one of them and different from the mere sum or collection

of all of them than the question supervenes whether it may not be possible to

discover a foundation for mathematics itself such that the above-indicated

branch foundations would be seen to be, not fundamental to the science itself,

but a genuine part of the superstructure. That question and the attempt to

answer  it  are  fundamental  strictly.  The  question  was  forced  uponmathematicians  not  only  by  developments  within  the  traditional  field  of

mathematics,  but  also  independently  from  developments  in  a  field  long

regarded as alien to mathematics, namely, the field of symbolic logic. The

emancipation of logic from the yoke of Aristotle very much resembles the

emancipation of geometry from the bondage of Euclid; and, by its subsequent

growth  and  diversification,  logic,  less  abundantly  perhaps  but  not  less

certainly  than  geometry,  has  illustrated  the  blessings  of  freedom.  When

modern logic began to learn from such a man as Leibnitz (who with the most

magnificent  expectations  devoted  much  of  his  life  to  researches  in  the

subject) the immense advantage of the systematic use of symbols, it soon

appeared that logic could state many of its propositions in symbolic form,

that  it  could  prove  some  of  these,  and  that  the  demonstration  could  be

conducted and expressed in the language of symbols. Evidently such a logic

looked  like  mathematics  and  acted  like  it.  Why  not  call  it  mathematics?

Evidently it differed from mathematics in neither spirit nor form. If it differed

at all, it was in respect of content. But where was the decree that the content

of mathematics should be restricted to this or that, as number or space? No

bne could find it. If traditional mathematics could

  state and prove propositions about number and space, about relations of

numbers  and  of  space  configurations,  about  classes  of  numbers  and  of

geometric  entities,  modern  logic  began  to  prove  propositions  about

propositions, relations and classes, regardless of whether such propositions,

relations and classes have to do with number and space or with no matter

what other specific kind of subject. At the same time what was admittedly

mathematics was by virtue of its own inner developments transcending its

traditional limitations to number and space. The situation was unmistakable:

traditional mathematics began to look like a genuine part of logic and no

longer like a separate something to which another thing called logic applied.

And  so  modern  logicians  by  their  own  researches  were  forced  to  ask  a

question,  which  under  a  thin  disguise  is  essentially  the  same  as  that

propounded by the bolder ones among the critical mathematicians, namely, is

it not possible to discover for logic a foundation that will at the same time

serve  as  a  foundation  for  mathematics  as  a  whole  and  thus  render

unnecessary  (and  strictly  impossible)  separate  foundations  for  separate

mathematical  branches?  It  is  to  answer  that  great  question  that  Messrs.

Whitehead  and  Russell  have  written  "Principia  Mathe-matica"  —  a  work

consisting of four large volumes, the first and second being in hand, the thirdsoon to appear — and the answer is affirmative. The thesis is: it is possible to

discover a small number of ideas (to be called primitive ideas) such that all

the other ideas in logic (including mathematics) shall be definable in terms of

them,  and  a  small  number  of  propositions  (to  be  called  primitive

propositions) such that all other propositions in logic (including mathematics)

can be demonstrated by means of them. Of course,

  not all ideas can be defined — some must be assumed as a working stock

— and those called primitive are so called merely because they are taken

without definition; similarly for propositions, not all can be proved, and those

called primitive are so called because they are assumed. It is not contended

by the authors (as it was by Leibnitz) that there exist ideas and propositions

that  are  absolutely  primitive  in  a  metaphysical  sense  or  in  the  nature  of

things; nor do they contend that but one sufficient set of primitives (in their

sense of the term) can be discovered. In view of the immeasurable wealth of

ideas and propositions that enter logic and mathematics, the authors' thesis is

very imposing; and their work borrows some of its impressiveness from the

magnificence of the undertaking. It is important to observe that the thesis is

not  a  thesis  of  logic  or  of  mathematics,  but  is  a  thesis  about  logic  and

mathematics. It can not be proved syllogistically; the only available method

is that by which one proves that one can jump through a hoop, namely, by

actually jumping through it. If the thesis be true, the only way to establish it

as such is to produce the required primitives and then to show their adequacy

by actually erecting upon them as a basis the superstructure of logic (and

mathematics) to such a point of development that any competent judge of

such architecture will say: "Enough! I am convinced. You have proved your

thesis by actually performing the deed that the thesis asserts to be possible."

  And such is the method the authors have employed. The labor involved

— or shall we call it austere and exalted play? — was immense. They had

predecessors,  including  themselves.  Among  their  earlier  works  Russell's  .

"Principles of Mathematics" and Whitehead's "Universal Algebra" are known

to many. The related

  works  of  their  predecessors  and  contemporaries,  modern  critical

mathematicians and modern logicians, Weier-strass, Cantor, Boole, Peano,

Schroder, Peirce and many others, including their own former selves, had to

be digested, assimilated and transcended. All this was done, in the course of

more than a score of years; and the work before us is a noble monument to

the authors' persistence, energy, acumen and idealism. A people capable ofsuch a work is neither crawling on its belly nor completely saturated with

commercialism nor wholly philistine. There are preliminary explanations in

ordinary  language  and  summaries  and  other  explanations  are  given  in

ordinary language here and there throughout the book, but the work proper is

all in symbolic form. Theoretically the use of symbols is not necessary. A

sufficiently powerful god could have dispensed with them, but unless he were

a divine spendthrift, he would not have done so, except perhaps for the reason

that whatever is feasible should be done at least once in order to complete the

possible  history  of  the  world.  But  whilst  the  employment  of  symbols  is

theoretically dispensable, it is, for- man, practically indispensable. Many of

the results in the work before us could not have been found without the help

of symbols, and even if they could have been thus found, their expression in

ordinary speech, besides being often unintelligible, owing to complexity and

involution, would have required at least fifteen large volumes instead of four.

Fortunately the symbology is both interesting and fairly easy to master. The

difficulty inheres in the subject itself.

  The  initial  chapter,  devoted  to  preliminary  explanations  that  any  one

capable of nice thinking may read with pleasure and profit, is followed by a

chapter of 30 pages dealing with "the theory of logical types."

  Mr. Russell has dealt with the same matter in volume 30 of the American

Journal of Mathematics (1908). One may or may not judge the theory to be

sound or adequate or necessary and yet not fail to find in the chapter setting it

forth both an excellent example of analytic and constructive thinking and a

worthy model of exposition. The theory, which, however, is recommended by

other  considerations,  originated  in  a  desire  to  exclude  from  logic

automatically by means of its principles what are called illegitimate totalities

and therewith a subtle variety of contradiction and vicious circle fallacy that,

owing  their  presence  to  the  non-exclusion  of  such  totalities,  have  always

infected logic and justified skepticism as to the ultimate soundness of all

discourse,  however  seemingly  rigorous.  (Such  theoretic  skepticism  may

persist anyhow, on other grounds.) Perhaps the most obvious example of an

illegitimate totality is the so-called class of all classes. Its illegitimacy may be

shown as follows. If A is a class (say that of men) and £ is a member of it, we

say, E is an A. Now let W be the class of all classes such that no one of them

is a member of itself. Then, whatever class x may be, to say that x is a W is

equivalent to saying that x is not an x, and hence to say that W is a FT is

equivalent to saying that W is not a Wl Such illegitimate totalities (and thefallacies they breed) are in general exceedingly sly, insinuating themselves

under an endless variety of most specious disguises, and that, not only in the

theory of classes but also in connection with every species of logical subject-

matter,  as  propositions,  relations  and  propositions!  functions.  As  the

proposition a! function — any expression containing a real (as distinguished

from an apparent) variable and yielding either non-sense or else a proposition

whenever

  the variable is replaced by a constant term — is the basis of our authors'

work,  their  theory  of  logical  types  is  fundamentally  a  theory  of  types  of

prepositional functions. It can not be set forth here nor in fewer pages than

the  authors  have  devoted  to  it.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  theory  presents

prepositional functions as constituting a summitless hierarchy of types such

that the functions of a given type make up a legitimate totality; and that, in

the light of the theory, truth and falsehood present themselves each in the

form of a systematic ambiguity, the quality of being true (or false) admitting

of distinctions in respect of order, level above level, without a summit. When

Epimenides, the Cretan, says that all statements of Cretans are false, and you

reply that then his statement is false, the significance of "false" here presents

two orders or levels; and logic must by its machinery automatically prevent

the possibility of confusing them.

  Next follows a chapter of 20 pages, which all philosophers, logicians and

grammarians  ought  to  study,  a  chapter  treating  of  Incomplete  Symbols

wherein by ingenious analysis it is shown that the ubiquitous expressions of

the  form  "the  so  and  so"  (the  "the"  being  singular,  as  "the  author  of

Waverley," "the sine of a," "the Athenian who drank hemlock," etc.) do not

of  themselves  denote  anything,  though  they  have  contextual  significance

essential to discourse, essential in particular to the significance of identity,

which, in the world of discourse, takes the form of "a is the so and so" and

not the form of the triviality, a is a.

  After the introduction of 88 pages, we reach the work proper (so far as it

is contained in the Volume I.), namely, Part L: Mathematical Logic. Here

enunciation of primitives is followed by series after series of

    PRINC1PIA MAI HI MA I 1* A

  theorems  and  demonstrations,  marching  through  578  pages,  all  matter

being clad in symbolic garb, except that the continuity is interrupted here and

there by summaries and explanations in ordinary language. Logic it is called

and  logic  it  is,  the  logic  of  propositions  and  functions  and  classes  andrelations, by far the greatest (not merely the biggest) logic that our planet has

produced,  so  much  that  is  new  in  matter  and  in  manner;  but  it  is  also

mathematics, a prolegomenon to the science, yet itself mathematics in the

most  genuine  sense,  differing  from  other  parts  of  the  science  only  in  the

respects that it surpasses these in fundamentally, generality and precision,

and lacks traditionality. Few will read it, but all will feel its effect, for behind

it is the urgence and push of a magnificent past: two thousand five hundred

years of record and yet longer tradition of human endeavor to think aright.

  Owing to the vast number, the great variety and the mechanical delicacy

of  the  symbols  employed,  errors  of  type  are  not  entirely  avoidable  and

Volume II. opens with a rather long list of "errata to Volume I." The second

volume  is  composed  of  three  grand  divisions:  Part  III.,  which  deals  with

cardinal  arithmetic;  Part  IV.,  which  is  devoted  to  what  is  called  relation-

arithmetic; and Part V., which treats of series. The theory of types, which is

presented  in  Volume  I.,  is  very  important  in  the  arithmetic  of  cardinals,

especially in the matter of existence-theorems, and for the convenience of the

reader Part III. is prefaced with explanations of how this theory applies to the

matter in hand. In the initial section of this part we find the definition and

logical  properties  of  cardinal  numbers,  the  definition  of  cardinal  number

being the one that is due to Frege, namely, the cardinal number of a class C is

the class of all classes

    similar to C, where by "similar" is meant that two classes are similar

when and only when the elements of either can be associated in a one-to-one

way with the elements of the other. This section consists of seven chapters

dealing respectively with elementary properties of cardinals; o and i and 2;

cardinals  of  assigned  types;  homogeneous  cardinals;  ascending  cardinals;

descending  cardinals;  and  cardinals  of  relational  types.  Then  follows  a

section  treating  of  addition,  multiplication  and  exponentiation,  where  the

logical muse handles such themes as the arithmetical sum of two classes and

of two cardinals; double similarity; the arithmetical sum of a class of classes;

the arithmetical product of two classes and of two cardinals; next, of a class

of  classes;  multiplicative  classes  and  arithmetical  classes;  exponentiation;

greater and less. Thus no less than 186 large symbolically compacted pages

deal  with  properties  common  to  finite  and  infinite  classes  and  to  the

corresponding numbers. Nevertheless finites and infinites do differ in many

important respects, and as many as 116 pages are required to present such

differences  under  such  captions  as  arithmetical  substitution  and  uniformformal  numbers;  subtraction;  inductive  cardinals;  intervals;  progressions;

Aleph null, Ko; reflexive classes and cardinals; the axiom of infinity; and

typically indefinite inductive cardinals.

  As  indicating  the  fundamental  character  of  the  "Prin-cipia"  it  is

noteworthy that the arithmetic of relations is not begun earlier than page 301

of the second huge volume. In this division the subject of thought is relations

including relations between relations. If RI and R-t are two relations and if F\

and F 2 are their respective fields (composed of the things between which the

relations subsist), it may happen that FI and F%

  can be so correlated that, if any two terms of FI have the relation R\, their

correlates in F 2 have the relation Rt t and vice versa. If such is the case, RI

and RI are said to be like or to be ordinally similar. Likeness of relations is

analogous  to  similarity  of  classes,  and,  as  cardinal  number  of  classes  is

defined  by  means  of  class  similarity,  so  relation-number  of  relations  is

denned  by  means  of  relation  likeness.  And  209  pages  are  devoted  to  the

fundamentals of relation arithmetic, the chief headings of the treatment being

ordinal similarity and relation-numbers; internal transformation of a relation;

ordinal similarity; definition and elementary properties of relation-numbers;

the  relation-numbers,  o  f  ,  2,  and  i,;  relation-numbers  of  assigned  types;

homogeneous relation-numbers; addition of relations and the product of two

relations; the sum of two relations; addition of a term to a relation; the sum of

the  relations  of  a  field;  relations  of  mutually  exclusive  relations;  double

likeness; relations of relations of couples; the product of two relations; the

multiplication and exponentiation of relations; and so on.

  The last 259 pages of the volume deal with series. A large initial section

is concerned with such properties as are common to all series whatsoever.

From this exceedingly high and tenuous atmosphere, the reader is conducted

to the level of sections, segments, stretches and derivatives of series. The

volume  closes  with  58  pages  devoted  to  convergence,  and  the  limits  of

functions.

  To judge the "Principia," as some are wont to do, as an attempt to furnish

methods  for  developing  existing  branches  of  mathematics,  is  manifestly

unfair; for it is no such attempt. It is an attempt to show that the entire body

of mathematical doctrine is deducible from' a small number of assumed ideas

and propositions.

  As such it is a most important contribution to the theory of the unity of

mathematics and of the compendence of knowledge in general. As a work ofconstructive  criticism  it  has  never  been  surpassed.  To  every  one  and

especially  to  philosophers  and  men  of  natural  science,  it  is  an  amazing

revelation of how the familiar terms with which they deal plunge their roots

far  into  the  darkness  beneath  the  surface  of  common  sense.  It  is  a  noble

monument to the critical spirit of science and to the idealism of our time.

    CONCERNING  MULTIPLE  INTERPRETATIONS  OF  POSTULATE

SYSTEMS AND THE "EXISTENCE" OF HYPERSPACE l

  WHAT  do  we  mean  when  we  speak  of  n-dimensional  space  and  n-

dimensional geometry, where n is greater than 3? The question refers to talk

about  space  and  geometry  that  are  n-dimensional  in  points,  for  ordinary

space, as is well known, is 4-dimensional in lines, 4-di-mensional in spheres,

5-dimensional in flat line-pencils, 6-dimensional in circles, etc., and there is

naturally no mystery involved in speaking of these latter varieties of multi-

dimensional  manifolds  and  their  geometries,  no  matter  how  high  the

dimensionality may be. No mystery for the reason that in these geometries

everything Lies within the domain of intuition in the same sense in which

everything in ordinary (point) geometry lies in that domain. In other words,

these  n-dimensional  geometries  are  nothing  but  theories  or  geometries  of

ordinary space, that arise when we take for element, not the point, but some

other entity, as the line or the sphere, . . . whose determination in ordinary

space  requires  more  than  3  independent  data.  Of  these  varieties  of  n-

dimensional geometry, the inventor was Julius PlUcker (d. 1868), but Pliicker

declined to concern himself with spaces and geometries of more than four

dimensions in points.

  1  Printed  in  The  Journal  of  Philosophy,  Psychology  and  ScUniiJic

Method, May 8, 1913.

  234 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS

  Since  Pliicker's  time,  however,  such  hyper-theories  of  points  have

invaded  not  only  almost  every  branch  of  pure  mathematics,  but  also  —

strangely enough — certain branches of physical science, as, for example, the

kinetic theory of gases. As to the manner of this latter invasion a hint may be

instructive.  Given  N  gas  molecules  enclosed,  say,  in  a  sphere.  These

molecules are, it is supposed, flying about hither and thither, all of them in

motion. Each of them depends on six coordinates, x, y, z, u, v, w, where x, y,

z, are the usual positional coordinates of the molecule regarded as a point in

ordinary space, and u, v, w are the components of the molecule's velocity

along  the  three  coordinate  axes.  Knowing  the  six  things  about  a  givenmolecule, we know where it is and the direction and rate of its going. The N

molecules making up the gas depend on 6N coordinates. At any instant these

have definite values. These values together define the "state" of the gas at that

instant. Now these 6N values are said to determine a point in space of 6N

dimensions. Thus is set up a one-one correspondence between such points

and the varying gas states. As the state of the gas changes, the corresponding

point  generates  a  locus  in  the  space  of  6N  dimensions.  In  this  way  the

behavior or history of the gas gets geometrically represented by loci in the

hyperspace in question.

  Is such geometric ^-dimensional phraseology merely a geometric way of

speaking about non-spatial things? Even if there exists a space, S n , one may

employ the language appropriate to the geometry of the space without having

the slightest reference to it, and, indeed, without knowing or even enquiring

whether it exists. This use of geometric speech in discourse about non-spatial

things is not only possible, but in fact very com-

  mon. An easily accessible example of it may be found in Bdcher 1 where,

in speaking of a set of values of n independent variables as a point in space of

n dimensions the reader is told that the author's use of geometric language for

the expression of algebraic facts is due to certain advantages of that language

compared with the language of algebra or of analysis; he is told that the

geometric terms will be employed "in a wholly conventional algebraic sense"

and  that  "we  do  not  propose  even  to  raise  the  question  whether  in  any

geometric  sense  there  is  such  a  thing  as  space  of  more  than  three

dimensions."

  It is held by many, including perhaps the majority of mathematicians, that

there are no hyperspaces of points and that n-dimensional geometries are,

rightly speaking, not geometries at all, but that the facts dealt with in such so-

called  geometries  are  nothing  but  algebraic  or  analytic  or  numeric  facts

expressed in geometric language. If this opinion be correct, then the extensive

and  growing  application  of  geometric  language  to  analytical  theories  of

higher dimensionality indicates a high superiority of geometric over analytic

speech, and it becomes a problem for psychology to ascertain whether the

mentioned  superiority  is  adequate  to  explain  the  phenomenon  in  question

and, if it be adequate, to show wherein the superiority resides.

  No doubt geometric language has a kind of esthetic value that is lacking

in  the  speech  of  analysis,  for  the  former,  being  transfused  with  the  rich

reminiscences  of  sensibility,  constantly  awakens  a  delightful  sense,  asthinking proceeds, of the colors, forms, and motions of the sensuous world.

This is an emotional value. No doubt, too, geometric language has, in its

distinctive

  1 "Introduction to Higher Algebra," page 9.

  236 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS

    conciseness, an economic superiority, as when, for example, one speaks

of the points of the 4-dimensional sphere, x 2 + y z + 2 2 + w 2 = r 2 , instead

of speaking of the various systems of values of the variables x, y, z, w that

satisfy the equation x* + ... = r 2 . Additional advantages of geometric over

analytic speech are brought to light in the following remarks by Poincare in

his address, "L'Avenir des Mathematiques" (1908):

  "Un grand avantage de la geometrie, c'est precisement que les sens y

peuvent  venir  au  secours  de  1'intelligence,  et  aident  a  deviner  la  route  a

suivre,  et  bien  des  esprits  preferent  ramener  les  problemes  d'analyse  a  la

forme geometrique. Malheureusement nos sens ne peuvent nous mener bien

loin, et ils nous faussent compagnie des que nous voulons nous envoler en

dehors  des  trois  dimensions  classiques.  Est-ce  a  dire  que,  sortis  de  ce

domaine restreint ou ils semblent vouloir nous enfermer, nous ne devons plus

compter  que  sur  Fanalyse  pure  et  que  toute  geometrie  a  plus  de  trois

dimensions est vaine et sans objet? Dans la generation qui nous a precedes,

les  plus  grands  maitres  auraient  repondu  'oui';  nous  sommes  anjourd'hui

tellement familiarises avec cette notion que nous pouvons en parler, meme

dans un cours d'universite, sans provoquer trop d'etonnement.

  "Mais  a  quoi  peut-elle  servir?  II  est  aise  de  le  voir:  elle  nous  donne

d'abord un langage tres commode, qui exprime en termes tres concis ce que le

langage analytique ordinaire dirait en phrases prolixes. De plus, ce langage

nous fait nommer du meme nom ce qui se ressemble et affirme des analogies

qu'il  ne  nous  permet  plus  d'oublier.  II  nous  permet  done  cenore  de  nous

diriger dans cet espace qui est trop grand pour nous et que nous ne pouvons

voir, en nous rappelant sans cesse 1'espace visible qui n'en est qu'une image

imparfaite sans doute,

    INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS 237

  mais  que  en  est  encore  une  image.  Ici  encore,  comme  dans  tous  les

exemples pr£c6dents, c'est 1'analogie avec ce qui est simple qui nous permet

de comprendre ce qui est complexe."

  The  question  of  determining  the  comparative  advantages  and

disadvantages of the languages of geometry and analysis is a very difficultone. It is evidently in the main a psychological problem. It appears that no

serious and systematic attempt has ever been made to solve it. Here, it seems,

is  an  inviting  opportunity  for  a  properly  qualified  psychologist,  it  being

understood that proper qualification would include a familiar knowledge of

the languages in question. The interest and manifold utility of such a study

are  obvious.  In  the  course  of  such  an  investigation  it  would  probably  be

found  that  the  superiority  of  geometric  over  analytic  speech  is  alone

sufficient  to  account  for  the  extensive  and  rapidly  increasing  literature  of

what is called n-dimensional geometry and that, in order to account for the

rise of such literature, it is therefore not necessary to suppose the existence of

n-dimensional spaces, S m , the facts dealt with in the literature being, it

could  be  supposed,  nothing  but  analytic  facts  expressed  in  geometric

language.

  If such a result were found, would it follow that 5, does not exist and that

consequently  n-dimensional  geometry  must  be  nothing  but  analysis  in

geometric garb? The answer is, no; for we may and we often do assign an

adequate cause of a phenomenon or event without assigning the actual cause;

and  so  the  possibility  would  remain  that  n-dimensional  geometry  has  an

appropriate  object  or  subject,  namely,  a  space  5.,  which,  though  without

sensuous existence, yet has every kind of existence that may warrantably be

attributed to ordinary

  238 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS

  geometric space, S s . For this last, though it is imitated by (or imitates)

sensible space, as an ideal model or pattern is imitated by (or imitates) an

imperfect copy, it is not identical with it. 83 is not tactile space, nor visual

space, nor that of muscular sensation, nor the space of any other sense, nor of

all the senses — it is a conceptual space; and whether there are or are not

spaces $4, 85, etc., which have every sort of existence rightly attributable to

ordinary geometric space, S 3 , and which differ from the latter only in the

accident of dimensionality and in the further accident that 6*3 appears in the

r61e of an ideal prototype for an actual sensible space, whilst £4, Ss, etc., do

not present such an appearance, — that is the question which remains for

consideration.

  A friend called at my study, and, finding me at work, asked, "What are

you doing?" My reply was: "I am trying to tell how a world which probably

does not exist would look if it did." I had been at work on a chapter of what is

called  4-dimensional  geometry.  The  incident  occurred  ten  years  ago.  Thereply to my friend no longer represents my conviction. Subsequent reflection

has convinced me that a space, S n , of four or more dimensions has every

kind of existence that may be rightly ascribed to the space, Ss, of ordinary

geometry.

  The  following  paragraphs  present  —  merely  in  outline,  for  space  is

lacking for a minute presentation — the considerations that have led me to

the conclusion above stated.

  Let  sensible  space  be  denoted  by  s-S  3  .  We  know  that  sS  3  is

discontinuous (in the mathematical sense of the term) and that it is irrational.

By saying that it is irrational I mean what common experience as well as the

results of experimental psychology prove: that

  three sensible extensions of a same type, let us for definiteness say three

sensible lengths, /i, It, /,, may be such that

  (i) /! = **,*» = /,,/!*/,.

  Because sS 3 is thus irrational, because it is radically infected with such

contradictions as (i), this space is not, and can not be, the subject or object of

geometry, for geometry is rational; it does not admit three such extensions as

those in (i). Not only do such contradictions as (i) render s$ 3 impossible as a

subject  or  object  of  geometry,  but,  when  encountered,  they  produce

intolerable  intellectual  pain  —  nay,  if  they  could  not  in  somewise  be

transcended or overcome, they would produce intellectual death, for, unless

the law of noncontradiction be preserved, concatentative thinking, the life of

intellect, must cease. In case of intellect we may say that its struggle for

existence is a struggle against contradictions. But mere existence is not the

characteristic aim or aspiration of intellect. Its aim, its aspiration, its joy, is

compatibility. Indeed, intellect seems to be controlled by two forces, a vis a

tergo  and  a  vis  a  fronte:  it  is  driven  by  discord  and  drawn  by  concord.

Intellect  is  a  perpetual  suitor,  the  object  of  the  suit  being  harmony,  the

beautiful daughter of the muses. Its perpetual enemy is the immortal demon

of discord, ever being overcome, but never vanquished.

  The victory of intellect over the characteristic contradictions inherent in

sS\ is won through what we call conception. That is to say that either we find

or  else  we  create  another  kind  of  space  which,  in  order  to  distinguish  it

nominally and symbolically from sS 3 , we may call conceptual space, and

denote  by  cS  t  .  Unlike  sSi,  cSt  is  mathematically  continuous  and  it  is

rational. Like sS 3 . cS 3 is extended, it has room, but the room and

  240 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS  the extensions are not sensible, they are conceptual; and these extensions

are such that, if l l} h, k be three amounts of a given type of extension, as

length, say, and if /i = lz and lz = Is, then li = 1 3 . The space cS s , whether

we regard it as found by the intellect or as created by it, is the subject or

object  of  geometry.  The  current  vulgar  confusion  of  sS  3  and  cS  3  is

doubtless due to the fact that the former imitates the latter, or the latter the

former, as a sensible thing imitates its ideal, or as an ideal (of a sensible

thing) may be said to imitate that thing; for it is precisely such alternative or

mutual imitation that enables us in a measure to control the sensible world

through its conceptual counterpart; and so the exigencies of practical affairs

and the fact that reciprocally imitating things each reminds us of the other

cooperate  to  cause  the  sensible  and  the  ideal,  the  perceptual  and  the

conceptual, to mingle constantly and to become confused in that part of our

mental life that belongs to the sensible and the conceptual worlds of three

dimensions. Nevertheless, it is a fact to be borne in mind that cS 3 is a subject

or object of geometry and that sS 3 is not.

  Now,  in  order  to  construct  the  geometry  in  question,  we  start  with  a

suitable system of postulates or axioms expressing certain relations among

what are called the elements of cS 3 . These postulates, together with such

propositions as are deducible from them, constitute the geometry of cS 3 . I

shall call it pure geometry, for a reason to be given later, and shall denote it

by pG 3 . For definiteness let us refer to the famous and familiar postulates of

Hilbert.  Any  other  system  would  do  as  well.  In  the  Hilbert  system,  the

elements are called points, lines, and planes. It is customary and just to point

out that the terms point, line, and plane are not

    defined, and in critical commentary it is customary to add:

  (A) That, consequently, these terras may be taken to be the names of any

things whatsoever with the single restriction that the things must satisfy the

relations stated by the postulates;

  (B)  That,  when  some  admissible  or  possible  interpretation  /  has  been

given to the element-names, the postulates P together with their deducible

consequences C constitute a definite theory or doctrine D;

  (C) That replacing 7 by a different interpretation /' produces no change

whatever in D;

  (D) That this invariant D is Euclidean geometry of three dimensions; and

  (£) That, if we are to speak of D as a theory or geometry of a space, this

space is nothing but the ensemble of any kind of things that may serve for aninterpretation of P.

  That the view expressed in that so-called "critical commentary" does not

agree with common sense or with traditional usage is obvious. That it will not

bear critical reflection can, I believe, be made evident. Let us examine it a

little. In order to avoid the prejudicial associations of the terms point, line,

and plane, we may replace them by the terms "roint," "rine," and "rane," so

that the first postulate, or axiom, as Hilbert calls it, will read: Two distinct

roints always completely deter-mine a rine. Or, better still, we may replace

them by the symbols e\ t c*, e\, so that the reading will be: Two distinct e\s

always completely determine an 4; and similarly for the remaining postulates.

  We will suppose the phrasing of (A), (B), (C), (D), (£),• slightly changed

to agree with the indicated new phrasing of the postulates.

  242 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS

  It seems very probable that there are no termless relations, i. e., relations

that do not relate. It seems very probable that a relation to be a relation must

be something actually connecting or subsisting between at least two things or

terms.  A  postulate  expressing  a  relation  having  terms  is  at  all  events

ostensibly  a  statement  about  the  terms,  and  so  it  would  seem  that,  if  the

relation be supposed to be termless, the statement ceases to be a statement

about something and, in so ceasing, ceases to be a statement that is true or

else is false. In discourse, it is true, there is frequent seeming evidence that

relations are often thought of as termless, as when, for example, we speak of

"a relation and its terms"; but then we speak also of a neckless fiddle without

intending to imply by such locution that there can be a fiddle without a neck.

As, however, we do not wish the validity of the following criticism to depend

on the denial of the possibility of termless relations, the discussion will be

conducted in turn under each of the alternative hypotheses: (hi) There are

termless relations; (hz) There are no termless relations. We will begin with

    HYPOTHESIS fa

  To (A) we make no objection.

  Let us now suppose given to P some definite interpretation /. Let us grant

that we now have a definite doctrine D, consisting of P and C. Either the

things which in I the e's denote have or they have not content, character, or

meaning, m, in excess of the fact that they satisfy P.

  (i)  Suppose  they  have  not  an  excessive  meaning  m.  Denote  the

interpretation by /i and the doctrine by D\. This DI is a queer doctrine. We

may ask; what  does D\ relate or refer to? That is, what is it a doctrine of or about? The

question seems to admit of no intelligent or intelligible answer. For if the

doctrine is about something, it is, it seems natural to say, a doctrine about the

/i-things  (denoted  by  the  e's);  but,  by  (i),  these  /i-things  can  not  be

characterized or indicated otherwise than by the fact of their satisfying P; and

so it appears that such attempted natural answer is reducible and equivalent to

saying (a) that the doctrine D\ is about the things which it is about. In order

not to be thus defeated, one might try to give an informing answer by saying

that D\ is a doctrine, not about the /i-things, i. c., not about terms of relations,

but about the relations themselves. Such an answer is suspicious on account

of its unnaturalness, and it is unnatural because the propositions of D\ wear

the appearance of talking explicitly, not about relations, but about terms of

relations. Moreover, the answer is not an informing one unless the relations

that the doctrine D\ is alleged to be about can be characterized otherwise than

by the fact of their being satisfied by the /i-things, for, if they can not be

otherwise  characterized,  evidently  by  (i)  the  answer  reduces  to  a  form

essentially like that of (a). May not one escape by saying that the relations

which D\ is alleged to be a doctrine about are just the relations expressed by

the propositions in D\? Does this attempted characterization make the answer

in question an informing one? If D\ is a doctrine about the relations expressed

by its propositions, then D\ says or teaches something about these relations,

for every doctrine, if it be about something, must teach or say something

about that which it is about. In the case supposed, what does D\ teach about

the relations? Nothing except that they are satisfied by the /i-things.  244 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS

  In  other  words,  what  D\  teaches  about  the  relations  expressed  by  its

propositions is, by (i), that these are satisfied by things that satisfy them — a

not very nutritious lesson. It is possible to make a yet further attempt so to

indicate the relations as to render the answer, that the doctrine D\ is about

relations, an informing one. It is known that P may receive an interpretation /'

different from I\ in that the /'-things do not satisfy (i), but have an excessive

content, character, or meaning m. May we not give the required indication of

the relations that D\ is said to be a doctrine about by saying that they are

relations satisfied by the /'-things, the presence of the m involved making the

indication genuine or effective? It seems so at first. But if again we ask what

D\  teaches  about  the  relations  thus  indicated,  we  are  led  into  the  same

difficulty as above. Moreover, when we ask what D\ is a doctrine about we

expect an answer in terms in somewise mentioned or intimated in the D\

discourse, whilst in the case in hand the required indication has depended on

m, a thing expressly excluded from the D\ discourse by (i).

  So, I repeat, D\ is a queer doctrine.

  It must be added that if there be an interpretation /i, it is unique of its

kind; for if I\ were an interpretation satisfying (i), the /I'-things would have

no excessive meaning m; hence they would be simply the /i-things, and I\ and

I\ would be merely two symbols for a same interpretation.

    Accordingly,  if  there  were  an  interpretation  /i,  but  no  other,  i.  e.,  no

interpretation / in which the /-things did not satisfy (i), then (C) would be

pointless; by (D), DI would be Euclidean geometry of three dimensions; and,

by (£), Euclidean space, if we wished to speak of

  D\ as a geometry of a space, would be the ensemble of the /i-things; but,

if we wished to characterize the I\-things, the elements of Euclidean space,

we could only say that they are the things satisfying certain relations, and, if

we  wished  to  indicate  what  relations,  we  could  only  say,  the  relations

satisfied by those things: a very handsome circle.

  In the following it will be seen that we are in fact not imprisoned within

that circle.

  (2) Suppose the /-things of the above-assumed interpretation 7 do not

satisfy (i), but have an excessive meaning m. (It is known that such an 7 is

possible, an example being found by taking for an e\ any ordered triad of real

numbers (*, y, z); for an e\ the ensemble of triads satisfying any two distinct

equations,  Biy+Ciz+ D! = o, A&+ B*y+C*+ A -o,

  in neither of which the coefficients are all of them zero; and for an e\ the

ensemble of triads satisfying any one such equation; the presence of m being

evident in countless facts such as the fact, for example, that an e\ is composed

of numbers studied by school-boys or useful in trade without regard to their

ordered triadic relationship.) Denote the assumed definite interpretation / by

/i to remind us that it satisfies (2), and denote the corresponding doctrine by

D\. It is immediately evident that there is an interpretation I\ and hence a

doctrine D\, for to obtain /i it is sufficient to abstract from the m of the /j-

things and to take the abstracts (which plainly satisfy (i)) for Ii-things.

  Are Di and A but two different symbols for one and the same doctrine, as

asserted  by  (C)?  Evidently  not.  For,  in  respect  of  DI,  we  can  give  an

informing answer to the question, what is A a doctrine about? Owing

  246 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS

  to the presence of the m in the /2-things, the answer will be an informing

one whether it be the natural answer that A is a doctrine about the / 2 -things,

or one of the less natural answers, that D 2 is about the relations having the

/2-things  for  terms,  that  D  2  is  about  the  relations  expressed  by  its

propositions; whilst, as we have seen, owing to the absence of m in the /i-

things no such answers were, in respect of D\, informing answers.

  Can not (C) be saved by refusing to admit that there is an interpretation /i,

and so refusing to admit that there is a Z>i? If there is no I\ and hence no D\,

then (C) is pointless unless there is an /a' and so a ZY in which the / 2 '-things

have an m' different from the m of the /2-things. But if there is an / 2 ' thus

different from / 2 , then obviously /Y and Dz are, contrary to (C), different

doctrines, for they are respectively doctrines about the /2-things and the /z'-

things, and these thing-systems are different by virtue of the difference of m

and m'. Now, it is known that there are two such differing interpretations /2

and / 2 '. For we may suppose / 2 to be the possible interpretation indicated in

the above parenthesis. And for -/ 2 ' we may take for e\ any ordered triad of

real numbers, except a specified triad (a, b, c), and including ( » f o> t » ) ; f

or ^ the ensemble of triads, except (a, b, c), that satisfy any pair of equations,

  ) + 2Bi(x - a) + 2Ci(y - b) + 2Di(* -c)- Ai(a*+ £ 2 + c 1 ) = o,

  2 ) + *Bi(x - a) + iCt(y - b) + 2D 2 (z -c)- Ai(a*+ b*+c*) = o;

  and for e t the ensemble satisfying any one such equation. Just as when

we compared D\ and D 2 , so here the conclusion is, that (C) is not valid.

    INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS 247  As a matter of fact mathematicians know that there are possible infinitely

many different interpretations of P. It follows from the foregoing that there

are correspondingly many different doctrines. For the sake of completeness

we may include D\ among these, although, for the purpose of answering a

hypothetical  objection,  we  momentarily  supposed  D\  to  be  disputable  or

inadmissible.

  Which one of the D's is (or should be called) Euclidean geometry of three

dimensions? I say which "one"? For, as no two are identical, it would be

willful courting of ambiguity to allow that two or more of them should be so

denominated. Which one, then? Evidently not one of the numerical ones,

such,  for  example,  as  the  two  above  specified.  For  who  has  ever  really

believed that a point, for example, is a triad of numbers? We know that the

Greeks did arrive at geometry; we know that they did not arrive at it through

numbers; and we know that, in their thought, points were not number triads,

nor were planes and lines, for them, certain ensembles of such triads. The

confusion, if anybody ever was really thus confused, is due to the modern

discovery that number triads and certain ensembles of them happen to satisfy

the same relations as the Greeks found to be satisfied by what they called

points, lines, and planes. There is really no excuse for the confusion, for, if

Smith is taller than Brown, and yonder oak is taller than yonder beech, it

obviously does not follow that Smith is the oak and Brown the beech.

    Evidently Euclidean geometry of three dimensions is that particular D for

which the /-things are points, lines, and planes. Here it is certain to be asked:

What, then, are points, lines, and planes? And the asker will mean to imply

that, in order to maintain the

  248 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS

    proposition, it is necessary to define these terms. The proper reply is that

is it not necessary to define them. All that can be reasonably required is that

they  be  indicated,  pointed  out,  sufficiently  described  for  purposes  of

recognition, for what we desire is to be able to say or to recognize what

Euclidean geometry is about. To the question one might, not foolishly, reply

that  the  terms  in  question  denote  things  that  you  and  I,  if  we  have  been

disciplined in geometry, converse under-standingly about when we converse

about geometry, though neither of us is able to say with absolute precision

what the terms mean. For who does not know that it is possible to write an

intelligent and intelligible discourse about cats, for example, without being

able to tell (for who can tell?) precisely what a cat is? And if it be asked whatthe discourse is about, who does not know that it is an informing answer to

say that it is about cats? It is informing because the term cat has an excessive

meaning, a meaning beyond that of satisfying the propositions (or relations)

of the discourse. Just here it is well worth while to point out an important

lesson in the procedure of Euclid. Against Euclid it is often held as a reproach

that he attempted to define the element-names, point, line, and plane, since no

definitions of them could render any logical service, that is, in the strictly

deductive part of the discourse. But to render no logical service is not to

render no service. And the lesson is that the definitions in question, which it

were perhaps better to call descriptions, do render an extralogical service.

They render such service not only in guiding the imagination in the matter of

invention, but also in serving to indicate, with a goodly degree of success, the

excessive meaning m of the elements denoted by the terms in

    INTERPRETATIONS OP POSTULATE SYSTEMS 249

  question and in thus serving to make known what it is that the deductive

part of the discourse is about. One should not forget that no discourse, no

doctrine, not even so-called pure logic itself, is exclusively deductive, for in

any  doctrine  there  is  reference,  implicit  or  explicit,  to  something

extradeductive  or  extralogical,  reference,  that  is,  to  something  which  the

doctrine is about.

  Are  the  three  Euclidean  "definitions,"  thus  viewed  as  descriptions,

sufficient or adequate to the service that they are here viewed as rendering? If

by sufficient or adequate be meant exhaustive, the answer is, of course, no.

For  we  may  confidently  say  that  no  possible  description,  that  is,  no

description involving only a finite number of words, can exhaust the meaning

of a system of terms except, possibly, in the special case where these have no

meaning  beyond  what  they  must  have  in  order  merely  to  satisfy  a  finite

number of postulates. But exhaustive is not what is meant by adequate. To

employ a previous illustration, it is not necessary to give or to attempt an

exhaustive description of "cat" in order to tell adequately what it is that a

discourse ostensibly about cats is ostensibly about. It is a question of intent.

A description is nearly, if not quite, adequate if it enables us to avoid thinking

that terms are intended to denote what they are not intended to denote. And,

whilst we may not admit that the three Euclidean "descriptions" are the best

that can be invented for the purpose, yet we must allow that they have long

served the end in question pretty effectively and that they are qualified to

continue  such  service.  They  have  been  and  they  are  good  enough,  forexample, to save us from thinking that the things which in geometry have

been denoted by the terms,

  250 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS

  points, lines, and planes, are identical with number triads, etc. The open

secret of their thus saving us is no doubt in their causing us to think of points,

lines, and planes in terms of, or in essential connection with, what we know

as extension, whilst numbers and number ensembles are not things naturally

so conceived. For evidently the notions of "length" and "breadth" involved in

the Euclidean "descriptions" are not metric in meaning; they do not signify

definite or numeric quantities or amounts of something (as when we say the

length of this or that thing is so and so much); but plainly they are generic

notions  connoting  extension.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  a  mind  devoid  of  the

concept  or  the  sense  of  extension  could  not  know  what  things  the

"descriptions" aim at describing. It is true that Euclid's "description" of a

point as "that which has no part" implies a denial of extension, but the denial

is one of extension, and, in its contextual atmosphere, it is felt to be essential

to an adequate indication of what is meant by point. On the other hand, if one

were  (and  how  unnatural  it  would  be!)  to  describe  an  ordered  triad  of

numbers as "that which has no part," it would be immediately necessary to

explain away the seeming falsity of the description by saying that the triad is

not the ordered multiplicity (of three numbers) as a multiplicity, but is merely

the uniphase of the multiplicity, and that it is this uniphase which has no part.

If, next, we were to say that thus extension is denied to the uniphase, the

statement,  though  true,  would  be  felt  to  be  inessential  to  an  adequate

indication of what is meant by a triad of numbers. Such felt difference is

alone sufficient to make any one pause who is disposed to adopt the current

creed that a point is nothing but an ordered triad of numbers. It is not

  contended that a point is composed of extension; the contention is that

point and extension are so connected that a mind devoid of the latter notion

would be devoid of the former, just as a mind devoid of the notion of variable

or variation would be devoid of the notion of constant, though a constant is

not a thing consisting of variation; just as the notion of limit would not be

intelligible except for the notion of something that may have a limit, though

the limit is not composed of it; and just as an instant, which is not composed

of  time,  would  not  be  intelligible  except  for  the  notion  of  time.  In  a

discussion of such matters it is foolish and futile to talk about "proofs." The

question, as said, is one of intent; it is a question of self-veracity, of gettingaware of and owning what it is that we mean by the terms and symbols of our

discourse. If, despite the Euclidean "descriptions" and despite any and all

others that may supplement or supplace them, one fails to see that extension

is essentially involved in the meaning that the terms points, lines, and planes,

are intended to have, the failure will be because "as the eyes of bats are to the

blaze of day, so is the reason in our soul to the things which are by nature

most evident of all." Nothing is more evident than that there is something that

is called extension. We have but to open our eyes to get aware that we are

beholding  an  expanse,  something  extended.  We  see  things  as  extended:

things  as  extended  are  revealed  to  the  tactile  sense;  a  region  or  room

involving extension is a datum of the muscular sensations connected with our

bodily movements; and so on. So much is certain. But it is said and rightly

said that these are sensible things; that the extension they are revealed as

having is sensibU extension; that these sensibles are infected with contra-

  252 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS

  diction, above noted, revealed in common experience, and confirmed by

the psychophysical law of Weber and Fechner; that geometry is free from

contradiction;  that,  therefore,  geometry  is  not  a  doctrine  about  these

sensibles; that among these sensibles are not the things which in geometry are

denoted by the terms point, line, and plane; and that, if these terms imply or

connote  extension,  as  asserted,  this  extension  is  not  sensible  extension.

Granted.  The  "connoted  extension"  is  not  sensible,  it  is  conceptual.  How

know, however, that there is conceptual extension? The answer is, by arriving

at it. (We need not here debate whether such "arriving" is best called creating

or  is  best  called  finding.)  But  how  does  the  mind  arrive  at  it?  By  doing

certain things to the sensibles, the raw material of mental architecture. What

things?  An  exhaustive  answer  is  unnecessary  —  perhaps  impossible.  The

things are of two sorts: the mind gives to the sensibles; it takes away from

them.  Consider  for  example  a  sensible  line.  From  it  the  conceptualizing

intellect  takes  away  (abstracts  from,  disregards)  certain  things  that  the

sensible in question has or may have, as color, weight, temperature, etc.,

including part of the extension, thus, I mean, narrowing and thinning away all

breadth  and  thickness.  What  of  the  extension  called  length?  Have  the

narrowing and thinning taken it away? It was not so intended, the opposite

was  intended.  Yet  no  sensible  length  (extension)  remains.  Does  the

narrowing and thinning involve shortening? We are absolutely certain that it

does not. What, then, is it that has happened? Evidently that, by the indicatedtaking away, the mind has arrived at insensible length, one kind of insensible

extension, that is, at conceptual length, one kind of conceptual extension. A

stretch, we are sure, remains,

    INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS 253

  but it is not a sensible stretch. The extension thus arrived at is yet not the

extension connoted by or involved in the things that geometry is about, for in

the taking-away process of arriving at it there is nothing to disinfect it of the

contradictions  inherent  in  the  sensible  with  which  we  started.  It  remains,

then, to follow the indicated process of taking away by a process of giving,

that is to say, it remains to endow the conceptual extension (arrived at) with

continuity so as to render it free from the mentioned contradictions. This

done,  the  kind  of  extension  meant  in  ordinary  geometry  or  ordinary

geometric space is arrived at. Such is, in kind, the conceptual extension that,

it is here held, is essential to what the geometric terms, point, line, plane, are

intended to mean. Without further talk we may say that such extension is

essential  in  the  conceptual  space  that,  we  may  say,  ordinary  Euclidean

geometry is about in being about the elements of the space.

  If we denote this conceptual space by c5» to distinguish it from (non-

geometrizable) sensible space J$i, then the geometry of cSi, if constructed by

means of postulates P making no indispensable use of algebraic analysis, may

be called pure geometry, pG*. If, as in the Cartesian method, we use ordered

number  triads,  etc.,  as  we  may  use  them,  not  to  be  points,  etc.,  but  to

represent points, etc., then we get analytical geometry, aGi, of cSi. On the

other hand, if, as we may, we interpret the P by allowing the /-things to be

number  triads,  etc.,  as  above  indicated,  the  resulting  doctrine  is,  not

geometry, but a pure algebra or analysis, pA\. If we use points, etc., not to be,

but to represent, number triads, etc., and so employ geometric language in

constructing pAi, we get by this kind of anti-Cartesian

  254 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS

    procedure, not a geometry, but geometrical analysis,

  gAz.

    HYPOTHESIS hi

  It is unnecessary to say anything and is not worth while to say much

under this hypothesis. For if the e's in P do not denote something, then as the

relations (if there be any) are termless, the doctrine D (if there be one) is not

about anything, unless about the relations, but about these it says nothing, for,

if it says aught about them, what it says is that they are satisfied by certainterms whose presence in the discourse is excluded by hi. We may profitably

say,  however,  that,  in  the  case  supposed  where  the  e's  do  not  denote

something  but  are  merely  uninterpreted  variables  ready,  so  to  speak,  to

denote something — in this case we may say that, though there is no doctrine

D, there is a doctrinal function, A (ei, e 2 , e z ). Then we should add that the

doctrines that do arise from actualized possible interpretations of the e's are

so many values of A. This function A, if we give some warning mark as A 7

to  its  symbol,  may  be  further  conveniently  employed  in  talking  about  an

ambiguous  one  of  the  doctrines  in  question,  i.  e.,  about  "any  value,"  an

ambiguous  value,  of  the  function.  As  above  argued,  these  values,  these

doctrines are identical in form, they are isomorphic, all of them having the

form of A, but no two of them are the same in respect of content, reference,

or  meaning.  In  this  conclusion,  analysis,  happily,  agrees  with  traditional

usage, intuition, and common sense.

    CONCLUDING CONSIDERATIONS

  We are, I believe, now prepared to answer definitively the long-vexed

question: What, if any, sort of existence have point spaces of four or more

dimensions?

    INTERPRETATIONS OP POSTULATE SYSTEMS 255

  As we have seen, the conceptual space cS» of ordinary geometry is an

affair  involving  extension;  it  is  a  triply  extended  conceptual  spread  or

expanse:  three  independent  linear  extensions  in  it  may  be  chosen;  these

suffice to determine all the others. So much is as certain as anything can be. It

is equally certain that we can, for we do without meeting contradiction, by

means  of  postulates  or  otherwise,  conceive  (not  perceive  or  imagine)  a

quadruply extended spread or expanse, one, that is, in which it is possible to

choose four independent linear extensions, and then by reference to these to

determine all the rest There is not the slightest difference in kind among the

four independents and not the slightest difference between any three of these

and the three of cSi. The spread or expanse thus set up is a c5 4 ; like cSi, it is

purely conceptual; the extension it involves is, in kind, identical with that of

cS 3 ', it contains spreads of the type of c.Sa as elements just exactly as a cS*

contains planes or spreads of type cS t as elements; it differs not at all from

cS 3 except in being one degree higher in respect of dimensionality. In a

word, cS* (and, of course, cS&, and so on) has the same kind of existence as

cSz. It is true that cSi is "imitated" by our sensible space sS), whilst there is

no sSt thus imitating cS t . But this writing is not intended for one who iscapable of thinking that the mentioned sensible imitation or instability of cSi

confers upon the latter a new or peculiar kind of existence.

  But one thing remains to be said, and it is important. If one denies that cS

a has the conceptually exten-sional existence, above alleged, then, of course,

the denial extends also to cS*, and the two spaces are, in respect of existence,

still on a level. If the denier then asserts, and such is the alternative, that cSt

is only the

  256 INTERPRETATIONS OF POSTULATE SYSTEMS

    ensemble of number triads, etc., as above explained, then, if he be right,

cS* is only, but equally, the ensemble of ordered quatrains, etc., of numbers.

Here,  again,  cSz  and  cSi  have  precisely  the  same  kind  of  existence.  The

conclusion  is  that  hyperspaces  have  every  kind  of  existence  that  may  be

warrantably attributed to the space of ordinary geometry.

    MATHEMATICAL PRODUCTIVITY IN THE UNITED STATES 1

  BOTH on its own account and in its relation to the general question of

research, this subject is naturally interesting to the specialists immediately

concerned; and it seems a happy augury that not long ago several western

college and university presidents, in convention, considered the problem how

to secure that officers of instruction shall become, in addition, investigators

and producers. A complete solution will be found when, and only when, the

nature  and  importance  of  the  problem  shall  be  appreciated,  not  only  by

scientific  specialists  and  university  presidents,  but  by  educators  and  the

educated public in general, and this condition will be satisfied in proportion

as the interdependence of all grades and varieties of educational and scientific

activity shall come to be generally understood, and especially in proportion

as we learn to value the things of mind, not merely for their utility, but for

their spiritual worth, and to seek, as a community, in addition to comfort and

happiness,  the  glory  of  the  sublimer  forms  of  knowledge  and  intellectual

achievement.

  Except  when  the  contrary  may  be  indicated  or  clearly  implied,  the

discussion  will  confine  itself  to  pure  mathematics  as  distinguished  from

applied mathematics, such as mechanics and mathematical physics.

  And first as to the significance of terms. According to the usage that has

long prevailed among foreign

    mathematicians, and which, during the last quarter of a century, has come

to prevail also in this country, the term mathematical productivity is restricted

to discovery, successful research, extension in some sense of the boundariesof mathematical knowledge; and such productive activity includes and ranges

thru the establishment of important new theorems, the critical grounding of

classical doctrines, the discovery or invention of new methods of attack, and,

in its highest form, the opening and exploration of new domains.

  Not only does the term productivity now signify here what it signifies

abroad, but the prevailing standards in the United States agree with those of

Europe. It is not meant that the best work in this country is yet equal to the

very  best  of  the  European,  nor  that  the  averages  coincide,  but  that  the

Americans judge home and foreign products by the same canons of value,

and  that  these  are  as  rigorous  as  the  French,  German,  or  British  rules  of

criticism.

  Time was when productivity meant, in the United States, the writing and

publishing  of  college  text-books  in  algebra,  geometry,  trigonometry,

analytical geometry and the calculus, not to mention arithmetic. That time has

gone by. At present the term neither signifies such work nor, except in rare

instances, includes it. With reverence for the olden time when the college

professor, especially in comparison with the average of his successors of the

present  time,  was  apt  to  be  a  man  of  general  attainments  and  diversified

learning,  it  may  be  said  that,  judged  by  modern  standards  of  specialized

scholarship, the special attainments of American mathematicians previous to

a  generation  ago,  except  in  the  case  of  a  few  illustrious  men,  were

exceedingly meager — a fact which, as it could hardly have been suspected

  owing to their isolation by the mathematicians themselves, was even less

known to their colleagues in other branches of learning or to the educated

public  in  general.  The  writer  of  a  college  text-book  in  mathematics  was

naturally regarded as a great mathematician, despite the circumstance that, in

general, the book contained the sum of the author's knowledge of the subject

treated, much more than the average teacher's knowledge, and quite as much

as the most capable youth was expected to master under the most favoring

conditions. In general, neither author nor teacher nor pupil had knowledge of

the fact that their most advanced instruction dealt only with the rudiments

and often even with these in an obsolete or obsolescent manner; in general,

there was no suspicion that, on the other side of the Atlantic, mathematics

was a vast and growing science, much less that it was developing so rapidly

and in so manifold a manner that the greatest mathematical genius found it

necessary to specialize, even in his own domain. As a natural consequence

American mathematical instruction depended almost exclusively on the useof text-books. What was thus at first a necessity became a tradition, and,

accordingly, in striking contrast with French and German practice in schools

of  corresponding  grade,  American  college  and  undergraduate  university

instruction in mathematics, with some exceptions, of which Harvard is the

most notable, continues still to make the text-book the basis of instruction,

even where it is not regarded as a sine qua turn of the classroom. One result

of this practice and tradition is that the textbook, which early assumed in the

public  estimation  what  now  seems  to  be  an  exaggerated  importance,

continues still to be often regarded as an indispensable instrument for the

systematic impartation of knowledge.

  The  text-book  method  in  undergraduate  mathematical  instruction

undoubtedly has some peculiar merits and is recommended by considerations

of  weight.  I  am  not  about  to  advocate  its  abandonment.  That  question,

moreover^ is in a sense alien to the subject here under discussion. But I may

say in passing that the notion, so firmly lodged in many of our colleges and

still more firmly established in the mind of the general educated public, that

the text-book is indispensable, is an erroneous one. That, as already said, has

been  amply  proved  both  here  and  abroad,  at  Harvard,  in  some  American

normal schools, and in the schools of Germany and France, by the best, if not

the only, method available for settling such questions, namely, by trial. And I

could  wish  it  were  better  known,  particularly  to  teachers  in  secondary

schools, that some of the ablest mathematicians and teachers of mathematics

deprecate, not the use of the text-book, for that use has been sufficiently

justified  by  the  practice  of  most  eminent  and  effective  teachers,  but  our

traditional dependence upon it, believing that this- dependence often hampers

the competent teacher's freedom and so prevents a full manifestation of the

proper life of the subject. For the subject has indeed a deep and serene and

even a joyous life, and, contrary to popular feeling, it is capable of being so

interpreted and administered as to have, not merely for the few, but for the

many, for the majority indeed of those who find their way to college, not only

the highest disciplinary value, which is generally conceded, but a wonderful

quickening power and inspiration as well. And it may very well be that the

very great, tho not generally suspected, human significance and cultural value

of mathematics, the fact that not merely in its elements it is highly useful and

appli-

  cable, but that throughout the entire immensity and wondrous complex of

its development it is informed with beauty, being sustained indeed by artisticinterest, — it may indeed be that all this will in some larger measure come to

be felt and understood when teaching shall depend less on the text-book, at

best a relatively dead thing, tending to bear the spirit of instruction down, and

shall instead be more by living men, speaking immediately to living men, out

of masterful knowledge of their science and with a clear perception of its

spiritual significance and worth.

  To  return  from  this  digression,  it  is  fully  recognized  by  all  that,  as

undergraduate mathematical instruction is now carried on in our country, the

text-book writer is a pretty valuable citizen, nor is there any disposition to

detract from the dignity of his activity. Indeed, though some of the older

books compare favorably in important respects with the best of the new, it

may be said that, in general, to write a highly acceptable mathematical book

for college use requires to-day an order of attainment far superior to that

which  was  sufficient  even  a  score  or  two  of  years  ago.  The  training  and

scholarship which such work presupposes are, in respect to amount and more

especially  in  respect  to  quality,  not  only  relatively  great,  but  very

considerable  absolutely.  The  author  of  the  kind  of  book  in  question  -and

happily there is no lack of competition in this field of writing — may be

certain of intelligent, if not always generous, appreciation; he may be able

thereby to lengthen his purse, his book stands some chance of being briefly

noticed in reputable journals, and he may even gain local fame, but, however

excellent the quality of his workmanship, it will seldom secure him a place in

the ranks of the investigator or producer. The ser-

  vice of the text-book writer has not been degraded. It receives a more

discriminating appreciation than ever before. It is merely that this kind of

work has received a more critical appraisement. Not a few mathematicians

decline to undertake the work of text-book writing, for the reason that they do

not wish to be classed as textbook authors. If one who has published several

original papers yields to the temptation to write a book for college use, the

chances are his reputation will suffer loss rather than gain. Possibly such

ought not to be the case, but nevertheless it is the case.

  In  regard  to  mathematical  productivity  proper,  it  is  probably  true  that

during  the  last  twenty-five  years,  especially  during  the  latter  half  of  this

period, there has been greater improvement in research work and output in

this country than elsewhere in the world. Such sweeping statements are of

course hazardous, and I make this one subject to correction. At all events, the

gain in question has been great and is full of promise. Just about twenty-fiveyears ago the American Journal oj Mathematics was founded at the Johns

Hopkins University, where it is still published as a quarterly. Previous to that

time two or three attempts had been made to publish journals of mathematics

in  this  country,  but  they  met  with  little  success,  and  are  now  scarcely

remembered. The American Journal of Mathematics, in the beginning, sought

contributions from abroad, and reference to the early volumes will show that

these are to a considerable extent occupied by foreign products. A second

journal, the Annals of Mathematics, was founded in 1884, and published at

the University of Virginia. This journal, a quarterly, still flourishes, being

now  published  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  under  the  auspices  of  Harvard

University. In 1888 was founded the New

  York  Mathematical  Club,  which  soon  became  the  New  York

Mathematical Society and began the publication of a monthly Bulletin. In

1894 this society became the American Mathematical Society which now has

a membership of nearly four hundred, including, with few exceptions, every

American mathematician of standing, besides some members from Canada,

England, and the Continent. This society has a rapidly growing library, and

publishes two journals, the Bulletin, already mentioned, and the Transactions,

a quarterly journal, recently founded, and devoted to the publication of the

more important results of research. The four journals named are, all of them,

of good standing and exchange with some of the best British and Continental

journals. Not by any means all the members of the society are producing

mathematicians, but a large precentage of them are sufficiently interested to

attend one or more meetings of the society each year. These meetings are bi-

monthly  meetings,  held  in  New  York,  and  a  summer  meeting  at  a  place

chosen from year to year. To meet growing demands, a Chicago section has

been  organized,  which  holds  regular  meetings  in  that  city,  and  a  second

section on the Pacific Coast, whose business will be conducted perhaps at

San  Francisco.  These  sections  report  to  the  society  proper,  which  has  its

offices in New York City.

  At these meetings there are presented annually several scores of papers, a

percentage of which deal with applied mathematics. Of course not all of these

papers are important, but some of them possess very considerable, a few of

them distinctly great, value, and a large majority of them fall properly within

the category of original investigation as defined. In addition to such more

regular contributions, a considerable number of mathe-

    matical papers are annually presented before other American scientificorganizations, as, for example, before Section A of the American Association

for the Advancement of Science. The majority of all these articles are found

to  be  available  for  publication,  and  the  result  is  that,  altho  foreign

contributions are no longer invited as formerly, and few of them received, the

four journals above mentioned are, nevertheless, taxed beyond their capacity;

and,  for  want  of  room,  papers  are  sometimes  rejected  by  the  American

journals  which,  if  produced  abroad,  would  probably  be  published  there,

where  the  facilities  for  publication  are  ampler.  In  fact,  the  number  of

American memoirs published abroad exceeds perhaps the number of foreign

contributions published here.

  It is greatly to be regretted that our facilities for publication, tho recently

so greatly enhanced, are still distinctly inadequate. For mathematicians are

also men, and, as such, one of their most powerful incentives to research is

the prospect of the recognition that comes from having the results of their

labors properly placed before the scientific world.

  While the picture "thus drawn of American mathematical activity is a

pleasing  one  and  is  full  of  encouragement  and  hope,  still  we  must  not

disguise from ourselves the fact that, in view of the vast extent and resources

of  our  country  and  of  the  large  number  of  professional  mathematicians

connected with our numerous colleges and universities, the amount and the

average quality of the American mathematical output are not only distinctly

inferior to that of the more scientific countries of Europe, for which, not

without  some  justice  and  plausibility,  we  are  wont  to  plead  our  youth  in

defense and explanation, but this average and amount are by no means a

measure of our native ability nor in

  keeping with our achievements in some other scarcely worthier, if less

ethereal, domains.

  The reasons for this state of case are not far to seek, and come readily to

light on a minuter study of the necessary and sufficient conditions for the

vigorous prosecution of mathematical research.

  We may recall the philosopher's insight that "there is but one poet and

that is Deity." The poet is indeed born, we all agree; and it is equally, if not

so obviously, true that the great mathematician or financier or administrator is

born. But the mathematician is not born trained or born with knowledge of

the state of the science, and hence it goes without saying that to native ability,

which we presuppose throughout as absolutely essential and which is not so

rare as is often thought, training must be superadded, years of austere trainingunder, or still better, in co-operation with, competent masters in a suitable

atmosphere.  Formerly,  it  was  in  general  necessary  to  seek  such  training

abroad; that is no longer the case, now that our better universities are manned

with  scholars  of  the  best  American  and  European  training.  Indeed  the

mathematical doctorate of a few of our own institutions now represents quite

as much as, if not more than, the average German doctorate, though less, we

must  still  confess,  than  the  French,  which  probably  has  the  highest

significance  of  any  in  the  world.  Several  of  the  most  highly  productive

mathematicians in the country have not received foreign training, while a still

larger number of non-producers studied abroad for years — a fact showing

that such training is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition. It is not

intended  to  depreciate  the  absolute  value  of  foreign  training,  but  only  its

relative value — its value as compared with that of the best which our

  own country now affords. It is still desirable, when not too inconvenient,

to spend a year in the atmosphere of foreign universities, and many avail

themselves of the opportunity, largely for the sake of the prestige which,

owing partly to a tradition, it still affords in many American communities. It

is, of course, a mere truism to say that training, though necessary, is not

sufficient. Unless there be the gift of originality, training can at best result in

receptive and critical scholarship, but not in productive power.

  There are in our country a goodly number of men having the requisite

ability and training, who, nevertheless, produce but little or nothing at all — a

fact  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  absence  in  their  case  of  other  essential

conditions.

  In  some  cases  library  facilities  are  lacking.  Mathematical  science  is  a

growth.  The  new  rises  out  of  the  old,  whence  the  necessity  that  the

investigator have at hand the major part at least of the literature of his subject

from the earliest times. Even more exacting, if possible, is the necessity of

having ready access to the leading journals of England, Germany, France,

and Italy, besides those of America. One takes special pleasure in mentioning

Italy,  because  she  has  been  recently  making  rapid  advances  and  in  two

important directions, the geometry of hyperspace and mathematical logic, the

ontology of pure thought, she comes well-nigh leading the van. Of journals

there are at least a dozen which are absolutely indispensable to the research

worker and as many more that are highly desirable. In addition, the producing

mathematician will not infrequently have occasion to refer to memoirs which,

because of their length or for other reasons, have not appeared in the journals,and are to be found only

  in  the  proceedings  of  the  leading  general  scientific  and  philosophical

societies of Europe. The lack of such facilities, which in some cases a few

hundred and in others a few thousand dollars would suffice to make good, is

in itself sufficient to explain the non-productivity of not a few American

mathematicians.

  Again, there are cases where able men have not the necessary leisure to

engage successfully in investigation. Our universities are for the most part so

organized  that  the  energies  of  scientific  men  are  largely  expended  in

undergraduate teaching and in administrative work. We, as a people, have yet

to learn that the value of a professor to a community can be rightly estimated,

not by counting the number of hours he actually stands before his classes, but

rather, if we must count at all, by reckoning the number of hours devoted to

the preparation of his lectures, and more particularly by the fruit of quiet

study and research. In Germany the ordinary professor lectures from four to

six  hours  a  week,  to  which  if  we  add  in  some  cases  two  hours

Seminariibungcn, we have a total of six to eight hours of presence in the

lecture  room.  In  France  the  professor  is  expected  to  give  one  course  of

lectures. These take place twice a week and last from one to one and a half

hours.  To  this  duty  should  be  added  that  of  holding  a  large  number  of

examinations — a rather wearisome service from which the German escapes.

When we contrast this with the ten to fifteen and often even twenty or more

hours of actual teaching demanded of the American professor, to say nothing

of  faculty  meetings,  committee  meetings,  and  the  multitudinous

examinations, and when we do not fail to reflect that ten hours are much

more  than  twice  five  in  their  tax  upon  energy,  it  is  little  wonder  that  in

productivity our

  most  brilliant  men  are  often  so  greatly  outclassed  by  their  foreign

competitors. Moreover ', "our universities are at present, for the first two

years, gymnasia and lycees, and our professors are accordingly obliged to

devote themselves largely to what is properly secondary instruction" — a

kind  of  work  which,  however  worthy,  important,  and  necessary,  has  the

effect, not merely of drawing off the energy in non-productive channels, but

also eventually of forming and hardening the mind about a relatively small

group of simpler ideas.

  Again, scientific activity is not infrequently rendered impossible by the

amount of administrative work which professors of notable administrativeability are called upon to perform. Indeed "the problem presses for solution,

how to retain the many peculiar excellences of our college and university life

and at the same time to create for certain men of talent and training a suitable

environment for the highest scientific activity."

  Once more, it is very desirable, indeed it is really necessary, for men

working in a branch of science to attend the meetings of scientific bodies, in

order to meet their fellow-men, to take counsel of them, to create and share in

a wholesome esprit de corps, to catch the inspiration and enthusiasm, and to

gain the sustaining impulses which can come only from personal contact and

co-operation. But our country is so vast, the distances so long, and traveling

so expensive, that many mathematicians, owing to smallness of income, find

themselves hopelessly condemned to a life of isolation, of which the result is

a loss first of interest and then of power. It is in vain that one counsels such

men to wake up and be strong and active, for their state of inactivity is less a

defect of will than an effect of circumstances.

  There  is  a  second  phase  of  this  question  of  remuneration  which  is,

happily,  beginning  to  attract  attention  and  to  receive  consideration  in

university circles. I refer to the proposition that a wise economy will provide,

for university service, remuneration, not such as would attract men whose

first ambition is to acquire the ease that wealth is supposed to afford, but such

as will not, by its inadequacy to the reasonable demands of modern social

life, deter men of ability and predilection for scientific pursuits from entering

upon  them.  I  know  personally  of  six  young  men,  not  all  of  them

mathematicians, who have sufficiently demonstrated that they possess such

ability and predilection, five of whom have recently relinquished the pursuit

of science and the fifth of whom told me only yesterday that he seriously

contemplates doing so, all of them, for the reason that, as they allege, the

university  career  furnishes  either  not  at  all,  or  too  tardily,  a  financial

competence and consequent relief from practical condemnation to celibacy. It

matters little whether they be mistaken to a degree or not, so long as the

contrary conviction determines choice. There is, indeed, more than a bare

suspicion  that  for  reasons  akin  to  those  actuating  in  the  cases  cited,  the

university career, particularly in case of the more abstract sciences, such as

pure mathematics, whose doctrines have little or no market value, fails to

attract a due proportion of the best intellects of the country. For it should be

understood that successful investigation in such sciences demands men of

intellectual resource, of power, of persistence, in a word, men of strenuosityof life and character. Such men are indeed the intellectual peers of the great

financier, or soldier, or statesman, or administrator, and they are aware of it;

so that if too many

  such men are not to be drawn away from scientific fields by the prospect

of achieving elsewhere not only fame but fortune also, it stands to reason that

the university career must promise at least a competence and the peace of

mind it brings. That such is the case, and that the future will condemn the

present for a too tardy recognition of the fact, is a matter which can hardly

admit of doubt.

  That the conditions above indicated are those which determine the matter

of mathematical productivity is a proposition which not only commends itself

a priori to the reason, but is justified also a posteriori by experience, for

statistics show that those institutions, both foreign and domestic, where such

productivity has flourished best are also those where the conditions named

are most fully satisfied, and that where one, at least, of the conditions is not

fulfilled, there investigation proceeds but feebly or is wholly wanting.

  It remains to mention another condition which in a sense includes all

others, and whose fulfillment will come gradually as at once the cause and

the effect of the fulfillment of all others. I mean, of course, a public sentiment

which  will  demand,  because  it  has  learned  to  appreciate,  knowledge,  not

merely  because  of  its  applications  and  utility,  but  for  its  beauty,  as  one

appreciates the moon and the stars without regard to their aid in navigation —

a public sentiment that shall seek every provision and regard as sacred every

instrumentality for the advancement and ministration of knowledge, not only

as a means to happiness, but as a glory, for its own sake, as a self-justifying

realization of the distinctive ambition of man, to understand the universe in

which he lives and the wondrous possibilities of the Reason unto which it

constantly makes appeal.

    MATHEMATICS >

  IN the early part of the last century a philosophic French mathematician,

addressing himself to the question of the perfectibility of scientific doctrines,

expressed the opinion that one may not imagine the last word has been said

of a given theory so long as it can not by a brief explanation be made clear to

the man of the street. Doubtless that conception of doctrinal perfectibility,

taken literally, can never be realized. For doubtless, just as there exist now, so

in the future there will abound, even in greater and greater variety and on a

vaster and vaster scale, deep-laid and high-towering scientific doctrines that,in respect to their infinitude of detail and in their remoter parts and more

recondite structure, shall not be intelligible to any but such as concentrate

their life upon them. And so the noble dream of Gergonne can never literally

come  true.  Nevertheless,  as  an  ideal,  as  a  goal  of  aspiration,  it  is  of  the

highest value, and, though in no case can it be quite attained, it yet admits in

many, as I believe, of a surprisingly high degree of approximation. I do

  1 An address delivered in 1907 at Columbia University, the University of

Virginia, Washington and Lee University, the University of North Carolina,

Tulane University, the University of Arkansas, the University of Nebraska,

the  University  of  Missouri,  the  University  of  Chicago,  Northwestern

University, the University of Illinois, Vanderbilt University, the University of

Minnesota,  the  University  of  Michigan,  the  University  of  Cincinnati,  the

Ohio State University, Vassar College, the University of Vermont, Purdue

University,  and  the  University  Club  of  New  York  City.  Printed  by  the

Columbia University Press, 1007.

  not mind frankly owning that I do not share in the feeling of those, if

there  be  any  such,  who  regard  their  special  subjects  as  so  intricate,

mysterious  and  high,  that  in  all  their  sublimer  parts  they  are  absolutely

inaccessible to the profane man of merely general culture even when he is led

by the hand of an expert and condescending guide. For scientific theories are,

each and all of them, and they will continue to be, built upon and about

notions which, however sublimated, are nevertheless derived from common

sense.  These  etherealized  central  concepts,  together  with  their  manifold

bearings  on  the  higher  interests  of  life  and  general  thought,  can  be

measurably assimilated to the language of the common level from which they

arose. And, in passing, I should like to express the hope that here at Columbia

or other competent center there may one day be established a magazine that

shall have for its aim to mediate, by the help, if it may be found, of such pens

as those of Huxley and Clifford, between the focal concepts and the larger

aspects of the technical doctrines of the specialist, on the one hand, and the

teeming  curiosity,  the  great  listening,  waiting,  eager,  hungering

consciousness of the educated thinking public on the other. Such a service,

however, is not to be lightly undertaken. An hour, at all events, is hardly time

enough in which to conduct an excursion even of scientific folk through the

mazes of more than twenty hundred years of mathematical thought or even to

express intelligibly, if one were competent, the significance of the whole in a

critical estimate.  Indeed, such is the character of mathematics in its profounder depths and

in its higher and remoter zones that it is well nigh impossible to convey to

one who has not devoted years to its exploration a just impression

  of  the  scope  and  magnitude  of  the  existing  body  of  the  science.  An

imagination formed by other disciplines and accustomed to the interests of

another  field  may  scarcely  receive  suddenly  an  apocalyptic  vision  of  that

infinite  interior  world.  But  how  amazing  and  how  edifying  were  such  a

revelation, if only it could be made. To tell the story of mathematics from

Pythagoras  and  Plato  to  Hilbert  and  Lie  and  Poincare";  to  recount  and

appraise the achievements of such as Euclid and Archimedes, Apollonius and

Diophantus; to display and estimate the creations of Descartes and Leibnitz

and  Newton;  to  dispose  in  genetic  order,  to  analyze,  to  synthesize  and

evaluate,  the  discoveries  of  the  Ber-noullis  and  Euler,  of  Desargues  and

Pascal  and  Monge  and  Poncelet,  of  Steiner  and  Mobius  and  Pliicker  and

Staudt, of Lobatschewsky and Bolyai, of W. R. Hamilton and Grassmann, of

Laplace, Lagrange and Gauss, of Boole and Cayley and Hermite and Gordan,

of Bolzano and Cauchy, of Riemann and Weierstrass, of Georg Cantor and

Boltzmann and Klein, of the Peirces and Schroder and Peano, of Helmholtz

and  Maxwell  and  Gibbs;  to  explore,  and  then  to  map  for  perspective

beholding  and  contemplation,  the  continent  of  doctrine  built  up  by  these

immortals,  to  say  nothing  of  the  countless  refinements,  extensions  and

elaborations meanwhile wrought by the genius and industry of a thousand

other agents of the mathetic spirit; — to do that would indeed be to render an

exceeding service to the higher intelligence of the world, but a service that

would require the conjoint labors of a council of scholars for the space of

many years. Even the three immense volumes of Moritz Cantor's Gesckichte

der Mathematik, though they do not aspire to the higher forms of elaborate

exposition and though they are far from exhaust-

  ing the material of the period traversed by them, yet conduct the narrative

down  only  to  I758.  1  That  date,  however,  but  marks  the  time  when

mathematics,  then  schooled  for  over  a  hundred  eventful  years  in  the

unfolding wonders of Analytic Geometry and the Calculus and rejoicing in

the  possession  of  these  the  two  most  powerful  among  the  instruments  of

human  thought,  had  but  fairly  entered  upon  her  modern  career.  And  so

fruitful have been the intervening years, so swift the march along the myriad

tracks of modern analysis and geometry, so abounding and bold and fertile

withal has been the creative genius of the time, that to record even briefly thediscoveries and the creations since the closing date of Cantor's work would

require an addition to his great volumes of a score of volumes more.

  Indeed the modern developments of mathematics constitute not only one

of the most impressive, but one of the most characteristic, phenomena of our

age. It is a phenomenon, however, of which the boasted intelligence of a

"universalized" daily press seems strangely unaware; and there is no other

great human interest, whether of science or of art, regarding which the mind

of the educated public is permitted to hold so many fallacious opinions and

inferior estimates. The golden age of mathematics — that was not the age of

Euclid, it is ours. Ours is the age in which no less than six international

congresses of mathematics have been held in the course of nine years. 2 It is

in our day that more than a dozen mathematical societies contain a growing

membership of over two thousand men representing the centers of scientific

light throughout the great cul-

  1 The work is now being carried forward by younger men.

  2 International congresses of mathematicians are held at intervals of four

years. Since the date of this address two have been held, one at Rome in 1908

and one in Cambridge, England, in 1912.

  ture nations of the world. It is in our time that over five hundred scientific

journals  are  each  devoted  in  part,  while  more  than  two  score  others  are

devoted exclusively, to the publication of mathematics. It is in our time that

the Jahrbuch iibcr die Fortschritte der Mathematik, though admitting only

condensed abstracts with titles, and not reporting on all the journals, has,

nevertheless, grown to nearly forty huge volumes in as many years. It is in

our time that as many as two thousand books and memoirs drop from the

mathematical  press  of  the  world  in  a  single  year,  the  estimated  number

mounting up to fifty thousand in the last generation. Finally, to adduce yet

another evidence of similar kind, it requires no less than the seven ponderous

tomes of the forthcoming Encyklopadie der Mathe-matischen Wissenschaften

to contain, not expositions, not demonstrations, but merely compact reports

and bibliographic notices sketching developments that have taken place since

the beginning of the nineteenth century. The Elements of Euclid is as small a

part of mathematics as the Iliad is of literature; or as the sculpture of Phidias

is of the world's total art. Indeed if Euclid or even Descartes were to return to

the abode of living men and repair to a university to resume pursuit of his

favorite study, it is evident that, making due allowance for his genius and his

fame, and presupposing familiarity with the modern scientific languages, hewould yet be required to devote at least a year to preparation before being

qualified even to begin a single strictly graduate course.

  It is not, however, by such comparisons nor by statistical methods nor by

any external sign whatever, but only by continued dwelling within the subtle

radiance of the discipline itself, that one at length may

  catch  the  spirit  and  learn  to  estimate  the  abounding  life  of  modern

mathesis: oldest of the sciences, yet flourishing to-day as never before, not

merely as a giant tree throwing out and aloft myriad branching arms in the

upper regions of clearer light and plunging deeper and deeper root in the

darker soil beneath, but rather as an immense mighty forest of such oaks,

which, however, literally grow into each other so that by the junction and

intercrescence of limb with limb and root with root and trunk with trunk the

manifold wood becomes a single living organic growing whole.

  What is this thing so marvelously vital? What does it undertake? What is

its motive? What its significance? How is it related to other modes and forms

and interests of the human spirit?

  What is mathematics? I inquire, not about the word, but about the thing.

Many have been the answers of former years, but none has approved itself as

final. All of them, by nature belonging to the "literature of knowledge," have

fallen under its law and "perished by supersession." Naturally conception of

the science has had to grow with the growth of the science itself.

  A  traditional  conception,  still  current  everywhere  except  in  critical

circles, has held mathematics to be the science of quantity or magnitude,

where  magnitude  including  multitude  (with  its  correlate  of  number)  as  a

special kind, signified whatever was "capable of increase and decrease and

measurement." Measurability was the essential thing. That definition of the

science was a very natural one, for magnitude did appear to be a singularly

fundamental notion, not only inviting but demanding consideration at every

stage and turn of life. The necessity of finding out how many and how much

was the mother of counting and measurement,

  and mathematics, first from necessity and then from pure curiosity and

joy, so occupied itself with these things that they came to seem its whole

employment.

    Nevertheless,  numerous  great  events  of  a  hundred  years  have  been

absolutely decisive against that view. For one thing, the notion of continuum

—  the  "  Grand  Continuum"  as  Sylvester  called  it  —  that  great  central

supporting pillar of modern Analysis, has been constructed by Weierstrass,Dedekind,  Georg  Cantor  and  others,  without  any  reference  whatever  to

quantity, so that number and magnitude are not only independent, they are

essentially  disparate.  When  we  attempt  to  correlate  the  two,  the  ordinary

concept of measurement as the repeated application of a constant finite unit,

undergoes such refinement and generalization through the notion of Limit or

its equivalent that counting no longer avails and measurement retains scarcely

a vestige of its original meaning. And when we add the further consideration

that non-Euclidean geometry employs a scale in which the unit of angle and

distance, though it is a constant unit, nevertheless appears from the Euclidean

point of view to suffer lawful change from step to step of its application, it is

seen that to retain the old words and call mathematics the science of quantity

or magnitude, and measurement, is quite inept as no longer telling either what

the science has actually become or what its spirit is bent upon.

    Moreover, the most striking measurements, as of the volume of a planet,

the  growth  of  cells,  the  valency  of  atoms,  rates  of  chemical  change,  the

swiftness of thought, the penetrative power of radium emanations, are none

of them done by direct repeated application of a unit or by any direct method

whatever.  They  are  all  of  them  accomplished  by  one  form  or  another  of

indirection. It

  was  perception  of  this  fact  that  led  the  famous  philosopher  and

respectable mathematician, Auguste Comte, to define mathematics as "the

science of indirect measurement." Here doubtless we are in presence of a

finer insight and a larger view, but the thought is not yet either wide enough

or deep enough. For it is obvious that there is an immense deal of admittedly

mathematical activity that is not in the least concerned with measurement

whether direct or indirect. Consider, for example, that splendid creation of the

nineteenth century known as Projective Geometry: a boundless domain of

countless fields where reals and imaginaries, finites and infinites, enter on

equal terms, where the spirit delights in the artistic balance and symmetric

interplay of a kind of conceptual and logical counterpoint, — an enchanted

realm where thought is double and flows throughout in parallel streams. Here

there  is  no  essential  concern  with  number  or  quantity  or  magnitude,  and

metric considerations are entirely absent or completely subordinate. The fact,

to take a simplest example, that two points determine a line uniquely, or that

the intersection of a sphere and a plane is a circle, or that any configuration

whatever — the reference is here to ordinary space — presents two reciprocal

aspects according as it is viewed as an ensemble of points or as a manifold ofplanes, is not a metric fact at all: it is not a fact about size or quantity or

magnitude of any kind. In this domain it was position rather than size that

seemed  to  some  the  central  matter,  and  so  it  was  proposed  to  call

mathematics the science of measurement and position.

  Even as thus expanded, the conception yet excludes many a mathematical

realm  of  vast  extent.  Consider  that  immense  class  of  things  known  as

Operations.

  These are limitless alike in number and in kind. Now it so happens that

there are many systems of operations such that any two operations of a given

system, if thought as following one another, together thus produce the same

effect  as  some  other  single  operation  of  the  system.  Such  systems  are

infinitely  numerous  and  present  themselves  on  every  hand.  For  a  simple

illustration, think of the totality of possible straight motions in space. The

operation of going from point A to point B, followed by the operation of

going  from  B  to  point  C,  is  equivalent  to  the  single  operation  of  going

straight from A to C. Thus the system of such operations is a closed system:

combination,  i.  e.,  of  any  two  of  the  operations  yields  a  third  one,  not

without,  but  within,  the  system.  The  great  notion  of  Group,  thus  simply

exemplified,  though  it  had  barely  emerged  into  consciousness  a  hundred

years ago, has meanwhile become a concept of fundamental importance and

prodigious fertility, not only affording the basis of an imposing doctrine —

the Theory of Groups — but therewith serving also as a bond of union, a kind

of connective tissue, or rather as an immense cerebro-spinal system, uniting

together a large number of widely dissimilar doctrines as organs of a single

body. But -and this is the point to be noted here — the abstract operations of

a  group,  though  they  are  very  real  things,  are  neither  magnitudes  nor

positions.

  This way of trying to come to an adequate conception of mathematics,

namely, by attempting to characterize in succession its distinct domains, or its

varieties of content, or its modes of activity, in the hope of finding a common

definitive  mark,  is  not  likely  to  prove  successful.  For  it  demands  an

exhaustive enumeration, not only of the fields now occupied by the science,

but

  also of those destined to be conquered by it in the future, and such an

achievement would require a prevision that none may claim.

    Fortunately there are other paths of approach that seem more promising.

Everyone has observed that mathematics, whatever it may be, possesses acertain mark, namely, a degree of certainty not found elsewhere. So it is,

proverbially, the exact science par excellence. Exact, no doubt, but in what

sense?  An  excellent  answer  is  found  in  a  definition  given  about  one

generation  ago  by  a  distinguished  American  mathematician,  Professor

Benjamin  Peirce:  "Mathematics  is  the  science  which  draws  necessary

conclusions" — a formulation of like significance with the following fine mot

by  Professor  William  Benjamin  Smith:  "Mathematics  is  the  universal  art

apodictic." These statements, though neither of them is adequate, are both of

them telling approximations, at once foreshadowing and neatly summarizing

for  popular  use,  the  epoch-making  thesis  established  by  the  creators  of

modern logic, namely, that mathematics is included in, and, in a profound

sense, may be said to be identical with, Symbolic Logic. Observe that the

emphasis falls on the quality of being "necessary," i. e., correct logically, or

valid formally.

  But  why  are  mathematical  conclusions  correct?  Is  it  that  the

mathematician has a reasoning faculty essentially different in kind from that

of other men? By no means. What, then, is the secret? Reflect that conclusion

implies premises, that premises involve terms, that terms stand for ideas or

concepts or notions, and that these latter are the ultimate material with which

the spiritual architect, called the Reason, designs and builds. Here, then, one

may expect to find light. The apodictic quality of mathematical thought, the

correct-

  ness of its conclusions as conclusions, are due, not to any special mode of

ratiocination, but to the character of the concepts with which it deals. What is

that distinctive characteristic? The answer is: precision and completeness of

determination.  But  how  comes  the  mathematician  by  such  completeness?

There is no mysterious trick involved: some concepts admit of such precision

and completeness, others do not; the mathematician is one who deals with

those that do.

  The matter, however, is not quite so simple as it sounds, and I bespeak

your attention to a word of caution and of further explanation. The ancient

maxim,  ex  nihilo  nikil  fit,  may  well  be  doubted  where  it  seems  most

obviously valid, namely, in the realm of matter, for it may be that matter has

evolved from something else; but the maxim cannot be ultimately denied

where  its  application  is  least  obvious,  namely,  in  the  realm  of  mind,  for

without  principia  in  the  strictest  sense,  doctrine  is,  in  the  strictest  sense,

impossible. And when the mathematician speaks of complete determinationof  concepts  and  of  rigor  of  demonstration,  he  does  not  mean  that  the

undefined and the undemonstrated have been or can be entirely eliminated

from  the  foundations  of  his  science.  He  knows  that  such  elimination  is

impossible; he knows, too, that it is unnecessary', for some undefinable ideas

are  perfectly  clear  and  some  undemon-strable  propositions  are  perfectly

precise and certain. It is in terms of such concepts that a definable notion, if it

is to be mathematically available, must admit of complete determination, and

in terms of such propositions that mathematical discourse secures its rigor. It

is, then, of such indefinables among ideas and such indemonstrable* among

propositions  —  paradoxical  as  the  statement  may  appear  —  that  the

foundations of mathe-

  matics in its ideal conception are composed; and whatever doctrine is

logically  constructive  on  such  a  basis  is  mathematics  either  actually  or

potentially. I am not asserting that the substructure herewith characterized has

been brought to completion. It is on the conception of it that the accent is

here designed to fall, for it is the conception as such that at once affords to

fundamental  investigation  a  goal  and  a  guide  and  furnishes  the  means  of

giving the science an adequate definition.

  On the other hand, actually to realize the conception requires that the

foundation to be established shall both include every element that is essential

and  exclude  every  one  that  is  not.  For  a  foundation  that  subsequently

demands or allows superfoetation of hypotheses is incomplete; and one that

contains the non-essential is imperfect. Of the two problems thus presented, it

is the latter, the problem of exclusion, of reducing principles to a minimum,

of applying Occam's Razor to the pruning away of non-essentials, — it is that

problem  that  taxes  most  severely  both  the  analytic  and  the  constructive

powers of criticism. And it is to the solution of that problem that the same

critical spirit of our time, which in other fields is reconstructing theology,

burning  out  the  dross  from  philosophy,  and  working  relentless

transformations of thought on every hand, has directed a chief movement of

modern mathematics.

  Apart from its technical importance, which can scarcely be overestimated,

the power, depth and comprehensiveness of the modern critical movement in

mathematics, make it one of the most significant scientific phenomena of the

last  century.  Double  in  respect  to  origin,  the  movement  itself  has  been

composite. One component began at the very center of

    mathematical  activity,  while  the  other  took  its  rise  in  what  was  thenerroneously regarded as an alien domain, the great domain of symbolic logic.

  A word as to the former component. For more than a hundred years after

the inventions of Analytical Geometry and the Calculus, mathematicians may

be said to have fairly rioted in applications of these instruments to physical,

mechanical and geometric problems, without concerning themselves about

the nicer questions of fundamental principles, cogency, and precision. In the

latter part of the eighteenth century the efforts of Euler, Lacroix and others to

systematize  results  served  to  reveal  in  a  startling  way  the  necessity  of

improving foundations. Constructive work was not indeed arrested by that

disclosure. On the contrary new doctrines continued to rise and old ones to

expand  and  flourish.  But  a  new  spirit  had  begun  to  manifest  itself.  The

science became increasingly critical as its towering edifices more and more

challenged attention to their foundations. Manifest already in the work of

Gauss  and  Lagrange,  the  new  tendence,  under  the  powerful  impulse  and

leadership of Cauchy, rapidly develops into a momentous movement. The

Calculus, while its instrumental efficacy is meanwhile marvelously improved,

is itself advanced from the level of a tool to the rank and dignity of a science.

The  doctrines  of  the  real  and  of  the  complex  variable  are  grounded  with

infinite patience and care, so that, owing chiefly to the critical constructive

genius of Weierstrass and his school, that stateliest of all the pure creations of

the human intellect — the Modern Theory of Functions with its manifold

branches - rests to-day on a basis not less certain and not less enduring than

the very integers with which we count. The movement still sweeps on, not

only extending to

  all the cardinal divisions of Analysis but, through the agencies of such as

Lobatschewsky  and  Bolyai,  Grass-mann  and  Riemann,  Cayley  and  Klein,

Hilbert and Lie, recasting the foundations of Geometry also. And there can

scarcely be a doubt that the great domains of Mechanics and Mathematical

Physics are by their need destined to a like invasion.

  In the light of all this criticism, mathematics came to appear as a great

ensemble of theories, compendent no doubt, interpenetrating each other in a

wondrous way, yet all of them distinct, each built up by logical processes on

its own appropriate basis of pure hypotheses, or assumptions, or postulates.

As all the theories were thus seen to rest equally on hypothetical foundations,

all  were  seen  to  be  equally  legitimate;  and  doctrines  like  those  of

Quaternions, non-Euclidean geometry and Hyperspace, for a time suspected

because based on postulates not all of them traditional, speedily overcametheir heretical reputations and were admitted to the circle of the lawful and

orthodox.

  It  is  one  thing,  however,  to  deal  with  the  principal  divisions  of

mathematics severally, underpinning each with a foundation of its own. That,

broadly speaking, has been the plan and the effect of the critical movement as

thus far sketched. But it is a very different and a profounder thing to underlay

all the divisions at once with a single foundation, with a foundation that shall

serve as a support, not merely for all the divisions but for something else,

distinct from each and from the sum of all, namely, for the whole, the science

itself, which they constitute. It is nothing less than that achievement which,

unconsciously at first, consciously at last, has been the aim and goal of the

other component of the critical movement, that component which,

  as  already  said,  found  its  origin  and  its  initial  interest  in  the  field  of

symbolic logic. The advantage of employing symbols in the investigation and

exposition  of  the  formal  laws  of  thought  is  not  a  recent  discovery.  As

everyone  knows,  symbols  were  thus  employed  to  a  small  extent  by  the

Stagirite himself. The advantage, however, was not pursued; because for two

thousand years the eyes of logicians were blinded by the blazing genius of the

"master of those that know." With the single exception of the reign of Euclid,

the annals of science afford no match for the tyranny that has been exercised

by the logic of Aristotle. Even the important logical researches of Leibnitz

and Lambert and their daring use of symbolical methods were powerless to

break the spell. It was not till 1854 when George Boole, having invented an

algebra  to  trace  and  illuminate  the  subtle  ways  of  reason,  published  his

symbolical "Investigation of the Laws of Thought," that the revolution in

logic  really  began.  For,  although  for  a  time  neglected  by  logicians  and

mathematicians alike, it was Boole's work that inspired and inaugurated the

scientific movement now known and honored throughout the world under the

name of Symbolic Logic.

  It is true, the revolution has advanced in silence. The discoveries and

creations of Boole's successors, of C. S. Peirce, of Schroeder, of Peano and of

their  disciples  and  peers,  have  not  been  proclaimed  by  the  daily  press.

Commerce and politics, gossip and sport, accident and crime, the shallow and

transitory affairs of the exoteric world,— these have filled the columns and

left no room to publish abroad the deep and abiding things achieved in the

silence of cloistral thought. The demonstration by symbolical means of the

fact that the three laws of Identity, Excluded Middle and Non-    contradiction are absolutely independent, none of them being derivable

from the other two; the discovery that the syllogism is not deducible from

those laws but has to be postulated as an independent principle; the discovery

of  the  astounding  and  significant  fact  that  false  propositions  imply  all

propositions and that true ones, though not implying, are implied by, all; the

discovery that most reasoning is not syllogistic, but is asyllogistic, in form,

and that, therefore, contrary to the teaching of tradition, the class-logic of

Aristotle is not adequate to all the concerns of rigorous thought; the discovery

that Relations, no less than Classes, demand a logic of their own, and that a

similar claim is valid in the case of Propositions: no intelligence of these

events  nor  of  the  immense  multitude  of  others  which  they  but  mea-gerly

serve to hint and to exemplify, has been cabled round the world and spread

broadcast by the flying bulletins of news. Even the scientific public, for the

most part accustomed to viewing the mind as only the instrument and not as a

subject of study, has been slow to recognize the achievements of modern

research in the minute anatomy of thought. Indeed it has been not uncommon

for  students  of  natural  science  to  sneer  at  logic  as  a  stale  and  profitless

pursuit, as the barren mistress of scholastic minds. These men have not been

aware  of  what  certainly  is  a  most  profound,  if  indeed  it  be  not  the  most

significant,  scientific  movement  of  our  time.  In  America,  in  England,  in

Germany, in France, and especially in Italy — supreme histolo-gist of the

human understanding — the deeps of mind and logical reality have been

explored in our generation as never before in the history of the world. Owing

to  the  power  of  the  symbolic  method,  not  only  the  foundations  of  the

Aristotelian logic — the Calculus of Classes —

  have  been  recast,  but  side  by  side  with  that  everlasting  monument  of

Greek genius, there rise today other structures, fit companions of the ancient

edifice, namely, the Logic of Relations and the Logic of Propositions.

  And what are the entities that have been found to constitute the base of

that triune organon? The answer is surprising: a score or so of primitive,

indemonstrable,  propositions  together  with  less  than  a  dozen  undefinable

notions, called logical constants. But what is more surprising — for here we

touch the goal and are enabled to enunciate what has been justly called "one

of the greatest discoveries of our age" -is the fact that the basis of logic is the

basis  of  mathematics  also.  Thus  the  two  great  components  of  the  critical

movement, though distinct in origin and following separate paths, are found

to  converge  at  last  in  the  thesis:  Symbolic  Logic  is  Mathematics,Mathematics is Symbolic Logic, the twain are one.

  Is it really so? Does the identity exist in fact? Is it true that so simple a

unifying foundation for what has hitherto been supposed two distinct and

even  mutually  alien  interests  has  been  actually  ascertained?  The  basal

masonry is indeed not yet completed but the work has advanced so far that

the thesis stated is beyond dispute or reasonable doubt. Primitive propositions

appear  to  allow  some  freedom  of  choice,  questions  still  exist  regarding

relative fundamentally, and statements of principles have not yet crystallized

into settled and final form; but regarding the nature of the data to be assumed,

the smallness of their number and their adequacy, agreement is substantial. In

England, Russell and Whitehead f are successfully engaged now in forging

  1 This work has been projected in four immense volumes bearing the

title, Prindpia Matkematua, of which three volumes have appeared.

  "chains  of  deduction"  binding  the  cardinal  matters  of  Analysis  and

Geometry to the premises of General Logic, while in Italy the Formulaire de

Mathematiques of Peano and his school has been for some years growing into

a veritable encyclopedia of mathematics wrought by the means and clad in

the garb of symbolic logic.

  But is it not incredible that the concept of number with all its distinctions

of cardinal and ordinal, fractional and whole, rational and irrational, algebraic

and transcendental, real and complex, finite and infinite, and the concept of

geometric  space,  in  all  its  varieties  of  form  and  dimensionality,  is  it  not

incredible that mathematical ideas, surpassing in multitude the sands of the

sea, should be precisely definable, each and all of them, in terms of a few

logical constants, in terms, i. e., of such indefinable notions as such that,

implication, denoting, relation, class, prepositional function, and two or three

others? And is it not incredible that by means of so few as a score of premises

(composed  of  ten  principles  of  deduction  and  ten  other  indemonstrable

propositions of a general logical nature), the entire body of mathematical

doctrine can be strictly and formally deduced?

  It  is  wonderful,  indeed,  but  not  incredible.  Not  incredible  in  a  world

where the mustard seed becometh a tree, not incredible in a world where all

the tints and hues of sea and land and sky are derived from three primary

colors, where the harmonies and the melodies of music proceed from notes

that are all of them but so many specifications of four generic marks, and

where  three  concepts  —  energy,  mass,  motion,  or  mass,  time,  space  —

apparently  suffice  for  grasping  together  in  organic  unity  the  mechanicalphenomena of a universe.

  But the thesis granted, does it not but serve to justify

  the cardinal contentions of the depredators of mathematics? Does it not

follow from it that the science is only a logical grind, suited only to narrow

and  straitened  intellects  content  to  tramp  in  treadmill  fashion  the  weary

rounds  of  deduction?  Does  it  not  follow  that  Schopenhauer  was  right  in

regarding mathematics as the lowest form of mental activity, and that he and

our own genial and enlightened countryman, Oliver Wendell Holmes, were

right  in  likening  mathematical  thought  to  the  operations  of  a  calculating

machine? Does it not follow that Huxley's characterization of mathematics as

"that  study  which  knows  nothing  of  observation,  nothing  of  induction,

nothing of experiment, nothing of causation," is surprisingly confirmed by

fact?  Does  it  not  follow  that  Sir  William  Hamilton's  famous  and  terrific

diatribe against the science finds ample warrant in truth? Does it not follow,

as  the  Scotch  philosopher  maintains,  that  mathematics  regarded  as  a

discipline, as a builder of mind, is inferior? That devotion to it is fatal to the

development of the sensibilities and the imagination? That continued pursuit

of the study leaves the mind narrow and dry, meagre and lean, disqualifying

it both for practical affairs and for those large and liberal studies where moral

questions intervene and judgment depends, not on nice calculation by rule,

but on a wide survey and a balancing of probabilities?

  The answer is, No. Those things not only do not follow but they are not

true. Every count in the indictment, whether explicit or only implied, is false.

Not only that, but the opposite in each case is true. On that point there can be

no doubt; authority, reason and fact, history and theory, are here in perfect

accord. Let me say once for all that I am conscious of no desire

  to  exaggerate  the  virtues  of  mathematics.  I  am  willing  to  admit  that

mathematicians do constitute an important part of the salt of the earth. But the

science  is  no  catholicon  for  mental  disease.  There  is  in  it  no  power  for

transforming  mediocrity  into  genius.  It  cannot  enrich  where  nature  has

impoverished. It makes no pretense of creating faculty where none exists, of

opening springs in desert minds. "Du bist am Ende — was du bist." The great

mathematician, like the great poet or great naturalist or great administrator, is

born. My contention shall be that where the mathetic endowment is found,

there will usually be found associated with it, as essential implications in it,

other endowments in generous measure, and that the appeal of the science is

to the whole mind, direct no doubt to the central powers of thought, butindirectly  through  sympathy  of  all,  rousing,  enlarging,  developing,

emancipating all, so that the faculties of will, of intellect and feeling, learn to

respond,  each  in  its  appropriate  order  and  degree,  like  the  parts  of  an

orchestra to the "urge and ardor" of its leader and lord.

  As for Hamilton and Schopenhauer, those detractors need not detain us

long. Indeed but for their fame and the great influence their opinions have

exercised over "the ignorant mass of educated men," they ought not in this

connection to be noticed at all. Of the subject on which they presumed to

pronounce authoritative judgment of condemnation, they were both of them

ignorant, the former well nigh proudly so, the latter unawares, but both of

them,  in  view  of  their  pretensions,  disgracefully  ignorant.  Lack  of

knowledge,  however,  is  but  a  venial  sin,  and  English-speaking

mathematicians have been disposed to hope that Hamilton might be saved in

accordance with the good old catholic doc-

  trine of invincible ignorance. But even that hope, as we shall see, must be

relinquished.  In  1853  William  Whewell,  then  fellow  and  tutor  of  Trinity

College, Cambridge, published an appreciative pamphlet entitled "Thoughts

on the Study of Mathematics as a Part of a Liberal Education." The author

was a brilliant scholar. "Science was his forte," but "omniscience his foible,"

and  his  reputation  for  universal  knowledge  was  looming  large.  That

reputation, however, Hamilton regarded as his own prerogative. None might

dispute the claim, much less share the glory of having it acknowledged on his

own behalf. Whewell must be crushed. In the following year Sir William

replies in the Edin-burg Review, and such a show of learning! The reader is

apparently confronted with the assembled opinions of the learned world, and

— what is more amazing -they all agree. Literati of every kind, of all nations

and every tongue, orators, philosophers, educators, scientific men, ancient

and modern, known and unknown, all are made to support Hamilton's claim,

and even the most celebrated mathematicians seem eager to declare that the

study of mathematics is unworthy of genius and injures the mind. Whewell

was  overwhelmed,  reduced  to  silence.  His  promised  rejoinder  failed  to

appear. The Scotchman's victory was complete, his fame enhanced, and his

alleged judgment regarding a great human interest of which he was ignorant

has reigned over the minds of thousands of men who have been either willing

or constrained to depend on borrowed estimates. But even all this may be

condoned. Jealousy, vanity, parade of learning, may be pardoned even in a

philosopher. Hamilton's deadly sin was none of these, it was sinning againstthe light. In October, 1877, A. T. Bledsoe, then editor of the Southern Renew

  — unfortunately too little known — published an article in that journal in

which he proved beyond a reasonable doubt — I have been at the pains to

verify  the  proof  —  that  Hamilton  by  studied  selections  and  omissions

deliberately and maliciously misrepresented the great authors from whom he

quoted — d'Alembert, Blaise Pascal, Descartes and others — distorting their

express and unmistakable meaning even to the extent of complete inversion.

This same verdict regarding Hamilton's vandalism, in so far as it relates to the

works of Descartes, was independently reached by Professor Pringsheim and

in 1904 announced by him in his Festrede before the Munich Academy of

Sciences.  As  for  Schopenhauer,  I  regret  to  say  that  a  similar  charge  and

finding  stand  against  him  also.  For  not  only  did  he  endorse  without

examination  and  re-utter  Hamilton's  tirade  in  the  strongest  terms,  thus

reinforcing it and giving it currency on the continent, but, as Pringsheim has

shown,  the  German  philosopher,  by  careful  excision  from  the  writings  of

Lichtenberg, converts that distinguished physicist's just strictures on the then

flourishing but wayward Combinatorial School of mathematics into a severe

condemnation of mathematicians in general and of the science itself, which,

nevertheless, in the opening but omitted line of the very passage from which

Schopenhauer quotes, is characterized by Lichtenberg as "eine gar herrliche

Wissenschaft." Regarding the question of the intrinsic merit of the estimate of

mathematics which these two most famous and influential enemies of the

science  have  made  so  largely  current  in  the  world  that  it  fairly  fills  the

atmosphere  and  people  take  it  in  unconsciously  as  by  a  kind  of  cerebral

suction, I shall speak in another connection. What I desire to emphasize here

is the fact that neither the

  vast,  splendid,  superficial  learning  of  the  pompous  author  of  "The

Philosophy of the Conditioned" nor the pungence and pith, brilliance and

intrepidity of the author of "Die Welt als Wille" can avail to constitute either

of them an authority in a subject in which neither was informed and in which

both stand convicted falsifiers of the judgments and opinions of other men.

  As  to  Huxley  and  Holmes,  the  case  is  different.  Both  of  them  were

generous, genial and honest, and to their opinions on any subject we gladly

pay respect qualified only as the former's judgment regarding mathematics

was qualified by Sylvester himself:

    "VersULndige Leute kannst du irren schn In Sachen n&mlich, die sic

nicht verstehn."  In relation to Huxley's statement that mathematical study knows nothing

of observation, induction, experiment, and causation, it ought to be borne in

mind that there are two kinds of observation: outer and inner, objective and

subjective,  material  and  immaterial,  sensuous  and  sense-transcending;

observation, that is, of physical things by the bodily senses, and observation,

by the inner eye, by the subtle touch of the intellect, of the entities that dwell

in the domain of logic and constitute the objects of pure thought. For, phrase

it  as  you  will,  there  is  a  world  that  is  peopled  with  ideas,  ensembles,

propositions, relations, and implications, in endless variety and multiplicity,

in  structure  ranging  from  the  very  simple  to  the  endlessly  intricate  and

complicate. That world is not the product but the object, not the creature but

the quarry of thought, the entities composing it — propositions, for example,

— being no more identical with thinking them than wine is identical with the

drinking of it. Mind or no mind, that world

  exists  as  an  extra-personal  affair,  —  Pragmatism  to  the  contrary

notwithstanding. It appears to me to be a radical error of pragmatism to blink

the fact that the most fundamental of spiritual things, namely, curiosity, never

poses as a maker of truth but is found always and only in the attitude of

seeking  it.  Indeed  truth  might  be  denned  to  be  the  presupposition  or  the

complement of curiosity — as that without which curiosity would cease to be

what  it  is.  The  constitution  of  that  extra-personal  world,  its  intimate

ontological make-up, is logic in its essential character and substance as an

independent  and  extra-personal  form  of  being,  while  the  study  of  that

constitution is logic pragmatically, in its character, i. e., as an enterprise of

mind. Now — and this is the point I wish to stress — just as the astronomer,

the physicist, the geologist, or other student of objective science looks abroad

in the world of sense, so, not metaphorically speaking but literally, the mind

of the mathematician goes forth into the universe of logic in quest of the

things that are there; exploring the heights and depths for facts — ideas,

classes, relationships, implications, and the rest; observing the minute and

elusive  with'  the  powerful  microscope  of  his  Infinitesimal  Analysis;

observing the elusive and vast with the limitless telescope of his Calculus of

the Infinite; making guesses regarding the order and internal harmony of the

data  observed  and  collocated;  testing  the  hypotheses,  not  merely  by  the

complete induction peculiar to mathematics, but, like his colleagues of the

outer world, resorting also to experimental tests and incomplete induction;

frequently finding it necessary, in view of unforeseen disclosures, to abandona  once  hopeful  hypothesis  or  to  transform  it  by  retrenchment  or  by

enlargement :— thus, in his own domain, matching,

  point  for  point,  the  processes,  methods  and  experience  familiar  to  the

devotee of natural science.

  Is it replied that it was not observation of the objects of pure thought but

the other kind, namely, sensuous observation, that Huxley had in mind, then I

rejoin that, nevertheless, observation by the inner eye of the things of thought

is observation, not less genuine, not less difficult, not less rich in its objects

and disciplinary value, than is sensuous observation of the things of sense.

But this is not all, nor nearly all. Indeed for direct beholding, for immediate

discerning, of the things of mathematics there is none other light but one,

namely,  psychic  illumination,  but  mediately  and  indirectly  they  are  often

revealed or at all events hinted by their sensuous counterparts, by indications

within  the  radiance  of  day,  and  it  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  the

mathetic spirit elects as its agents those who, having eyes, yet see not the

things that disclose themselves in solar light. To facilitate eyeless observation

of  his  sense-transcending  world,  the  mathematician  invokes  the  aid  of

physical diagrams and physical symbols in endless variety and combination;

the  logos  is  thus  drawn  into  a  kind  of  diagrammatic  and  symbolical

incarnation,  gets  itself  externalized,  made  flesh,  so  to  speak;  and  it  is  by

attentive  physical  observation  of  this  embodiment,  by  scrutinizing  the

physical  frame  and  make-up  of  his  diagrams,  equations  and  formulae,  by

experimental substitutions in, and transformations of, them, by noting what

emerges as essential and what as accidental, the things that vanish and those

that do not, the things that vary and the things that abide unchanged, as the

transformations proceed and trains of algebraic evolution unfold themselves

to view, — it is thus, by the laboratory method, by trial and by

    watching,  that  often  the  mathematician  gains  his  best  insight  into  the

constitution of the invisible world thus depicted by visible symbols. Indeed

the importance to the mathematician of such sensuous observation cannot be

overrated. It is not merely that the craving to see has led to the construction

of  the  manifold  models,  ingenious  and  noble,  of  Schilling  and  others,

illustrating  important  parts  of  Higher  Geometry,  Analysis  Situs,  Function

Theory and other doctrines, but the annals of the science are illustrious with

achievements made possible by facts first noted by the physical eye. To take

a simple example from ancient days, it was by observation of the fact that the

squares  of  certain  numbers  are  each  the  sum  of  two  other  squares,  thedetection and collection of these numbers by the method of trial, observation

of  the  fact  that  apparently  all  and  only  the  numbers  of  such  triplets  are

measures of the sides of right triangles, — it was thus, by observation and

experiment,  by  the  method  of  incomplete  induction,  common  to  the

experimental  sciences,  that  the  Pythagorean  theorem,  now  familiar

throughout the world, was discovered. It was by Leibnitz's observation of the

definitely lawful .manner in which the coefficients of a system of equations

enter their solution that the suggestion came of a notion on the basis of which

there has grown up in our time an imposing theory, an algebra built up on

algebra — the colossal doctrine of Determinants. It was the observation, the

detection by the eye of Lagrange and Boole and Eisenstein, of the fact that

linear transformation of certain algebraic expressions leaves certain functions

of their coefficients absolutely undisturbed in form, unaltered in frame of

constitution, that gave rise to the concept, and therewith to the morphological

doctrine, of Invariants, a

  theory filling the heavens like a light-bearing ether, penetrating all the

branches  of  geometry  and  analysis,  revealing  everywhere  abiding

configurations in the midst of change, everywhere disclosing the eternal reign

of the law of Form. It was in order to render evident to sensuous observation

and to keep constantly before the physical eye the pervasive symmetry of

mathematical  thought  that  Hesse  in  the  employment  of  homogeneous

coordinates set the example, since then generally followed, of replacing a

variety  of  different  letters  by  repetitions  of  a  single  one  distinguished  by

indices or subscripts, — a practice yet further justified on grounds both of

physical and of intellectual economy. It was by sensuous observation that

Clerk Maxwell, in the beginning of his wondrous career, detected a lack of

symmetry in the then recognized equations of electrodynamics and by that

observed  fact  together  with  a  discriminating  sense  of  the  scientific

significance of esthetic intimations, that he was led to remove the seeming

blemish by the addition of a term, antedating experimental justification of his

daring deed by twenty years: an example of prescience not surpassed by that

of  Adams  and  Leverrier  who,  while  engaged  in  the  study  of  planetary

disturbance,  each  of  them  about  the  same  time  and  independently  of  the

other, felt the then unknown Neptune "trembling on the delicate thread of

their  analysis"  and  correctly  informed  the  astronomer  where  to  point  his

telescope in order to behold the planet. One might go on to cite the theorem

of Sturm in Equation Theory, the "Diophantine theorems of Fermat" in theTheory of Numbers, the Jacobian "doctrine of double periodicity" in Function

Theory,  Le-gendre's  law  of  reciprocity,  Sylvester's  reduction  of  Eider's

problem of the Virgins to the form of a question

  in Simple Partitions, and so on and on, thus continuing indefinitely the

story of the great r61e of observation, experiment and incomplete induction,

in mathematical discovery. Indeed it is no wonder that even Gauss, "facile

princeps matematicorum," even though he dwelt aloft in the privacy of a

genius  above  the  needs  and  ways  of  other  minds,  yet  pronounced

mathematics "a science of the eye."

  Indeed  the  time  is  at  hand  when  at  least  the  academic  mind  should

discharge  its  traditional  fallacies  regarding  the  nature  of  mathematics  and

thus  in  a  measure  promote  the  emancipation  of  criticism  from  inherited

delusions  respecting  the  kind  of  activity  in  which  the  life  of  the  science

consists. Mathematics is no more the art of reckoning and computation than

architecture  is  the  art  of  making  bricks  or  hewing  wood,  no  more  than

painting is the art of mixing colors on a palette, no more than the science of

geology is the art of breaking rocks, or the science of anatomy the art of

butchering.

  Did not Babbage or somebody invent an adding machine? And does it not

follow, say Holmes and Schopenhauer, that mathematical thought is a merely

mechanical  process?  Strange  how  such  trash  is  occasionally  found  in  the

critical offering of thoughtful men and thus acquires circulation as golden

coin of wisdom. It would not be sillier to argue that, because Stanley Jevons

constructed  a  machine  for  producing  certain  forms  of  logical  inference,

therefore all thought, even that of a philosopher like Schopenhauer or that of

a poet like Holmes, is merely a thing of pulleys and levers and screws, or that

the pianola serves to prove that a symphony by Beethoven or a drama by

Wagner is reducible to a trick of mechanics.

  But far more pernicious, because more deeply imbedded and persistent, is

the fallacy that the mathematician's mind is but a syllogistic mill and that his

life resolves itself into a weary repetition of A is B, B is C, therefore A is C;

and Q.E.D. That fallacy is the Carthago delenda of regnant methodology.

Reasoning,  indeed,  in  the  sense  of  compounding  propositions  into  formal

arguments, is of great importance at every stage and turn, as in the deduction

of consequences, in the testing of hypotheses, in the detection of error, in

purging out the dross from crude material, in chastening the deliverances of

intuition, and especially in the final stages of a growing doctrine, in weldingtogether  and  concatenating  the  various  parts  into  a  compact  and  coherent

whole. But, indispensable in all such ways as syllogistic undoubtedly is, it is

of minor importance and minor difficulty compared with the supreme matters

of Invention and Construction. Begrijfbildung, the resolution of the nebula of

consciousness into star-forms of definite ideas; discriminating sensibility to

the logical significances, affinities and bearings of these; susceptibility to the

delicate  intimations  of  the  subtle  or  the  remote;  sensitiveness  to  dim  and

fading tremors sent below by breezes striking the higher sails; the ability to

grasp together and to hold in steady view at once a multitude of ideas, to

transcend the individuals and, compounding their forces, to seize the resultant

meaning of them all; the ability to summon not only concepts but doctrines,

marshalling them and bringing them to bear upon a single point, like great

armies converging to a critical center on a battle field. These and such as

these are the powers that mathematical activity in its higher rdles demands.

The power of ratiocination, as already said, is of exceeding great importance

but

  it  is  neither  the  base  nor  the  crown  of  the  faculties  essential  to  "

Mathematicised Man." When the greatest of American logicians, speaking of

the  powers  that  constitute  the  born  geometrician,  had  named  Conception,

Imagination,  and  Generalization,  he  paused.  Thereupon  from  one  in  the

audience there came the challenge, "What of Reason?" The instant response,

not  less  just  than  brilliant,  was  "Ratiocination  —  that  is  but  the  smooth

pavement  on  which  the  chariot  rolls."  When  the  late  Sophus  Lie,  great

comparative  anatomist  of  geometric  theories,  creator  of  the  doctrines  of

Contact Transformations, and Infinite Continuous Groups, and revolutionizer

of the Theory of Differential Equations, was asked to name the characteristic

endowment of the mathematician, his answer was the following quaternion:

Phantasie, Energie, Selbstvertrauen, Selbstkritik. Not a word, you observe,

about ratiocination. Phantasie, not merely the fine frenzied fancy that gives to

airy nothings a local habitation and a name, but the creative imagination that

conceives ordered realms and lawful worlds in which our own universe is as

but  a  point  of  light  in  a  shining  sky;  Energie,  not  merely  endurance  and

doggedness,  not  persistence  merely,  but  mental  vis  viva,  the  kinetic,

plunging,  penetrating  power  of  intellect;  Selbstvertrauen  and  Selbstkritik,

self-confidence aware of its ground, deepened by achievement and reinforced

until in men like Richard Dedekind, Bernhard Bolzano and especially Georg

Cantor it attains to a spiritual boldness that even dares leap from the islandshore of the Finite over into the all-surrounding boundless ocean of Infinitude

itself, and thence brings back the gladdening news that the shoreless vast of

Transfinite Being differs in its logical structure from that of our island home

only in owning the reign of more generic law.

  Indeed it is not surprising, in view of the polydynamic constitution of the

genuinely mathematical mind, that many of the major heroes of the science,

men like Desargues and Pascal, Descartes and Leibnitz, Newton, Gauss, and

Bolzano,  Helmholtz  and  Clifford,  Riemann  and  Salmon  and  Plucker  and

Poincarl, have attained to high distinction in other fields not only of science

but of philosophy and letters too. And when we reflect that the very greatest

mathematical  achievements  have  been  due,  not  alone  to  the  peering,

microscopic,  histo-logic  vision  of  men  like  Weierstrass,  illuminating  the

hidden recesses, the minute and intimate structure of logical reality, but to the

larger vision also of men like Klein who survey the kingdoms of geometry

and analysis for the endless variety of things that flourish there, as the eye of

Darwin ranged over the flora and fauna of the world, or as a commercial

monarch  contemplates  its  industry,  or  as  a  statesman  beholds  an  empire;

when we reflect not only that the Calculus of Probability is a creation of

mathematics  but  that  the  master  mathematician  is  constantly  required  to

exercise judgment -judgment, that is, in matters not admitting of certainty —

balancing  probabilities  not  yet  reduced  nor  even  reducible  perhaps  to

calculation; when we reflect that he is called upon to exercise a function

analogous  to  that  of  the  comparative  anatomist  like  Cuvier,  comparing

theories  and  doctrines  of  every  degree  of  similarity  and  dissimilarity  of

structure; when, finally, we reflect that he seldom deals with a single idea at a

time, but is for the most part engaged in wielding organized hosts of them, as

a  general  wields  at  once  the  divisions  of  an  army  or  as  a  great  civil

administrator directs from his central office diverse and scattered but related

groups of interests and operations; then, I say, the current

  opinion  that  devotion  to  mathematics  unfits  the  devotee  for  practical

affairs should be known for false on a priori grounds. And one should be thus

prepared  to  find  that  as  a  fact  Gaspard  Monge,  creator  of  descriptive

geometry, author of the classic "Applications de Panalyse a la geometric";

Lazare Carnot, author of the celebrated works, "Geometrie de position," and

"Reflexions sur la Metaphysique du Calcul infinitesimal"; Fourier, immortal

creator of the "Theorie analytique de la chaleur"; Arago, rightful inheritor of

Monge's  chair  of  geometry;  and  Poncelet,  creator  of  pure  pro-jectivegeometry; one should not be surprised, I say, to find that these and other

mathematicians  in  a  land  sagacious  enough  to  invoke  their  aid,  rendered,

alike in peace and in war, eminent public service.

  To speak at length, if that were necessary, of Huxley's deliverance that

the study of mathematics "knows nothing of causation," the "law of my song

and the hastening hour forbid." Suffice it to say in passing that when the

mathematician seeks the consequences of given suppositions, saying 'when

these precede, those will follow/ and when, having plied a circle, a sphere or

other  form  chosen  from  among  infinitudes  of  configurations,  with  some

transformation among infinite hosts at his disposal, he speaks of its 'effect/

then,  I  submit,  he  is  employing  the  language  of  causation  with  as  nice

propriety as it admits of in a world where, as everyone knows, except such as

still enjoy the blessings of a juvenile philosophy, the best we can say is that

the  ceaseless  shuttles  fly  back  and  forth,  and  streams  of  events  without

original source flow on without ultimate termination. Indeed it is a certain

and signal lesson of science in all its forms everywhere that the language of

cause and effect, except in the sense of

  facts being lawfully implied in other facts, has no indispensable use.

  I have not spoken of "Applied Mathematics," and that for the best of

reasons: there is, strictly speaking, no such thing. The term indeed exists, and,

in  a  conservative  practical  world  that  cares  but  little  for  "The  nice  sharp

quillets of the law," it will doubtless persist as a convenient designation for

something that never existed and never can. It is of the very essence of the

practician type of mind not to know aught as it is in itself nor aught as self-

justified but to mistake the secondary and accidental for the primary and

essential, to blink and elude the presence of immediate worth, and being thus

blind  to  instant  and  immanent  ends,  to  revel  in  means  and  uses  and

applications,  requiring  all  things  to  excuse  their  being  by  extraneous  and

emanant effects, — vindicating the stately elm by its promise of lumber, or

the lily by its message of purity, or the flood of Niagara by its available

energy, or even knowledge itself by the worldly advantage and the power

which it gives. I am told that even the deep and exquisite terminology of art

has been to some extent invaded by such barbarous and shallow phrases as

'applied music,' 'applied architecture,' 'applied sculpture,' 'applied painting/ as

if Beauty, virgin mother of art, could, without dissolution of her essential

character, consciously become the willing drudge and paramour of Use. And

I suppose we are fated yet to hear of applied glory, applied holiness, appliedpoetry -t. e., poetry that is consciously pedagogic or that aims at a moral and

thereby sinks or rises to the level of a sermon — of applied joy, applied

ontology, yea, of applied inapplicability itself.

  It is in implications and not in applications that

    mathematics has its lair. Applied mathematics is mathematics simply or is

not mathematics at all. To think aright is no characteristic striving of a class

of men; it is a common aspiration; and Mechanics, Mathematical Physics,

Mathematical  Astronomy,  and  the  other  chief  Anwendungsgebiete  of

mathematics,  as  Geodesy,  Geophysics,  and  Engineering  in  its  various

branches, are all of them but so many witnesses of the truth of Riemann's

saying that "Natural science is the attempt to comprehend nature by means of

exact  concepts."  A  gas  molecule  regarded  as  a  minute  sphere  or  other

geometric  form,  however  complicate;  stars  and  planets  conceived  as

ellipsoids or as points, and their orbits as loci; time and space, mass and

motion and impenetrability; velocity, acceleration and energy; the concepts of

norm  and  average;  —  what  are  these  but  mathematical  notions?  And  the

wondrous garment woven of them in the loom of logic — what is that but

mathematics?  Indeed  every  branch  of  so-called  applied  mathematics  is  a

mixed doctrine, being thoroughly analyzable into two disparate parts: one of

these consists of determinate concepts formally combined in accordance with

the canons of logic, i. e., it is mathematics and not natural science viewed as

matter of observation and experiment; the other is such matter and is natural

science  in  that  conception  of  it  and  not  mathematics.  No  fibre  of  either

component is a filament of the other. It is a fundamental error to regard the

term Mathematicisa-tion of thought as the importation of a tool into a foreign

workshop. It does not signify the transition of mathematics conceived as a

thing  accomplished  over  into  some  outlying  domain  like  physics,  for

example. Its significance is different radically, far deeper and far wider. It

means the growth of mathematics itself, its

  extension  and  development  from  within;  it  signifies  the  continuous

revelation, the endlessly progressive coming into view, of the static universe

of logic; or, to put it dynamically, it means the evolution of intellect, the

upward  striving  and  aspiration  of  thought  everywhere,  to  the  level  of

cogency, precision and exactitude. This self-propagation of the rational logos,

the springing up of mathetic rigor even in void and formless places, in the

very retreats of chaos, is to my mind the most impressive and significant

phenomenon in the history of science, and never so strikingly manifest as inthe last half hundred years. Seventy-two years ago, even Comte, the stout

advocate of mathematics as constituting "the veritable point of departure for

all rational scientific education, general or special," expressed the opinion

that we should never "be in position by any means whatever to study the

chemical composition of the stars." In less than twenty-five years thereafter

that  negative  prophecy  was  falsified  by  the  chemical  genius  of  Bunsen

fortified by the mathematics of Kirchoff. Not only has mathematics grown, in

the domain of Physics, into the vast proportions of Rational Dynamics, but

the derivative and integral of the Calculus, and Differential Equations, are

more and more finding subsistence in Chemistry also, and by the work of

Nernst and others even the foundations of the latter science are being laid in

mathematico-physical  considerations.  Merely  to  sketch  most  briefly  the

mathematical literature that has grown up in the field of Political Economy

requires  twenty-five  pages  of  the  above  mentioned  Encyklop&dit  of

mathematics. Similar sketches for Statistics and Life Insurance require no

less than thirty and sixty-five pages respectively. Even in the baffling and

elusive matter of Psychology, the

  work of Herbart, Fechner, Weber, Wundt and others confirms the hope

that the soil of that great field will some day support a vigorous growth of

mathematics. It seems indeed as if the entire surface of the world of human

consciousness were predestined to be covered over, in varying degrees of

luxuriance, by the flora of mathetic science.

  But  while  mathematics  may  spring  up  and  flourish  in  any  and  all

experimental and observational fields, it is by no means to be expected that

'experiment and observation' will ever thus be superseded. Such domains are

rather destined to be occupied at the same time by two tenants, mathematical

science and science that is not mathematical. But while the former will serve

as an ideal standard for the latter, mathematics has neither the power nor the

disposition to disseize experiment and observation of any holdings that are

theirs by the rights of conquest and use. Between mathematics on the one

hand  and  non-mathematical  science  on  the  other,  there  can  never  occur

collision  or  quarrel,  for  the  reason  that  the  two  interests  are  ultimately

discriminated  by  the  kind  of  curiosity  whence  they  spring.  The

mathematician is curious about definite naked relationships, about logically

possible  modes  of  order,  about  varieties  of  implication,  about  completely

determined or determinable functional relationships, considered solely in and

of themselves, considered, that is, without the slightest concern about anyquestion whether or no they have any external or sensuous validity or other

sort of validity than that of being logically thinkable. It is the aggregate of

things thinkable logically that constitutes the mathematician's universe, and it

is inconceivably richer in mathetic content than can be any outer world of

sense such as the

  physical  universe  according  to  which  we  chance  to  have  our  physical

being.

  This  mere  speck  of  a  physical  universe  in  which  the  chemist,  the

physicist, the astronomer, the biologist, the sociologist, and the rest of nature

students, find their great fields and their deep and teeming interests, may be a

realm of invariant uniformities, or laws; it may be a mechanically organic

aggregate,  connected  into  an  ordered  whole  by  a  tissue  of  completely

definable functional relationships; and it may not. It may be that the universe

eternally has been and is a genuine cosmos; it may be that the external sea of

things immersing us, although it is ever changing infinitely, changes only

lawfully,  in  accordance  with  a  system  of  immutable  rules  of  order  that

constitute  an  invariant  at  once  underived  and  indestructible  and  securing

everlasting  harmony  through  and  through;  and  it  may  not  be  such.  The

student of nature assumes, he rightly assumes, that it is; and, moved and

sustained by characteristic appropriate curiosity, he endeavors to find in the

outer world what are the elements and what the relationships assumed by him

to be valid there. The mathematician as such does not make that assumption

and does not seek for elements and relationships in the outer world.

  Is the assumption correct? Undoubtedly it is admissible, and as a working

hypothesis it is undoubtedly exceedingly useful or even indispensable to the

student of external nature; but is it true? The mathematician as man does not

know although he cares. Man as mathematician neither knows nor cares. The

mathematician does know, however, that, if the assumption be correct, every

relationship that is valid in nature is, in abstractu, an element in his domain, a

subject for

  his  study.  He  knows,  too,  at  least  he  strongly  suspects,  that,  if  the

assumption be not correct, his domain remains the same absolutely, and the

title  of  mathematics  to  human  regard  "would  remain  unimpeached  and

unimpaired" were the universe without a plan or, having a plan, if it "were

unrolled like a map at our feet, and the mind of man qualified to take in the

whole scheme of creation at a glance."

  The  two  realms,  of  mathematics,  of  natural  science,  like  the  twocuriosities and the two attitudes, the mathematician's and the nature student's,

are  fundamentally  distinct  and  disparate.  To  think  logically  the  logically

thinkable — that is the mathematician's aim. To assume that nature is thus

thinkable, an embodied rational logos, and to discover the thought supposed

incarnate there — these are at once the principle and the hope of the student

of nature.

  Suppose the latter student is right and that the outer universe really is an

embodied logos of reason, does it follow that all the logically thinkable is

incorporated in it? It seems not. Indeed there appears to be many a rational

logos.  A  cosmos,  a  harmoniously  ordered  universe,  one  that  through  and

through is self-compatible, can hardly be the whole of reason materialized

and objectified. At all events the mathematician has delight in the conceptual

construction and in the contemplation of divers systems that are inconsistent

with one another though each is thoroughly self-coherent. He constructs in

thought a summitless hierarchy of hyperspaces, an endless series of ordered

worlds, worlds that are possible and logically actual. And he is content not to

know if any of them be otherwise actual or actualized. There is, for example,

a Euclidean geometry and there are infinitely many kinds of non-

    Euclidean. These doctrines, regarded as true descriptions of some one

actual space, are incompatible. In our universe, to be specific, if it be as Plato

thought and natural science takes for granted, a geometrized or geometrizable

affair, then one of these geometries may be, none of them may be, not all of

them  can  be,  objectively  valid.  But  in  the  infinitely  vaster  world  of  pure

thought, in the world of mathesis, all of them are valid; there they co-exist,

there  they  interlace  and  blend  among  themselves  and  others  as  differing

strains of a hypercosmic harmony.

  It is from some such elevation, not the misty lowland of the sensuously

and materially Actual, but from a mount of speculation lawfully rising into

the azure of the logically Possible, that one may glimpse the dawn heralded

by the avowal of Leibnitz: "J/a mtta-physique est touie mathtmaliquc" Time

fails  me  to  deal  fittingly  with  the  great  theme  herewith  suggested,  but  I

cannot  quite  forbear  to  express  briefly  my  conviction  that,  apart  from  its

service  to  kindred  interests  of  thought  as  a  standard  of  clarity,  rigor  and

certitude, mathematics is and will be found to be an inexhaustible quarry of

material  —  of  ontologic  types,  of  ideas  and  problems,  of  distinctions,

discriminants and hints, evidences, analogies and intimations — all for the

exploitation and use of Philosophy, Psychology, and Theology. The allusionis not to such celebrated alliances of philosophy and mathesis as flourished in

the school of Pythagoras and in the gigantic personalities of Plato, Descartes,

Spinoza, and Leibnitz, nor to the more technical mat he matico-philosophical

researches and speculations of our own time by such as C. S. Peirce, Russell,

Whitehead, Peano, G. Cantor, Couturat and Poincare, glorious as were those

alliances and

    important  as  these  researches  are.  The  reference  is  rather  to  the

unappreciated fact that the measureless accumulated wealth of the realm of

exact thought is at once a marvelous mine of subject matter and a rich and

ready  arsenal  for  those  great  human  concerns  of  reflective  and  militant

thought that is none the less important because it is not exact.

  For the vindication of that claim, a hint or two must here suffice. The

modern  mathematical  concepts  of  number,  time,  space,  order,  infinitude,

finitude, group, manifold, functionality, and innumerable hosts of others, the

varied processes of mathematics, and the principles and modes of its growth

and evolution, all of these or nearly all still challenge and still await those

kinds of analysis that are proper to the philosopher and the psychologist. The

psychology of Euclidean, non-Euclidean, and hyperspaces, the question of

the  intuita-bility  of  the  latter,  the  secret  of  their  having  become  not  only

indispensable in various branches of mathematics but instrumentally useful in

other fields also, as in the kinetic theory of gases; the question, for example,

why it is that while thought maintains a straightforward course through four-

dimensional space, imagination travels through it on a zigzag path, of two

logically identical configurations, being partially or completely blind to the

one, yet perfectly beholding the other; the evaluation and adjustment of the

contradictory claims of Poincare and his school on the one hand and of Mach

and his disciples on the other, the former contending that Modern Analysis is

a "free creation of the human spirit" guided indeed but not constrained by

experience of the external world, being merely kept by this from aimless

wandering in wayward paths; while the latter maintain that mathematical

    concepts,  however  tenuous  or  remote  or  recondite,  have  been  literally

evolved continuously in accordance with the needs of the animal organism

and with environmental conditions out of the veriest elements (feelings) of

physical  life,  and  accordingly  that  the  purest  offspring  of  mathematical

thought  may  trace  a  legitimate  lineage  back  and  down  to  the  lowliest

rudiments of physical and physiological experience: — these problems and

such as these are, I take it, problems for the student of mind as mind and forthe  student  of  psycho-physics.  Regarding  the  relations  of  mathesis  to  the

former "queen of ail the sciences," I have on this occasion but little to say. I

do  not  believe  that  the  declined  estate  of  Theology  is  destined  to  be

permanent. The present is but an interregnum in her reign and her fallen days

will have an end. She has been deposed mainly because she has not seen fit to

avail herself promptly and fully of the dispensations of advancing knowledge.

The aims, however, of the ancient mistress are as high as ever, and when she

shall have made good her present lack of modern education and learned to

extend a generous and eager hospitality to modern light, she will reascend,

and will occupy with dignity as of yore an exalted place in the ascending

scale  of  human  interests  and  the  esteem  of  enlightened  men.  And

mathematics, by the character of her inmost being, is especially qualified, I

believe, to assist in the restoration. It was but little more than a generation

ago that the mathematician, philosopher and theologian, Bernhard Bolzano,

dispelled the clouds that throughout all the foregone centuries had enveloped

the notion of Infinitude in darkness, completely sheared the great term of its

vagueness without shearing it of its strength, and thus rendered it forever

available for the purposes of

  logical discourse. Whereas, too, in former times the Infinite betrayed its

presence  not  indeed  to  the  faculties  of  Logic  but  only  to  the  spiritual

Imagination and Sensibility, mathematics has shown, even during the life of

the elder men here present, — and the achievement marks an epoch in the

history  of  man,  —  that  the  structure  of  Transfinite  Being  is  open  to

exploration  by  the  organon  of  Thought.  Again,  it  is  in  the  mathematical

doctrine  of  Invariance,  the  realm  wherein  are  sought  and  found

configurations and types of being that, amid the swirl and stress of countless

hosts  of  transformations,  remain  immutable,  and  the  spirit  dwells  in

contemplation of the serene and eternal reign of the subtile law of Form, it is

there that Theology may find, if she will, the clearest conceptions, the noblest

symbols, the most inspiring intimations, the most illuminating illustrations,

and  the  surest  guarantees  of  the  object  of  her  teaching  and  her  quest,  an

Eternal Being, unchanging in the midst of the universal flux.

  It is not, however, by any considerations or estimates of utility in any

form however high it be or essential to the worldly weal of 'man; it is not by

evaluating mastery of the processes of measurement and computation, though

these are continuously vital everywhere to the conduct of practical life; nor is

it by strengthening the arms of natural science and speeding her conquests ina thousand ways and a hundred fields; nor yet by extending the empire of the

human intellect over the realms of number and space and establishing the

dominion  of  thought  throughout  the  universe  of  logic;  it  is  not  even  by

affording argument and fact and light to theology and so contributing to the

advancement  of  her  supreme  concerns;  —  it  is  not  by  any  of  these

considerations nor by all of them that Mathematics,

  were she called upon to do so, would rightly seek to vindicate her highest

claims to human regard. It requires indeed but little penetration to see that no

science, no art, no doctrine, no human activity whatever, however humble or

high, can ultimately succeed in justifying itself in terms of measurable fruits

and ema-nant effects, for these remain always to be themselves appraised,

and the process of such attempted vindication is plainly fated to issue only in

regression without an end. Such Baconian apologetic, when offered as final,

quite mistakes the finest mood of the scientific spirit and is beneath the level

of academic faith. Science does not seek emancipation in order to become a

drudge, she consents to serve indeed but her service aims at freedom as an

end.

  Man has been so long a slave of circumstance and need, he has been so

long  constrained  to  seek  license  for  his  summit  faculties,  in  lower  courts

without appeal, that a sudden transitory moment of release sets him trembling

with distrust and fear, an occasional imperfect vision of the instant dignity of

his spiritual enterprises is at once obscured by doubt, and he straightway

descends  into  the  market  places  of  the  world  to  excuse  or  to  justify  his

illumination,  pleading  some  mere  utility  against  the  ignoring  or  the

condemnation of an insight or an inspiration whose worth is nevertheless

immediate and no more needs and no more admits of utilitarian justification

than the breaking of morning light on mountain peaks or the bounding of

lambs in a meadow.

  The solemn cant of Science in our day and her sombre visage are but the

lingering tone and shade of the prisonhouse, and they will pass away. Science

is destined to appear as the child and the parent of freedom blessing the earth

without design. Not in the ground

  of need, not in bent and painful toil, but in the deep-centred play-instinct

of the world, in the joyous mood of the eternal Being, which is always young,

Science has her origin and root; and her spirit, which is the spirit of genius in

moments of elevation, is but a sublimated form of play, the austere and lofty

analogue  of  the  kitten  playing  with  the  entangled  skein  or  of  the  eagletsporting with the mountain winds.

    NfOCMi UWMIT »«CUT»

    Illllllllllllllll

  A 000 687 533 o 










































 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  










































 