                                  About the Author

 


Melanie Klein was born in Vienna in 1882, the youngest of four children. At

about fourteen, she decided to study medicine. With her brother’s help she

learnt enough Greek and Latin to pass into the Gymnasium. But her early

engagement and subsequent marriage in 1903 brought a halt to her plans.

Years  later,  discovering  a  booklet  on  dreams  by  Freud,  she  turned  her

attention to psycho-analysis. At this time she was living in Budapest and

began her own analysis with Ferenczi, who encouraged her interest in the

analysis of children. In 1921 she moved to Berlin to continue her work with

children,  supported  by  Dr  Karl  Abraham.  In  1926  she  moved  to  London

where she worked and lived until her death in 1960.                                  BY MELANIE KLEIN


                  Love, Guilt and Reparation and Other Works

                          The Psycho-Analysis of Children

                      Envy and Gratitude and Other Works

                            Narrative of a Child Analysis                    ENVY AND GRATITUDE


 

                            And Other Works 1946-1963

 

                                    Melanie Klein

 
                              WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY

                                      Hanna SegalThis ebook is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or

otherwise,  be  lent,  resold,  hired  out  or  otherwise  circulated  without  the

publisher’s prior consent in any form (including any digital form) other than

this in which it is published and without a similar condition including this

condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.



                            Epub ISBN: 9781446450697

                                      Version 1.0

                                www.randomhouse.co.uk  
                                  Published by Vintage 1997

                                            11

                          Copyright © The Melanie Klein Trust 1975
                          International copyright © Hanna Segal 1988

                              First published in Great Britain by
                                The Hogarth Press Ltd 1975

                                          Vintage
                          Random House, 20 Vauxhall Bridge Road,
                                    London SW1V 2SA

                                    www.vintage-books.co.uk

        Addresses for companies within the Random House Group Limited can be found at:
                                www.randomhouse.co.uk/offices.htm

                    The Random House Group Limited Reg. No. 954009
                                    www.randomhouse.co.uk

                            A CIP catalogue record for this book
                            is available from the British Library

                                  ISBN 9780099752011                                    CONTENTS

 


Introduction by Hanna Segal

Preface

  1. Notes on Some Schizoid Mechanisms (1946)

  2. On the Theory of Anxiety and Guilt (1948)

  3. On the Criteria for the Termination of a Psycho-Analysis (1950)

  4. The Origins of Transference (1952)

  5. The Mutual Influences in the Development of Ego and Id (1952)

  6. Some Theoretical Conclusions Regarding the Emotional Life of the Infant

    (1952)

  7. On Observing the Behaviour of Young Infants (1952)

  8. The Psycho-Analytic Play Technique: Its History and Significance (1955)

  9. On Identification (1955)

10. Envy and Gratitude (1957)

11. On the Development of Mental Functioning (1958)

12. Our Adult World and its Roots in Infancy (1959)

13. A Note on Depression in the Schizophrenic (1960)

14. On Mental Health (1960)

15. Some Reflections on 'The Oresteia' (1963)

16. On the Sense of Loneliness (1963)

Short Contributions

The Importance of Words in Early Analysis (1927)

Note on ‘A Dream of Forensic Interest’ (1928)

Theoretical Deductions from an Analysis of Dementia Praecox in Early

  Infancy (1929)

Review of Woman’s Periodicity by Mary Chadwick (1933)

Some Psychological Considerations: A comment (1942)

Explanatory Notes

Appendix: Introductory Notes by Ernest Jones to Previous Editions of

    Melanie Klein’s Works

Bibliography                                INTRODUCTION

 



The papers in this volume contain Melanie Klein’s work from 1946 up to her

death in 1960. It includes unfinished work published posthumously in 1963.

The  later  papers  of  Volume  I,  ‘A  Contribution  to  the  Psychogenesis  of

Manic-Depressive  States’  (1935),  ‘Mourning  and  its  Relation  to  Manic-

Depressive States’ (1942), and ‘The Oedipus Complex in the Light of Early

Anxieties’ (1945), introduce the concept of the depressive position and mark

a new development in Melanie Klein’s thinking.

The  first  paper  in  the  present  volume,  ‘Notes  on  Some  Schizoid

Mechanisms’ (1946), introduces a further development, the paranoid/schizoid

position. In her early work with children, Melanie Klein described the child’s

relationships  to  part  objects  –  primarily  the  breast  and  the  penis.  She

observed  and  analysed  persecutory  feelings  and  splitting  between  highly

idealised and persecutory objects. She also saw a constant interplay between

projection  and  introjection.  But  she  did  not  quite  see  those  features  as

conjoined phenomena; in ‘Notes on Some Schizoid Mechanisms’ she sees

these  various  features  as  interrelated  parts  of  a  recurring  constellation.  In

1936 when she had described the depressive position, she also stated that

before the onset of this position, the predominant anxieties are of a paranoid

nature. She occasionally referred to a paranoid position. To begin with she

used the term ‘position’ rather loosely, speaking, for instance, of a manic

position when describing manic defences or even an obsessional position in

relation to obsessional defences. The 1946 paper firmly establishes the idea

of two positions, two basic modes of psychic organisation. In this paper she

investigates  in  considerable  detail  the  anxieties  and  defences  in  earliest

infancy  –  the  paranoid/schizoid  position.  She  called  it  paranoid/schizoid

because  the  prevalent  anxiety  is  of  a  persecutory  nature  and  the  leading

mental mechanism that of splitting. She describes persecutory anxieties and

mental  mechanisms,  known  to  Freud  but  seen  by  her,  as  operating  from

earliest  infancy  and  sees  them  as  a  system  of  anxieties  and  correlated

defences.  She  also  introduces  a  new  mechanism  of  defence  –  that  of

projective  identification.  In  Klein’s  view  –  more  explicitly  expounded  by

Susan Isaacs  in The  Nature  and  Function  of  Phantasy (1952) – the term

‘mechanism’ is a more abstract and generalised description of an unconsciousphantasy. A phantasy is the mental content of the mechanism.

The  phantasy  or  mechanism  of  projective  identification  has  been

foreshadowed  in  Klein’s  earlier  work.  In  her  paper,  ‘The  Importance  of

Symbol Formation in the Development of the Ego’ (1930), she describes how

the psychotic little boy in his phantasy splits off the bad part of himself,

which he identifies with his urine, faeces and even penis and which he then

projects into his mother’s body so that her body is perceived as filled with

bad objects. In the present paper she describes this as one of the earliest and

fundamental phantasies and mechanisms. The infant splits off and projects

into his mother intolerable parts of himself. These parts are phantasied as

having taken possession of mother’s body and she becomes identified with

them.  In  certain  situations,  good  parts  of  the  self  may  be  projected  in  a

similar way, leading to an impoverishment of the ego characteristic of the

schizoid  personality.  Considering  its  importance,  the  paper  is  surprisingly

short. The description of projective identification occupies little more than

two paragraphs, and yet it is one of the most seminal papers she has written.

It has opened the way to understanding schizophrenia and schizoid patients

hitherto considered unreachable by analysis. It gave an impetus to pioneering

work  in  the  psychoanalysis  of  psychotics  and  its  publication  was  soon

followed by important papers by people who used these new insights in their

clinical work with psychotic patients.

This paper on schizoid mechanisms completes a new metapsychological

theory.  Klein  posits  that  from  the  start  the  infant  has  an  ego  capable  of

experiencing  anxiety,  forming  relationships  and  using  mechanisms  of

defence. This ego is not only largely unintegrated but it is also subject to

being split by powerful splitting mechanisms and, under the spur of anxiety,

fragmented.  The  infant  relates  to  part  objects.  Because  of  splitting  and

projections,  these  objects  become  highly  idealised  or  very  persecutory.

Feelings  of  persecution,  mechanisms  of  splitting,  projective  identification

and,  at  times  of  intense  anxiety,  fragmentation  characterise  the

paranoid/schizoid position which is a point of fixation of the schizophrenic

group of illnesses. The persistence of some of these features, in children who

only  partly  reached  and  worked  through  the  depressive  position,  is  the

background to paranoid, narcissistic and schizoid personalities even if they

are not overtly psychotic.

As the infant begins to integrate his or her picture of his/her object as a

whole person there is a fundamental change in the integration of the ego, thenature of the object relationships and the nature of anxiety. The infant and the

child become capable of feelings of guilt and concern for the object. Klein

first described this in two major papers on the depressive position (1935,

1940). In the two papers following the 1946 one, ‘On the Theory of Anxiety

and  Guilt’  (1948)  and  ‘Some  Theoretical  Conclusions  Regarding  the

Emotional Life of the Infant’ (1952), she explores in detail the implications

of  the  changes  occurring  in  the  move  from  the  paranoid/schizoid  to  the

depressive position and the fluctuations to which this process is subject, as

the depressive pain over and over again leads to some regression to paranoid

and schizoid defences. One of Mrs Klein’s contemporaries reports that when

she was asked what she considered her most important discovery she said

that it was the discovery of the paranoid defences against guilt.

The  other  papers  in  this  volume  are  all  in  the  framework  of  her  new

concept of positions and I think they show how it broadened and deepened

her outlook. Some are technical. Some approach more general psychoanalytic

subjects such as ‘The Origins of Transference’ (1952); some are in the field

of applied psychoanalysis. The two unfinished papers which she was working

on just before her death, ‘Some Reflections on The Oresteia’ and ‘On the

Sense of Loneliness’, show a reflective mood and address themselves to more

general topics.

The formulation of the concept of the paranoid/schizoid and depressive

positions is in a way a culmination of her work and completes it by providing

a  comprehensive  theoretical  framework.  This  framework  is  a  new  and

original idea, a contribution to theory which had a profound influence on

psychoanalytic thinking.

  There was, however, yet one more fundamental discovery to come – that

of primitive envy. In 1957, following a shorter Congress paper on the same

theme, she published a monograph, ‘Envy and Gratitude’. She had always

paid attention to envy and refers to it quite often in her early work but in

‘Envy and Gratitude’ she introduces the new idea that envy operates from the

beginning of life and is the earliest manifestation of the death instinct. Envy

is  in  conflict  with  love  and  gratitude.  The  operation  of  envy  in  the

paranoid/schizoid position is a potent factor in pathology. For instance, since

envy  attacks  goodness,  it  interferes  with  normal  splitting  processes  and

therefore impedes the formation of a good object relationship. This in turn

leads to confusional states based on the inability to differentiate a good from

a  bad  object.  The  importance  of  envy  was  always  recognised  inpsychoanalytic work, for instance, in Freud’s discovery of penis envy. But

the  idea  that  envy  operates  in  primitive  part-object  relationships  and  is

directed at the life-giving breast, was completely revolutionary.

  Psychoanalytical discoveries are always fraught with controversy. It was

so with Freud’s work, and indeed, his last major concept, that of the life and

death instincts, has never been fully accepted by the vast majority of analysts.

  Klein’s work was from the beginning subject to passionate controversy.

Her technique of child analysis, her emphasis on the importance of the pre-

genital stages, her stress on aggression, gave rise to the early controversies

with the Viennese School based on the work of Anna Freud. When Klein

moved to England in 1926 she found the British Psycho-Analytic Society far

more receptive to her ideas. But her formulation of the depressive position

gave rise to new controversies and some of those who had enthusiastically

accepted her early work, for instance, Edward Glover, felt that she went too

far in attributing psychic complexity to the infant. Growing differences gave

rise to a series of ‘Controversial Discussions’ in the British Society and her

two papers (1948 and 1952) are revised versions of some of her contributions

to those discussions. Her work on envy gave rise to a new storm.

The value of new ideas can be gauged by how they survive the upheaval

which they cause. Many of the early controversies about Klein’s work are

almost  forgotten:  most  analysts  today  take  for  granted  the  early  object

relationships  described  by  Klein  and  many  use  her  early  discoveries  and

concepts  without  even  knowing  their  origin.  Much  of  her  thinking  has

become assimilated into the mainstream of psychoanalysis. Those known as

Kleinians,  who  explicitly  use  her  concepts  and  her  technique,  have

developed, and are developing, her work further, and interest in her ideas is

increasing throughout the world. The vitality and importance of her work

cannot be doubted.


                                                          Hanna Segal, London, 1987                                      PREFACE

 



THIS third volume of The Writings of Melanie Klein contains all her later

work from 1946 until her death in 1960—with the exception of Narrative of a

Child  Analysis  which  is  published  separately  as  Volume  IV.  Unlike  the

papers which compose Volume I, Love, Guilt and Reparation 1921–45 (most

of which were originally published in Contributions to Psycho-Analysis) the

contents of Volume III have never before been collected together. Some of

them appeared first in two books, Developments in Psycho-Analysis and New

Directions in Psycho-Analysis, which also included contributions by authors

other than Melanie Klein. Envy and Gratitude was originally a monograph,

and some of the papers were published posthumously in Our Adult World

and  Other  Essays.  Moreover,  written  as  they  were  some  specifically  for

psycho-analysts and some for the general reader, they are less homogeneous

than are the contents of the other volumes. But they contain writings of the

latter and most mature phase of Melanie Klein’s working life and so include

works which for the Kleinian student are of the very first importance.

As in the case of Volumes I and II there are Explanatory Notes towards the

end of the book designed to indicate the position of each main theme in the

evolution of Melanie Klein’s thought. At the end, one Introduction and two

Prefaces written by Ernest Jones for earlier editions are preserved for their

historical interest.


                                                                  R. E. MONEY-KYRLE                                            1

 
                                                                              1
          NOTES ON SOME SCHIZOID MECHANISMS

 

                                        (1946)

 


                                    INTRODUCTION

 


THE present paper is concerned with the importance of early paranoid and

schizoid anxieties and mechanisms. I have given much thought to this subject

for a number of years, even before clarifying my views on the depressive

processes in infancy. In the course of working out my concept of the infantile

depressive position, however, the problems of the phase preceding it again

forced themselves on my attention. I now wish to formulate some hypotheses
                                                                                    2
at which I have arrived regarding the earlier anxieties and mechanisms.

The hypotheses I shall put forward, which relate to very early stages of

development, are derived by inference from material gained in the analyses of

adults  and  children,  and  some  of  these  hypotheses  seem  to  tally  with

observations  familiar  in  psychiatric  work.  To  substantiate  my  contentions

would require an accumulation of detailed case material for which there is no

room in the framework of this paper, and I hope in further contributions to fill

this gap.

At  the  outset  it  will  be  useful  to  summarize  briefly  the  conclusions

regarding  the  earliest  phases  of  development  which  I  have  already  put
        3
forward.

In early infancy anxieties characteristic of psychosis arise which drive the

ego  to  develop  specific  defence-mechanisms.  In  this  period  the  fixation-

points for all psychotic disorders are to be found. This hypothesis led some

people to believe that I regarded all infants as psychotic; but I have already

dealt  sufficiently  with  this  misunderstanding  on  other  occasions.  The

psychotic  anxieties,  mechanisms  and  ego-defences  of  infancy  have  a

profound  influence  on  development  in  all  its  aspects,  including  the

development of the ego, super-ego and object-relations.

I  have  often  expressed  my  view  that  object-relations  exist  from  the

beginning of life, the first object being the mother’s breast which to the childbecomes  split  into  a  good  (gratifying)  and  bad  (frustrating)  breast;  this

splitting results in a severance of love and hate. I have further suggested that

the relation to the first object implies its introjection and projection, and thus

from the beginning object-relations are moulded by an interaction between

introjection  and  projection,  between  internal  and  external  objects  and

situations.  These  processes  participate  in  the  building  up  of  the  ego  and

super-ego and prepare the ground for the onset of the Oedipus complex in the

second half of the first year.

  From the beginning the destructive impulse is turned against the object and

is first expressed in phantasied oral-sadistic attacks on the mother’s breast,

which soon develop into onslaughts on her body by all sadistic means. The

persecutory fears arising from the infant’s oral-sadistic impulses to rob the

mother’s body of its good contents, and from the anal-sadistic impulses to put

his excrements into her (including the desire to enter her body in order to

control  her  from  within)  are  of  great  importance  for  the  development  of

paranoia and schizophrenia.

I  enumerated  various  typical  defences  of  the  early  ego,  such  as  the

mechanisms of splitting the object and the impulses, idealization, denial of

inner and outer reality and the stifling of emotions. I also mentioned various

anxiety-contents, including the fear of being poisoned and devoured. Most of

these phenomena—prevalent in the first few months of life—are found in the

later symptomatic picture of schizophrenia.

This early period (first described as the ‘persecutory phase’) I later termed
                      4
‘paranoid position’,  and  held  that  it  precedes  the  depressive  position.  If

persecutory  fears  are  very  strong,  and  for  this  reason  (among  others)  the

infant  cannot  work  through  the  paranoid-schizoid  position,  the  working

through of the depressive position is in turn impeded. This failure may lead to

a  regressive  reinforcing  of  persecutory  fears  and  strengthen  the  fixation-

points  for  severe  psychoses  (that  is  to  say,  the  group  of  schizophrenias).

Another  outcome  of  serious  difficulties  arising  during  the  period  of  the

depressive position may be manic-depressive disorders in later life. I also

concluded that in less severe disturbances of development the same factors

strongly influence the choice of neurosis.

  While I assumed that the outcome of the depressive position depends on

the working through of the preceding phase, I nevertheless attributed to the

depressive position a central rôle in the child’s early development. For with

the introjection of the object as a whole the infant’s object-relation altersfundamentally.  The  synthesis  between  the  loved  and  hated  aspects  of  the

complete object gives rise to feelings of mourning and guilt which imply vital

advances in the infant’s emotional and intellectual life. This is also a crucial

juncture for the choice of neurosis or psychosis. To all these conclusions I

still adhere.


                    SOME NOTES ON FAIRBAIRN’S RECENT PAPERS

 


                                    5
In a number of recent papers W. R. D. Fairbairn has given much attention

to the subject-matter with which I am now dealing. I therefore find it helpful

to clarify some essential points of agreement and disagreement between us. It

will be seen that some of the conclusions which I shall present in this paper

are in line with Fairbairn’s conclusions, while others differ fundamentally.

Fairbairn’s  approach  was  largely  from  the  angle  of  ego-development  in

relation to objects, while mine was predominantly from the angle of anxieties

and their vicissitudes. He called the earliest phase the ‘schizoid position’: he

stated that it forms part of normal development and is the basis for adult

schizoid and schizophrenic illness. I agree with this contention and consider

his  description  of  developmental  schizoid  phenomena  as  significant  and

revealing, and of great value for our understanding of schizoid behaviour and

of schizophrenia. I also think that Fairbairn’s view that the group of schizoid

or  schizophrenic  disorders  is  much  wider  than  has  been  acknowledged  is

correct and important; and the particular emphasis he laid on the inherent

relation between hysteria and schizophrenia deserves full attention. His term

‘schizoid position’ would be appropriate if it is understood to cover both

persecutory fear and schizoid mechanisms.

I disagree—to mention first the most basic issues—with his revision of the

theory of mental structure and instincts. I also disagree with his view that to

begin with only the bad object is internalized—a view which seems to me to

contribute to the important differences between us regarding the development

of  object-relations  as  well  as  of  ego-development.  For  I  hold  that  the

introjected  good  breast  forms  a  vital  part  of  the  ego,  exerts  from  the

beginning a fundamental influence on the process of ego-development and

affects both ego-structure and object-relations. I also differ from Fairbairn’s

view that ‘the great problem of the schizoid individual is how to love without

destroying by love, whereas the great problem of the depressive individual is                                                6
how to love without destroying by hate’. This conclusion is in line not only

with  his  rejecting  Freud’s  concept  of  primary  instincts  but  also  with  his

underrating the rôle which aggression and hatred play from the beginning of

life. As a result of this approach, he does not give enough weight to the

importance  of  early  anxiety  and  conflict  and  their  dynamic  effects  on

development.


                        CERTAIN PROBLEMS OF THE EARLY EGO

 


In  the  following  discussion  I  shall  single  out  one  aspect  of  ego-

development and I shall deliberately not attempt to link it with the problems

of ego-development as a whole. Nor can I here touch on the relation of the

ego to the id and super-ego.

So far, we know little about the structure of the early ego. Some of the

recent suggestions on this point have not convinced me: I have particularly in

mind Glover’s concept of ego nuclei and Fairbairn’s theory of a central ego

and two subsidiary egos. More helpful in my view is Winnicott’s emphasis
                                            7
on the unintegration of the early ego. I would also say that the early ego

largely lacks cohesion, and a tendency towards integration alternates with a
                                                                8
tendency  towards  disintegration,  a  falling  into  bits.  I  believe  that  these

fluctuations are characteristic of the first few months of life.

We are, I think, justified in assuming that some of the functions which we

know from the later ego are there at the beginning. Prominent amongst these

functions is that of dealing with anxiety. I hold that anxiety arises from the

operation  of  the  death  instinct  within  the  organism,  is  felt  as  fear  of

annihilation (death) and takes the form of fear of persecution. The fear of the

destructive impulse seems to attach itself at once to an object—or rather it is

experienced  as  the  fear  of  an  uncontrollable  overpowering  object.  Other

important  sources  of  primary  anxiety  are  the  trauma  of  birth  (separation

anxiety) and frustration of bodily needs; and these experiences too are from

the beginning felt as being caused by objects. Even if these objects are felt to

be external, they become through introjection internal persecutors and thus

reinforce the fear of the destructive impulse within.

The  vital  need  to  deal  with  anxiety  forces  the  early  ego  to  develop

fundamental  mechanisms  and  defences.  The  destructive  impulse  is  partly

projected outwards (deflection of the death instinct) and, I think, attachesitself to the first external object, the mother’s breast. As Freud has pointed

out, the remaining portion of the destructive impulse is to some extent bound

by  the  libido  within  the  organism.  However,  neither  of  these  processes

entirely fulfils its purpose, and therefore the anxiety of being destroyed from

within  remains  active.  It  seems  to  me  in  keeping  with  the  lack  of

cohesiveness that under the pressure of this threat the ego tends to fall to
      9
pieces. This falling to pieces appears to underlie states of disintegration in

schizophrenics.

The question arises whether some active splitting processes within the ego

may not occur even at a very early stage. As we assume, the early ego splits

the object and the relation to it in an active way, and this may imply some

active  splitting  of  the  ego  itself.  In  any  case,  the  result  of  splitting  is  a

dispersal of the destructive impulse which is felt as the source of danger. I

suggest that the primary anxiety of being annihilated by a destructive force

within, with the ego’s specific response of falling to pieces or splitting itself,

may be extremely important in all schizophrenic processes.


                  SPLITTING PROCESSES IN RELATION TO THE OBJECT

 


The  destructive  impulse  projected  outwards  is  first  experienced  as  oral

aggression. I believe that oral-sadistic impulses towards the mother’s breast

are active from the beginning of life, though with the onset of teething the

cannibalistic impulses increase in strength—a factor stressed by Abraham.

In  states  of  frustration  and  anxiety  the  oral-sadistic  and  cannibalistic

desires are reinforced, and then the infant feels that he has taken in the nipple

and the breast in bits. Therefore in addition to the divorce between a good

and  a  bad  breast  in  the  young  infant’s  phantasy,  the  frustrating  breast—

attacked in oral-sadistic phantasies—is felt to be in fragments; the gratifying

breast,  taken  in  under  the  dominance  of  the  sucking  libido,  is  felt  to  be

complete. This first internal good object acts as a focal point in the ego. It

counteracts the processes of splitting and dispersal, makes for cohesiveness
                                                                        10
and integration, and is instrumental in building up the ego. The infant’s

feeling of having inside a good and complete breast may, however, be shaken

by frustration and anxiety. As a result, the divorce between the good and bad

breast may be difficult to maintain, and the infant may feel that the good

breast too is in pieces.I  believe  that  the  ego  is  incapable  of  splitting  the  object—internal  and

external—without  a  corresponding  splitting  taking  place  within  the  ego.

Therefore the phantasies and feelings about the state of the internal object

vitally influence the structure of the ego. The more sadism prevails in the

process of incorporating the object, and the more the object is felt to be in

pieces,  the  more  the  ego  is  in  danger  of  being  split  in  relation  to  the

internalized object fragments.

The processes I have described are, of course, bound up with the infant’s

phantasy-life; and the anxieties which stimulate the mechanism of splitting

are also of a phantastic nature. It is in phantasy that the infant splits the object

and the self, but the effect of this phantasy is a very real one, because it leads

to feelings and relations (and later on, thought-processes) being in fact cut off
                    11
from one another.


          SPLITTING IN CONNECTION WITH PROJECTION AND INTROJECTION

 


So far, I have dealt particularly with the mechanism of splitting as one of

the earliest ego-mechanisms and defences against anxiety. Introjection and

projection  are  from  the  beginning  of  life  also  used  in  the  service  of  this

primary aim of the ego. Projection, as Freud described, originates from the

deflection of the death instinct outwards and in my view it helps the ego to

overcome anxiety by ridding it of danger and badness. Introjection of the

good object is also used by the ego as a defence against anxiety.

  Closely  connected  with  projection  and  introjection  are  some  other

mechanisms. Here I am particularly concerned with the connection between

splitting, idealization and denial. As regards splitting of the object, we have

to  remember  that  in  states  of  gratification  love-feelings  turn  towards  the

gratifying breast, while in states of frustration hatred and persecutory anxiety

attach themselves to the frustrating breast.

  Idealization  is  bound  up  with  the  splitting  of  the  object,  for  the  good

aspects of the breast are exaggerated as a safeguard against the fear of the

persecuting  breast.  While  idealization  is  thus  the  corollary  of  persecutory

fear, it also springs from the power of the instinctual desires which aim at

unlimited gratification and therefore create the picture of an inexhaustible and

always bountiful breast—an ideal breast.

We  find  an  instance  of  such  a  cleavage  in  infantile  hallucinatory

gratification. The main processes which come into play in idealization arealso operative in hallucinatory gratification, namely, splitting of the object

and  denial  both  of  frustration  and  of  persecution.  The  frustrating  and

persecuting object is kept widely apart from the idealized object. However,

the bad object is not only kept apart from the good one but its very existence

is denied, as is the whole situation of frustration and the bad feelings (pain) to

which frustration gives rise. This is bound up with denial of psychic reality.

The denial of psychic reality becomes possible only through strong feelings

of omnipotence—an essential characteristic of early mentality. Omnipotent

denial of the existence of the bad object and of the painful situation is in the

unconscious equal to annihilation by the destructive impulse. It is, however,

not only a situation and an object that are denied and annihilated—it is an

object-relation which suffers this fate; and therefore a part of the ego, from

which the feelings towards the object emanate, is denied and annihilated as

well.

In  hallucinatory  gratification,  therefore,  two  interrelated  processes  take

place: the omnipotent conjuring up of the ideal object and situation, and the

equally omnipotent annihilation of the bad persecutory object and the painful

situation. These processes are based on splitting both the object and the ego.

In passing I would mention that in this early phase splitting, denial and

omnipotence play a rôle similar to that of repression at a later stage of ego-

development. In considering the importance of the processes of denial and

omnipotence  at  a  stage  which  is  characterized  by  persecutory  fear  and

schizoid mechanisms, we may remember the delusions of both grandeur and

of persecution in schizophrenia.

So  far,  in  dealing  with  persecutory  fear,  I  have  singled  out  the  oral

element.  However,  while  the  oral  libido  still  has  the  lead,  libidinal  and

aggressive impulses and phantasies from other sources come to the fore and

lead  to  a  confluence  of  oral,  urethral  and  anal  desires,  both  libidinal  and

aggressive. Also the attacks on the mother’s breast develop into attacks of a

similar nature on her body, which comes to be felt as it were as an extension

of the breast, even before the mother is conceived of as a complete person.

The phantasied onslaughts on the mother follow two main lines: one is the

predominantly  oral  impulse  to  suck  dry,  bite  up,  scoop  out  and  rob  the

mother’s  body  of  its  good  contents.  (I  shall  discuss  the  bearing  of  these

impulses  on  the  development  of  object-relations  in  connection  with

introjection.)  The  other  line  of  attack  derives  from  the  anal  and  urethral

impulses and implies expelling dangerous substances (excrements) out of theself and into the mother. Together with these harmful excrements, expelled in

hatred, split-off parts of the ego are also projected on to the mother or, as I
                                          12
would rather call it, into the mother. These excrements and bad parts of the

self are meant not only to injure but also to control and to take possession of

the object. In so far as the mother comes to contain the bad parts of the self,

she is not felt to be a separate individual but is felt to be the bad self.

  Much of the hatred against parts of the self is now directed towards the

mother. This leads to a particular form of identification which establishes the

prototype of an aggressive object-relation. I suggest for these processes the

term ‘projective identification’. When projection is mainly derived from the
                                                              13
infant’s impulse to harm or to control the mother,  he  feels  her  to  be  a

persecutor. In psychotic disorders this identification of an object with the

hated  parts  of  the  self  contributes  to  the  intensity  of  the  hatred  directed

against other people. As far as the ego is concerned the excessive splitting off

and expelling into the outer world of parts of itself considerably weaken it.

For the aggressive component of feelings and of the personality is intimately

bound up in the mind with power, potency, strength, knowledge and many

other desired qualities.

It is, however, not only the bad parts of the self which are expelled and

projected,  but  also  good  parts  of  the  self.  Excrements  then  have  the

significance of gifts; and parts of the ego which, together with excrements,

are expelled and projected into the other person represent the good, i.e. the

loving parts of the self. The identification based on this type of projection

again vitally influences object-relations. The projection of good feelings and

good parts of the self into the mother is essential for the infant’s ability to

develop  good  object-relations  and  to  integrate  his  ego.  However,  if  this

projective process is carried out excessively, good parts of the personality are

felt to be lost, and in this way the mother becomes the ego-ideal; this process

too  results  in  weakening  and  impoverishing  the  ego.  Very  soon  such
                                        14
processes  extend  to  other  people,  and  the  result  may  be  an  over-strong

dependence  on  these  external  representatives  of  one’s  own  good  parts.

Another consequence is a fear that the capacity to love has been lost because

the loved object is felt to be loved predominantly as a representative of the

self.

The processes of splitting off parts of the self and projecting them into

objects are thus of vital importance for normal development as well as for

abnormal object-relations.The  effect  of  introjection  on  object-relations  is  equally  important.  The

introjection  of  the  good  object,  first  of  all  the  mother’s  breast,  is  a

precondition for normal development. I have already described that it comes

to form a focal point in the ego and makes for cohesiveness of the ego. One

characteristic feature of the earliest relation to the good object—internal and

external—is the tendency to idealize it. In states of frustration or increased

anxiety, the infant is driven to take flight to his internal idealized object as a

means of escaping from persecutors. From this mechanism various serious

disturbances may result: when persecutory fear is too strong, the flight to the

idealized  object  becomes  excessive,  and  this  severely  hampers  ego-

development and disturbs object-relations. As a result the ego may be felt to

be entirely subservient to and dependent on the internal object—only a shell

for it. With an unassimilated idealized object there goes a feeling that the ego
                                          15
has no life and no value of its own. I would suggest that the condition of

flight  to  the  unassimilated  idealized  object  necessitates  further  splitting

processes within the ego. For parts of the ego attempt to unite with the ideal

object, while other parts strive to deal with the internal persecutors.

The various ways of splitting the ego and internal objects result in the

feeling that the ego is in bits. This feeling amounts to a state of disintegration.

In  normal  development,  the  states  of  disintegration  which  the  infant

experiences are transitory. Among other factors, gratification by the external
            16
good object again and again helps to break through these schizoid states.

The infant’s capacity to overcome temporary schizoid states is in keeping

with the strong elasticity and resilience of the infantile mind. If states of

splitting and therefore of disintegration, which the ego is unable to overcome,

occur too frequently and go on for too long, then in my view they must be

regarded as a sign of schizophrenic illness in the infant, and some indications

of such illness may already be seen in the first few months of life. In adult

patients, states of depersonalization and of schizophrenic dissociation seem to
                                                                  17
be a regression to these infantile states of disintegration.

In my experience, excessive persecutory fears and schizoid mechanisms in

early infancy may have a detrimental effect on intellectual development in its

initial stages. Certain forms of mental deficiency would therefore have to be

regarded  as  belonging  to  the  group  of  schizophrenias.  Accordingly,  in

considering mental deficiency in children at any age one should keep in mind

the possibility of schizophrenic illness in early infancy.

I  have  so  far  described  some  effects  of  excessive  introjection  andprojection on object-relations. I am not attempting to investigate here in any

detail the various factors which in some cases make for a predominance of

introjective and in other cases for a predominance of projective processes. As

regards normal personality, it may be said that the course of ego-development

and  object-relations  depends  on  the  degree  to  which  an  optimal  balance

between introjection and projection in the early stages of development can be

achieved. This in turn has a bearing on the integration of the ego and the

assimilation of internal objects. Even if the balance is disturbed and one or

the other of these processes is excessive, there is some interaction between

introjection and projection. For instance the projection of a predominantly

hostile  inner  world  which  is  ruled  by  persecutory  fears  leads  to  the

introjection—a taking-back—of a hostile external world; and vice versa, the

introjection of a distorted and hostile external world reinforces the projection

of a hostile inner world.

  Another  aspect  of  projective  processes,  as  we  have  seen,  concerns  the

forceful entry into the object and control of the object by parts of the self. As

a consequence, introjection may then be felt as a forceful entry from the

outside into the inside, in retribution for violent projection. This may lead to

the fear that not only the body but also the mind is controlled by other people

in a hostile way. As a result there may be a severe disturbance in introjecting

good objects—a disturbance which would impede all ego-functions as well as

sexual development and might lead to an excessive withdrawal to the inner

world.  This  withdrawal  is,  however,  caused  not  only  by  the  fear  of

introjecting  a  dangerous  external  world  but  also  by  the  fear  of  internal

persecutors and an ensuing flight to the idealized internal object.

I have referred to the weakening and impoverishment of the ego resulting

from  excessive  splitting  and  projective  identification.  This  weakened  ego,

however, becomes also incapable of assimilating its internal objects, and this

leads to the feeling that it is ruled by them. Again, such a weakened ego feels

incapable  of  taking  back  into  itself  the  parts  which  it  projected  into  the

external  world.  These  various  disturbances  in  the  interplay  between

projection and introjection, which imply excessive splitting of the ego, have a

detrimental effect on the relation to the inner and outer world and seem to be

at the root of some forms of schizophrenia.

  Projective identification is the basis of many anxiety-situations, of which I

shall mention a few. The phantasy of forcefully entering the object gives rise

to anxieties relating to the dangers threatening the subject from within theobject. For instance, the impulses to control an object from within it stir up

the fear of being controlled and persecuted inside it. By introjecting and re-

introjecting  the  forcefully  entered  object,  the  subject’s  feelings  of  inner

persecution  are  strongly  reinforced;  all  the  more  since  the  re-introjected

object is felt to contain the dangerous aspects of the self. The accumulation of

anxieties of this nature, in which the ego is, as it were, caught between a

variety of external and internal persecution-situations, is a basic element in
        18
paranoia.
                                    19
I  have  previously  described  the  infant’s  phantasies  of  attacking  and

sadistically  entering  the  mother’s  body  as  giving  rise  to  various  anxiety-

situations (particularly the fear of being imprisoned and persecuted within

her) which are at the bottom of paranoia. I also showed that the fear of being

imprisoned (and especially of the penis being attacked) inside the mother is

an important factor in later disturbances of male potency (impotence) and
                                    20
also underlines claustrophobia.


                              SCHIZOID OBJECT-RELATIONS

 


To summarize now some of the disturbed object-relations which are found

in  schizoid  personalities:  the  violent  splitting  of  the  self  and  excessive

projection  have  the  effect  that  the  person  towards  whom  this  process  is

directed is felt as a persecutor. Since the destructive and hated part of the self

which is split off and projected is felt as a danger to the loved object and

therefore gives rise to guilt, this process of projection in some ways also

implies a deflection of guilt from the self on to the other person. Guilt has,

however,  not  been  done  away  with,  and  the  deflected  guilt  is  felt  as  an

unconscious responsibility for the people who have become representatives

of the aggressive part of the self.

  Another  typical  feature  of  schizoid  object-relations  is  their  narcissistic

nature which derives from the infantile introjective and projective processes.

For,  as  I  suggested  earlier,  when  the  ego-ideal  is  projected  into  another

person, this person becomes predominantly loved and admired because he

contains the good parts of the self. Similarly, the relation to another person on

the basis of projecting bad parts of the self into him is of a narcissistic nature,

because in this case as well the object strongly represents one part of the self.

Both  these  types  of  a  narcissistic  relation  to  an  object  often  show  strongobsessional features. The impulse to control other people is, as we know, an

essential element in obsessional neurosis. The need to control others can to

some extent be explained by a deflected drive to control parts of the self.

When these parts have been projected excessively into another person, they

can  only  be  controlled  by  controlling  the  other  person.  One  root  of

obsessional mechanisms may thus be found in the particular identification

which results from infantile projective processes. This connection may also

throw some light on the obsessional element which so often enters into the

tendency for reparation. For it is not only an object about whom guilt is

experienced but also parts of the self which the subject is driven to repair or

restore.

All  these  factors  may  lead  to  a  compulsive  tie  to  certain  objects  or—

another  outcome—to  a  shrinking  from  people  in  order  to  prevent  both  a

destructive intrusion into them and the danger of retaliation by them. The fear

of  such  dangers  may  show  itself  in  various  negative  attitudes  in  object-

relations. For instance, one of my patients told me that he dislikes people who

are too much influenced by him, for they seem to become too much like

himself and therefore he gets tired of them.

  Another characteristic of schizoid object-relations is a marked artificiality

and lack of spontaneity. Side by side with this goes a severe disturbance of

the feeling of the self or, as I would put it, of the relation to the self. This

relation, too, appears to be artificial. In other words, psychic reality and the

relation to external reality are equally disturbed.

The projection of split-off parts of the self into another person essentially

influences object-relations, emotional life and the personality as a whole. To

illustrate this contention I will select as an instance two universal phenomena

which are interlinked: the feeling of loneliness and fear of parting. We know

that one source of the depressive feelings accompanying parting from people

can be found in the fear of the destruction of the object by the aggressive

impulses  directed  against  it.  But  it  is  more  specifically  the  splitting  and

projective  processes  which  underlie  this  fear.  If  aggressive  elements  in

relation to the object are predominant and strongly aroused by the frustration

of  parting,  the  individual  feels  that  the  split-off  components  of  his  self,

projected into the object, control this object in an aggressive and destructive

way. At the same time the internal object is felt to be in the same danger of

destruction as the external one in whom one part of the self is felt to be left.

The  result  is  an  excessive  weakening  of  the  ego,  a  feeling  that  there  isnothing to sustain it, and a corresponding feeling of loneliness. While this

description applies to neurotic individuals, I think that in some degree it is a

general phenomenon.

One need hardly elaborate the fact that some other features of schizoid

object-relations, which I described earlier, can also be found in minor degrees

and in a less striking form in normal people—for instance shyness, lack of

spontaneity or, on the other hand, a particularly intense interest in people.

In similar ways normal disturbances in thought-processes link up with the

developmental paranoid-schizoid position. For all of us are liable at times to a

momentary impairment of logical thinking which amounts to thoughts and

associations being cut off from one another and situations being split off from

one another; in fact, the ego is temporarily split.


  THE DEPRESSIVE POSITION IN RELATION TO THE PARANOID-SCHIZOID POSITION

 


I now wish to consider further steps in the infant’s development. So far I

have  described  the  anxieties,  mechanisms  and  defences  which  are

characteristic  of  the  first  few  months  of  life.  With  the  introjection  of  the

complete object in about the second quarter of the first year marked steps in

integration  are  made.  This  implies  important  changes  in  the  relation  to

objects. The loved and hated aspects of the mother are no longer felt to be so

widely separated, and the result is an increased fear of loss, states akin to

mourning and a strong feeling of guilt, because the aggressive impulses are

felt to be directed against the loved object. The depressive position has come

to the fore. The very experience of depressive feelings in turn has the effect

of  further  integrating  the  ego,  because  it  makes  for  an  increased

understanding of psychic reality and better perception of the external world,

as well as for a greater synthesis between inner and external situations.

The drive to make reparation, which comes to the fore at this stage, can be

regarded  as  a  consequence  of  greater  insight  into  psychic  reality  and  of

growing synthesis, for it shows a more realistic response to the feelings of

grief, guilt and fear of loss resulting from the aggression against the loved

object. Since the drive to repair or protect the injured object paves the way

for more satisfactory object-relations and sublimations, it in turn increases

synthesis and contributes to the integration of the ego.

  During the second half of the first year the infant makes some fundamental

steps towards working through the depressive position. However, schizoidmechanisms still remain in force, though in a modified form and to a lesser

degree, and early anxiety-situations are again and again experienced in the

process  of  modification.  The  working  through  of  the  persecutory  and

depressive positions extends over the first few years of childhood and plays

an  essential  part  in  the  infantile  neurosis.  In  the  course  of  this  process,

anxieties  lose  in  strength;  objects  become  both  less  idealized  and  less

terrifying, and the ego becomes more unified. All this is interconnected with

the growing perception of reality and adaptation to it.

If development during the paranoid-schizoid position has not proceeded

normally and the infant cannot—for internal or external reasons—cope with

the impact of depressive anxieties a vicious circle arises. For if persecutory

fear, and correspondingly schizoid mechanisms, are too strong, the ego is not

capable of working through the depressive position. This forces the ego to

regress  to  the  paranoid-schizoid  position  and  reinforces  the  earlier

persecutory fears and schizoid phenomena. Thus the basis is established for

various  forms  of  schizophrenia  in  later  life;  for  when  such  a  regression

occurs, not only are the fixation-points in the schizoid position reinforced, but

there  is  a  danger  of  greater  states  of  disintegration  setting  in.  Another

outcome may be the strengthening of depressive features.

  External  experiences  are,  of  course,  of  great  importance  in  these

developments. For instance, in the case of a patient who showed depressive

and schizoid features, the analysis brought up with great vividness his early

experiences in babyhood, to such an extent that in some sessions physical

sensations in the throat or digestive organs occurred. The patient had been

weaned  suddenly  at  four  months  of  age  because  his  mother  fell  ill.  In

addition, he did not see his mother for four weeks. When she returned, she

found the child greatly changed. He had been a lively baby, interested in his

surroundings,  and  he  seemed  to  have  lost  this  interest.  He  had  become

apathetic. He had accepted the substitute food fairly easily and in fact never

refused food. But he did not thrive on it any more, lost weight and had a good

deal of digestive trouble. It was only at the end of the first year, when other

food was introduced, that he again made good physical progress.

  Much light was thrown in the analysis on the influence these experiences

had on his whole development. His outlook and attitudes in adult life were

based on the patterns established in this early stage. For instance, we found

again and again a tendency to be influenced by other people in an unselective

way—in fact to take in greedily whatever was offered—together with greatdistrust  during  the  process  of  introjection.  This  process  was  constantly

disturbed by anxieties from various sources, which also contributed to an

increase of greed.

  Taking the material of this analysis as a whole, I came to the conclusion

that  at  the  time  when  the  sudden  loss  of  the  breast  and  of  the  mother

occurred, the patient had already to some extent established a relation to a

complete  good  object.  He  had  no  doubt  already  entered  the  depressive

position but could not work through it successfully and the paranoid-schizoid

position became regressively reinforced. This expressed itself in the ‘apathy’

which followed a period when the child had already shown a lively interest in

his surroundings. The fact that he had reached the depressive position and

had introjected a complete object showed in many ways in his personality. He

had actually a strong capacity for love and a great longing for a good and

complete object. A characteristic feature of his personality was the desire to

love people and trust them, unconsciously to regain and build up again the

good and complete breast which he had once possessed and lost.


      CONNECTION BETWEEN SCHIZOID AND MANIC-DEPRESSIVE PHENOMENA

 


  Some  fluctuations  between  the  paranoid-schizoid  and  the  depressive

positions always occur and are part of normal development. No clear division

between the two stages of development can therefore be drawn; moreover,

modification is a gradual process and the phenomena of the two positions

remain  for  some  time  to  some  extent  intermingled  and  interacting.  In

abnormal development this interaction influences, I think, the clinical picture

both of some forms of schizophrenia and of manic-depressive disorders.

To illustrate this connection I shall briefly refer to some case-material. I do

not intend to present a case-history here and am therefore only selecting some

parts of material relevant to my topic. The patient I have in mind was a

pronounced  manic-depressive  case  (diagnosed  as  such  by  more  than  one

psychiatrist)  with  all  the  characteristics  of  that  disorder:  there  was  the

alternation between depressive and manic states, strong suicidal tendencies

leading repeatedly to suicidal attempts, and various other characteristic manic

and depressive features. In the course of her analysis a stage was reached in

which a real and great improvement was achieved. Not only did the cycle

stop but there were fundamental changes in her personality and her object-

relations. Productivity on various lines developed, as well as actual feelingsof  happiness  (not  of  a  manic  type).  Then,  partly  owing  to  external

circumstances, another phase set in. During this last phase, which continued

for several months, the patient co-operated in the analysis in a particular way.

She came regularly to the analytic sessions, associated fairly freely, reported

dreams  and  provided  material  for  the  analysis.  There  was,  however,  no

emotional response to my interpretations and a good deal of contempt of

them.  There  was  very  seldom  any  conscious  confirmation  of  what  I

suggested. Yet the material by which she responded to the interpretations

reflected  their  unconscious  effect.  The  powerful  resistance  shown  at  this

stage seemed to come from one part of the personality only, while at the same

time another part responded to the analytic work. It was not only that parts of

her personality did not co-operate with me; they did not seem to co-operate

with each other, and at the time the analysis was unable to help the patient to

achieve synthesis. During this stage she decided to bring the analysis to an

end.  External  circumstances  contributed  strongly  to  this  decision  and  she

fixed a date for the last session.

On that particular date she reported the following dream: there was a blind

man who was very worried about being blind; but he seemed to comfort

himself by touching the patient’s dress and finding out how it was fastened.

The dress in the dream reminded her of one of her frocks which was buttoned

high up to the throat. The patient gave two further associations to this dream.

She said, with some resistance, that the blind man was herself; and when

referring to the dress fastened up to the throat, she remarked that she had

again gone into her ‘hide’. I suggested to the patient that she unconsciously

expressed in the dream that she was blind to her own difficulties, and that her

decisions with regard to the analysis as well as to various circumstances in

her life were not in accordance with her unconscious knowledge. This was

also shown by her admitting that she had gone into her ‘hide’, meaning by it

that she was shutting herself off, an attitude well known to her from previous

stages  in  her  analysis.  Thus  the  unconscious  insight,  and  even  some  co-

operation on the conscious level (recognition that she was the blind man and

that  she  had  gone  into  her  ‘hide’),  derived  from  isolated  parts  of  her

personality only. Actually, the interpretation of this dream did not produce

any effect and did not alter the patient’s decision to bring the analysis to an
                              21
end in that particular hour.

The nature of certain difficulties encountered in this analysis as well as in

others  had  revealed  itself  more  clearly  in  the  last  few  months  before  thepatient broke off the treatment. It was the mixture of schizoid and manic-

depressive features which determined the nature of her illness. For at times

throughout her analysis—even in the early stage when depressive and manic

states were at their height—depressive and schizoid mechanisms sometimes

appeared simultaneously. There were, for instance, hours when the patient

was  obviously  deeply  depressed,  full  of  self-reproaches  and  feelings  of

unworthiness;  tears  were  running  down  her  cheeks  and  her  gestures

expressed despair; and yet she said, when I interpreted these emotions, that

she did not feel them at all. Whereupon she reproached herself for having no

feelings at all, for being completely empty. In such sessions there was also a

flight of ideas, the thoughts seemed to be broken up, and their expression was

disjointed.

  Following the interpretation of the unconscious reasons underlying such

states, there were sometimes sessions in which the emotions and depressive

anxieties came out fully, and at such times thoughts and speech were much

more coherent.

This  close  connection  between  depressive  and  schizoid  phenomena

appeared, though in different forms, throughout her analysis but became very

pronounced during the last stage preceding the break just described.

I  have  already  referred  to  the  developmental  connection  between  the

paranoid-schizoid and depressive positions. The question now arises whether

this developmental connection is the basis for the mixture of these features in

manic-depressive  disorders  and,  as  I  would  suggest,  in  schizophrenic

disorders as well. If this tentative hypothesis could be proved, the conclusion

would be that the groups of schizophrenic and manic-depressive disorders are

more  closely  connected  developmentally  with  one  another  than  has  been

assumed.  This  would  also  account  for  the  cases  in  which,  I  believe,  the

differential diagnosis between melancholia and schizophrenia is exceedingly

difficult.  I  should  be  grateful  if  further  light  could  be  thrown  on  my

hypothesis  by  colleagues  who  have  had  ample  material  for  psychiatric

observation.


                              SOME SCHIZOID DEFENCES

 


It is generally agreed that schizoid patients are more difficult to analyse

than  manic-depressive  types.  Their  withdrawn,  unemotional  attitude,  the

narcissistic elements in their object-relations (to which I referred earlier), akind of detached hostility which pervades the whole relation to the analyst

create  a  very  difficult  type  of  resistance.  I  believe  that  it  is  largely  the

splitting processes which account for the patient’s failure in contact with the

analyst  and  for  his  lack  of  response  to  the  analyst’s  interpretations.  The

patient himself feels estranged and far away, and this feeling corresponds to

the analyst’s impression that considerable parts of the patient’s personality

and of his emotions are not available. Patients with schizoid features may

say: ‘I hear what you are saying. You may be right, but it has no meaning for

me.’  Or  again  they  say  they  feel  they  are  not  there.  The  expression  ‘no

meaning’ in such cases does not imply an active rejection of the interpretation

but suggests that parts of the personality and of the emotions are split off.

These  patients  can,  therefore,  not  deal  with  the  interpretation;  they  can

neither accept it nor reject it.

I shall illustrate the processes underlying such states by a piece of material

taken from the analysis of a man patient. The session I have in mind started

with the patient’s telling me that he felt anxiety and did not know why. He

then  made  comparisons  with  people  more  successful  and  fortunate  than

himself. These remarks also had a reference to me. Very strong feelings of

frustration, envy and grievance came to the fore. When I interpreted—to give

here  again  only  the  gist  of  my  interpretations—that  these  feelings  were

directed  against  the  analyst  and  that  he  wanted  to  destroy  me,  his  mood

changed abruptly. The tone of his voice became flat, he spoke in a slow,

expressionless  way,  and  he  said  that  he  felt  detached  from  the  whole

situation. He added that my interpretation seemed correct, but that it did not

matter.  In  fact,  he  no  longer  had  any  wishes,  and  nothing  was  worth

bothering about.

My next interpretations centred on the causes for this change of mood. I

suggested that at the moment of my interpretation the danger of destroying

me had become very real to him and the immediate consequence was the fear

of losing me. Instead of feeling guilt and depression, which at certain stages

of his analysis followed such interpretations, he now attempted to deal with

these dangers by a particular method of splitting. As we know, under the

pressure of ambivalence, conflict and guilt, the patient often splits the figure

of the analyst; then the analyst may at certain moments be loved, at other

moments hated. Or the relations to the analyst may be split in such a way that

he  remains  the  good  (or  bad)  figure  while  somebody  else  becomes  the

opposite figure. But this was not the kind of splitting which occurred in thisparticular instance. The patient split off those parts of himself, i.e. of his ego

which he felt to be dangerous and hostile towards the analyst. He turned his

destructive impulses from his object towards his ego, with the result that

parts of his ego temporarily went out of existence. In unconscious phantasy

this  amounted  to  annihilation  of  part  of  his  personality.  The  particular

mechanism  of  turning  the  destructive  impulse  against  one  part  of  his

personality, and the ensuing dispersal of emotions, kept his anxiety in a latent

state.

My interpretation of these processes had the effect of again altering the

patient’s mood. He became emotional, said he felt like crying, was depressed,
                                                                              22
but felt more integrated; then he also expressed a feeling of hunger.

The violent splitting off and destroying of one part of the personality under

the pressure of anxiety and guilt is in my experience an important schizoid

mechanism.  To  refer  briefly  to  another  instance:  a  woman  patient  had

dreamed that she had to deal with a wicked girl child who was determined to

murder somebody. The patient tried to influence or control the child and to

extort a confession from her which would have been to the child’s benefit;

but she was unsuccessful. I also entered into the dream and the patient felt

that I might help her in dealing with the child. Then the patient strung up the

child on a tree in order to frighten her and also prevent her from doing harm.

When the patient was about to pull the rope and kill the child, she woke.

During this part of the dream the analyst was also present but again remained

inactive.

I shall give here only the essence of the conclusions I arrived at from the

analysis of this dream. In the dream the patient’s personality was split into

two parts: the wicked and uncontrollable child on the one hand, and on the

other hand the person who tried to influence and control her. The child, of

course,  stood  also  for  various  figures  in  the  past,  but  in  this  context  she

mainly represented one part of the patient’s self. Another conclusion was that

the analyst was the person whom the child was going to murder; and my rôle

in the dream was partly to prevent this murder from taking place. Killing the

child—to which the patient had to resort—represented the annihilation of one

part of her personality.

The question arises how the schizoid mechanism of annihilating part of the

self  connects  with  repression  which,  as  we  know,  is  directed  against

dangerous impulses. This, however, is a problem with which I cannot deal

here.  Changes of mood, of course, do not always appear as dramatically within a

session  as  in  the  first  instance  I  have  given  in  this  section.  But  I  have

repeatedly  found  that  advances  in  synthesis  are  brought  about  by

interpretations of the specific causes for splitting. Such interpretations must

deal in detail with the transference-situation at that moment, including of

course  the  connection  with  the  past,  and  must  contain  a  reference  to  the

details of the anxiety-situations which drive the ego to regress to schizoid

mechanisms. The synthesis resulting from interpretations on these lines goes

along with depression and anxieties of various kinds. Gradually such waves

of  depression—followed  by  greater  integration—lead  to  a  lessening  of

schizoid phenomena and also to fundamental changes in object-relations.


                        LATENT ANXIETY IN SCHIZOID PATIENTS

 


I  have  already  referred  to  the  lack  of  emotion  which  makes  schizoid

patients unresponsive. This is accompained by an absence of anxiety. An

important support for the analytic work is therefore lacking. For with other

types of patients who have strong manifest and latent anxiety, the relief of

anxiety derived from analytic interpretation becomes an experience which

furthers their capacity to co-operate in the analysis.

This lack of anxiety in schizoid patients is only apparent. For the schizoid

mechanisms  imply  a  dispersal  of  emotions  including  anxiety,  but  these

dispersed elements still exist in the patient. Such patients have a certain form

of latent anxiety; it is kept latent by the particular method of dispersal. The

feeling of being disintegrated, of being unable to experience emotions, of

losing one’s objects, is in fact the equivalent of anxiety. This becomes clearer

when advances in synthesis have been made. The great relief which a patient

then experiences derives from a feeling that his inner and outer worlds have

not  only  come  more  together  but  back  to  life  again.  At  such  moments  it

appears in retrospect that when emotions were lacking, relations were vague

and uncertain and parts of the personality were felt to be lost, everything

seemed to be dead. All this is the equivalent of anxiety of a very serious

nature. This anxiety, kept latent by dispersal, is to some extent experienced

all along, but its form differs from the latent anxiety which we can recognize

in other types of cases.

  Interpretations  which  tend  towards  synthesizing  the  split  in  the  self,

including the dispersal of emotions, make it possible for the anxiety graduallyto be experienced as such, though for long stretches we may in fact only be

able to bring the ideational contents together but not to elicit the emotions of

anxiety.

I have also found that interpretations of schizoid states make particular

demands on our capacity to put the interpretations in an intellectually clear

form  in  which  the  links  between  the  conscious,  pre-conscious  and

unconscious are established. This is, of course, always one of our aims, but it

is  of  special  importance  at  times  when  the  patient’s  emotions  are  not

available and we seem to address ourselves only to his intellect, however

much broken up.

It is possible that the few hints I have given may to some extent apply as

well to the technique of analysing schizophrenic patients.


                              SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 


I will now summarize some of the conclusions presented in this paper. One

of my main points was the suggestion that in the first few months of life

anxiety  is  predominantly  experienced  as  fear  of  persecution  and  that  this

contributes to certain mechanisms and defences which are significant for the

paranoid-schizoid  position.  Outstanding  among  these  defences  are  the

mechanisms of splitting internal and external objects, emotions and the ego.

These mechanisms and defences are part of normal development and at the

same  time  form  the  basis  for  later  schizophrenic  illness.  I  described  the

processes underlying identification by projection as a combination of splitting

off parts of the self and projecting them on to another person, and some of the

effects this identification has on normal and schizoid object-relations. The

onset  of  the  depressive  position  is  the  juncture  at  which  by  regression

schizoid mechanisms may be reinforced. I also suggested a close connection

between  the  manic-depressive  and  schizoid  disorders,  based  on  the

interaction between the infantile paranoid-schizoid and depressive positions.



                                        APPENDIX

 


                                            23
FREUD’S analysis of the Schreber case contains a wealth of material which

is very relevant to my topic but from which I shall here draw only a fewconclusions.

  Schreber  described  vividly  the  splitting  of  the  soul  of  his  physician

Flechsig (his loved and persecuting figure). The ‘Flechsig soul’ at one time

introduced the system of ‘soul divisions’, splitting into as many as forty to

sixty  sub-divisions.  These  souls  having  multiplied  till  they  became  a

‘nuisance’,  God  made  a  raid  on  them  and  as  a  result  the  Flechsig  soul

survived in ‘only one or two shapes’. Another point which Schreber mentions

is that the fragments of the Flechsig soul slowly lost both their intelligence

and their power.

One of the conclusions Freud arrived at in his analysis of this case was that

the  persecutor  was  split  into  God  and  Flechsig,  and  also  that  God  and

Flechsig  represented  the  patient’s  father  and  brother.  In  discussing  the

various forms of Schreber’s delusion of the destruction of the world, Freud

states: ‘In any case the end of the world was the consequence of the conflict

which had broken out between him, Schreber, and Flechsig, or, according to

the aetiology adopted in the second phase of his delusion, of the indissoluble

bond which had been formed between him and God. . . .’ (Loc. cit., p. 69).

I would suggest, in keeping with the hypotheses outlined in the present

chapter, that the division of the Flechsig soul into many souls was not only a

splitting of the object but also a projection of Schreber’s feeling that his ego

was split. I shall here only mention the connection of such splitting processes

with processess of introjection. The conclusion suggests itself that God and

Flechsig  also  represented  parts  of  Schreber’s  self.  The  conflict  between

Schreber and Flechsig, to which Freud attributed a vital rôle in the world-

destruction delusion, found expression in the raid by God on the Flechsig

souls. In my view this raid represents the annihilation by one part of the self

of  the  other  parts—which,  as  I  contend,  is  a  schizoid  mechanism.  The

anxieties and phantasies about inner destruction and ego-disintegration bound

up with this mechanism are projected on to the external world and underlie

the delusions of its destruction.

  Regarding the processes which are at the bottom of the paranoic ‘world

catastrophe’,  Freud  arrived  at  the  following  conclusions:  ‘The  patient  has

withdrawn from the people in his environment and from the external world

generally the libidinal cathexis which he has hitherto directed on to them.

Thus everything has become indifferent and irrelevant to him, and has to be

explained by means of a secondary rationalization as being “miracled up,

cursorily improvised”. The end of the world is the projection of this internalcatastrophe;  for  his  subjective  world  has  come  to  an  end  since  he  has

withdrawn his love from it.’ (Loc. cit., p. 70.) This explanation specifically

concerns  the  disturbance  in  object-libido  and  the  ensuing  breakdown  in

relation to people and to the external world. But a little further on Freud

considered another aspect of these disturbances. He said: ‘We can no more

dismiss  the  possibility  that  disturbances  of  the  libido  may  react  upon  the

egoistic  cathexes  than  we  can  overlook  the converse possibility—namely,

that a secondary or induced disturbance of the libidinal processes may result

from abnormal changes in the ego. Indeed it is probable that processes of

this kind constitute the distinctive characteristic of psychoses’ (my italics). It

is  particularly  the  possibility  expressed  in  the  last  two  sentences  which

provides the link between Freud’s explanation of the ‘world catastrophe’ and

my hypothesis. ‘Abnormal changes in the ego’ derive, as I have suggested in

this  chapter,  from  excessive  splitting  processes  in  the  early  ego.  These

processes are inextricably linked with instinctual development, and with the

anxieties to which instinctual desires give rise. In the light of Freud’s later

theory  of  the  life  and  death  instincts,  which  replaced  the  concept  of  the

egoistic and sexual instincts, disturbances in the distribution of the libido

presuppose a defusion between the destructive impulse and the libido. The

mechanism of one part of the ego annihilating other parts which, I suggest,

underlies  ‘world  catastrophe’  phantasy  (the  raid  by  God  on  the  Flechsig

souls) implies a preponderance of the destructive impulse over the libido.

Any disturbance in the distribution of the narcissistic libido is in turn bound

up with the relation to introjected objects which (according to my work) from

the  beginning  come  to  form  part  of  the  ego.  The  interaction  between

narcissistic  libido  and  object-libido  corresponds  thus  to  the  interaction

between the relation to introjected and external objects. If the ego and the

internalized  objects  are  felt  to  be  in  bits,  an  internal  catastrophe  is

experienced by the infant which both extends to the external world and is

projected on to it. Such anxiety-states relating to an internal catastrophe arise,

according  to  the  hypothesis  discussed  in  the  present  chapter,  during  the

period of the infantile paranoid-schizoid position and form the basis for later

schizophrenia. In Freud’s view the dispositional fixation to dementia praecox

is found in a very early stage of development. Referring to dementia praecox,

which Freud distinguished from paranoia, he said: ‘The dispositional point of

fixation must therefore be situated further back than in paranoia, and must lie

somewhere at the beginning of the course of development from auto-erotismto object-love.’ (Loc. cit., p. 77.)

I wish to draw one more conclusion from Freud’s analysis of the Schreber

case. I suggest that the raid, which ended in the Flechsig souls being reduced

to one or two, was part of the attempt towards recovery. For the raid was to

undo, or, one may say, heal the split in the ego by annihilating the split-off

parts of the ego. As a result only one or two of the souls were left which, as

we may assume, were meant to regain their intelligence and their power. This

attempt towards recovery, however, was effected by very destructive means

used by the ego against itself and its projected objects.

  Freud’s  approach  to  the  problems  of  schizophrenia  and  paranoia  has

proved of fundamental importance. His Schreber paper (and here we also
                                            24
have  to  remember  Abraham’s  paper  quoted  by  Freud)  opened  up  the

possibility of understanding psychosis and the processes underlying it.                                            2

 

          ON THE THEORY OF ANXIETY AND GUILT

 

                                        (1948)

 


MY conclusions regarding anxiety and guilt have evolved gradually over a

number of years; it may be useful to retrace some of the steps by which I

arrived at them.


                                            I

 


  Concerning the origins of anxiety, Freud put forward to begin with the

hypothesis  that  anxiety  arises  out  of  a  direct  transformation  of  libido.  In

Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety he reviewed his various theories on the

origin of anxiety. As he put it: ‘I propose to assemble quite impartially, all

the facts that we know about anxiety without expecting to arrive at a fresh

synthesis’ (S.E. 20, p. 132). He stated again that anxiety arises from direct

transformation of libido but now seemed to attribute less importance to this

‘economic’  aspect  of  the  origin  of  anxiety.  He  qualified  this  view  in  the

following  statements:  ‘The  whole  matter  can  be  clarified,  I  think,  if  we

commit ourselves to the definite statement that as a result of repression the

intended course of the excitatory process in the id does not occur at all; the

ego  succeeds  in  inhibiting  or  deflecting  it.  If  this  is  so  the  problem  of

“transformation of affect” under repression disappears’ (p. 91). And: ‘The

problem  of  how  anxiety  arises  in  connection  with  repression  may  be  no

simple one; but we may legitimately hold firmly to the idea that the ego is the

actual seat of anxiety and give up our earlier view that the cathectic energy of

the repressed impulse is automatically turned into anxiety’ (p. 93).

  Regarding the manifestations of anxiety in young children, Freud said that

anxiety is caused by the child ‘missing someone who is loved and longed for’

(p. 136). In connection with the girl’s most fundamental anxiety, he described

the infantile fear of loss of love in terms which in some measure seem to

apply to infants of both sexes: ‘If a mother is absent or has withdrawn her

love from her child, it is no longer sure of the satisfaction of its needs and isperhaps exposed to the most distressing feelings of tension’ (S.E. 22, p. 87).

In the New Introductory Lectures, referring to the theory that anxiety arises

from  a  transformation  of  unsatisfied  libido,  Freud  said  that  it  has  ‘found

support  in  some  quite  regularly  occurring  phobias  of  small  children.  .  .  .

Infantile phobias and the expectation of anxiety in anxiety neurosis offer us

two examples of one way in which neurotic anxiety originates: by a direct

transformation of libido’ (S.E. 22, pp. 82–83).

Two conclusions, to which I shall return later on, can be drawn from these

and  similar  passages:  (a)  in  young  children  it  is  unsatisfied  libidinal

excitation which turns into anxiety; (b) the earliest content of anxiety is the

infant’s feeling of danger lest his need should not be satisfied because the

mother is ‘absent’.


                                            II

 


As regards guilt, Freud held that it has its origin in the Oedipus complex

and arises as a sequel to it. There are passages, however, in which Freud

clearly referred to conflict and guilt arising at a much earlier stage of life. He

wrote:  ‘.  .  .  the  sense  of  guilt  is  an  expression  of  the  conflict  due  to

ambivalence  of  the eternal  struggle  between  Eros  and  the  instinct  of

destruction or death.’ (my italics) Also: ‘. . . as a result of the inborn conflict

arising from ambivalence [my italics], of the eternal struggle between the
                                                                                  1
trends of love and death—there is . . . an increase of the sense of guilt’.

  Furthermore,  speaking  of  the  view  propounded  by  some  authors  that

frustration heightens the sense of guilt, he said: ‘For how are we to account,

on  dynamic  and  economic  grounds,  for  an  increase  in  the  sense  of  guilt

appearing in place of an unfulfilled erotic demand? This only seems possible

in a round-about way—if we suppose, that is, that the prevention of an erotic

satisfaction calls up a piece of aggressiveness against the person who has

interfered with the satisfaction, and that this aggressiveness has itself to be

suppressed in turn. But if this is so, it is after all only the aggressiveness

which is transformed into a sense of guilt, by being suppressed and made

over to the super-ego. I am convinced that many processes will admit of a

simpler and clearer exposition if the findings of psycho-analysis with regard

to  the  derivation  of  the  sense  of  guilt  are  restricted  to  the  aggressive
                        2
instincts.’ (my italics).Here Freud unequivocally stated that guilt derives from aggression and

this,  together  with  the  sentences  quoted  above  (‘innate  conflict  of

ambivalence’)  would  point  to  guilt  arising  at  a  very  early  stage  of

development. Taking, however, Freud’s views as a whole, as we find them

summarized again in the New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, it is

clear that he maintained his hypothesis that guilt sets in as a sequel to the

Oedipus complex.
                                                                                  3
  Abraham,  particularly  in  his  study  of  the  libidinal  organization  threw

much light on the earliest phases of development. His discoveries in the field

of infantile sexuality were bound up with a new approach to the origin of

anxiety and guilt. Abraham suggested that ‘in the stage of narcissism with a

cannibalistic sexual aim the first evidence of an instinctual inhibition appears

in the shape of morbid anxiety. The process of overcoming the cannibalistic

impulses is intimately associated with a sense of guilt which comes into the

foreground as a typical inhibitory phenomenon belonging to the third (earlier
                      4
anal-sadistic) stage.’

  Abraham thus contributed materially to our understanding of the origins of

anxiety and guilt, since he was the first to point out the connection of anxiety

and  guilt  with  cannibalistic  desires.  He  compared  his  brief  survey  of  the

psycho-sexual development to a ‘time-table of express trains in which only

the  larger  stations  at  which  they  stop  are  given’.  He  suggested  that  the

‘halting-places  that  lie  between  cannot  be  marked  in  a  summary  of  this
    5
kind’.


                                            III

 


My own work not only corroborated Abraham’s discoveries on anxiety and

guilt and showed their importance in proper perspective, but also developed

them  further  by  bringing  them  together  with  a  number  of  new  facts

discovered in the analyses of young children.

  When I analysed infantile anxiety-situations, I recognized the fundamental

importance  of  sadistic  impulses  and  phantasies  from  all  sources  which

converge and reach a climax in the earliest stages of development. I also

came to see that the early processes of introjection and projection lead to

establishing  within  the  ego,  side  by  side  with  extremely  ‘good’  objects,

extremely frightening and persecuting objects. These figures are conceived inthe  light  of  the  infant’s  own  aggressive  impulses  and  phantasies, i.e.  he

projects his own aggression on to the internal figures which form part of his

early super-ego. To anxiety from these sources is added the guilt derived

from  the  infant’s  aggressive  impulses  against  his  first  loved  object,  both
                            6
external and internalized.
                  7
In a later paper I illustrated by an extreme case the pathological effects of

the anxiety aroused in infants by their destructive impulses and concluded

that  the  earliest  defences  of  the  ego  (in  normal  as  well  as  in  abnormal

development) are directed against the anxiety aroused by aggressive impulses
                8
and phantasies.

  Some years later, in my attempt to reach a fuller understanding of infantile

sadistic phantasies and their origin, I was led to apply Freud’s hypothesis of

the struggle between the life and death instincts to the clinical material gained

in  the  analysis  of  young  children.  We  remember  that  Freud  stated:  ‘The

dangerous death instincts are dealt with in the individual in various ways: in

part they are rendered harmless by being fused with erotic components, in

part they are diverted towards the external world in the form of aggression,

while  to  a  large  extent  they  undoubtedly  continue  their  internal  work
            9
unhindered.’
                                                                        10
  Following this line of thought I put forward the hypothesis that anxiety is

aroused by the danger which threatens the organism from the death instinct;

and I suggested that this is the primary cause of anxiety. Freud’s description

of  the  struggle  between  the  life  and  death  instincts  (which  leads  to  the

deflection of one portion of the death instinct outwards and to the fusion of

the two instincts) would point to the conclusion that anxiety has its origin in

the fear of death.
                                  11
In his paper on masochism Freud drew some fundamental conclusions

regarding the connections between masochism and the death instinct, and he

considered in this light the various anxieties arising from the activity of the
                                  12
death instinct turned inwards. Among these anxieties he does not, however,

mention the fear of death.

In Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety Freud discussed his reasons for not

regarding the fear of death (or fear for life) as a primary anxiety. He based

this view on his observation that ‘the unconscious seems to contain nothing

that could give any content to our concept of the annihilation of life’ (S.E. 20,

p.  129),  pointed  out  that  nothing  resembling  death  can  ever  have  beenexperienced, except possibly fainting, and concluded that ‘the fear of death

should be regarded as analogous to the fear of castration’.

I do not share this view because my analytic observations show that there

is in the unconscious a fear of annihilation of life. I would also think that if

we assume the existence of a death instinct, we must also assume that in the

deepest layers of the mind there is a response to this instinct in the form of

fear of annihilation of life. Thus in my view the danger arising from the inner
                                                                  13
working of the death instinct is the first cause of anxiety. Since the struggle

between the life and death instincts persists throughout life, this source of

anxiety is never eliminated and enters as a perpetual factor into all anxiety-

situations.

My contention that anxiety originates in the fear of annihilation derives

from experience accumulated in the analyses of young children. When in

such  analyses  the  earliest  anxiety-situations  of  the  infant  are  revived  and

repeated, the inherent power of an instinct ultimately directed against the self

can be detected in such strength that its existence appears beyond doubt. This

remains true even when we allow for the part which frustration, internal and

external, plays in the vicissitudes of destructive impulses. This is not the

place for detailed evidence in support of my argument, but I shall quote by

way  of  illustration  one  instance  mentioned  in  my Psycho-Analysis  of

Children (p. 127). A five-year-old boy used to pretend that he had all sorts of

wild animals, such as elephants, leopards, hyenas and wolves, to help him

against  his  enemies.  They  represented  dangerous  objects—persecutors—

which he had tamed and could use as protection against his enemies. But it

appeared in the analysis that they also stood for his own sadism, each animal

representing  a  specfic  source  of  sadism  and  the  organs  used  in  this

connection. The elephants symbolized his muscular sadism, his impulses to

trample and stamp. The tearing leopards represented his teeth and nails and

their functions in his attacks. The wolves symbolized his excrements invested

with destructive properties. He sometimes became very frightened that the

wild animals he had tamed would turn against him and exterminate him. This

fear expressed his sense of being threatened by his own destructiveness (as

well as by internal persecutors).

As I have illustrated by this instance, the analysis of the anxieties arising in

young children teaches us a good deal about the forms in which the fear of

death exists in the unconscious, that is to say, about the part this fear plays in

various anxiety-situations. I have already mentioned Freud’s paper on the‘Economic Problem in Masochism’, which was based on his new discovery
                                                                                    14
of the death instinct. To take the first anxiety-situation he enumerated: ‘the

fear of being eaten up by the totem animal (father)’. This in my view is an

undisguised expression of the fear of total annihilation of the self. The fear of

being  devoured  by  the  father  derives  from  the  projection  of  the  infant’s

impulses to devour his objects. In this way, first the mother’s breast (and the
                                                                      15
mother) becomes in the infant’s mind a devouring object and these fears

soon extend to the father’s penis and to the father. At the same time, since

devouring  implies  from  the  beginning  the  internalization  of  the  devoured

object, the ego is felt to contain devoured and devouring objects. Thus the

super-ego is built up from the devouring breast (mother) to which is added

the  devouring  penis  (father).  These  cruel  and  dangerous  internal  figures

become the representatives of the death instinct. Simultaneously the other

aspect of the early super-ego is formed first by the internalized good breast

(to which is added the good penis of the father), which is felt as a feeding and

helpful internal object, and as the representative of the life instinct. The fear

of  being  annihilated  includes  the  anxiety  lest  the  internal  good  breast  be

destroyed, for this object is felt to be indispensable for the preservation of

life. The threat to the self from the death instinct working within is bound up

with the dangers apprehended from the internalized devouring mother and

father, and amounts to fear of death.

  According to this view, the fear of death enters from the beginning into the

fear of the super-ego and is not, as Freud remarked, a ‘final transformation’
                                16
of the fear of the super-ego.

  Turning to another essential danger-situation which Freud mentioned in his

paper on Masochism, i.e. the fear of castration, I would suggest that the fear

of death enters into and reinforces castration fear and is not ‘analogous’ to
17
it. Since the genital is not only the source of the most intense libidinal

gratification, but also the representative of Eros, and since reproduction is the

essential way of counteracting death, the loss of the genital would mean the

end of the creative power which preserves and continues life.


                                            IV

 


If we try to visualize in concrete form the primary anxiety, the fear of

annihilation,  we  must  remember  the  helplessness  of  the  infant  in  face  ofinternal  and  external  dangers.  I  suggest  that  the  primary  danger-situation

arising from the activity of the death instinct within is felt by him as an

overwhelming attack, as persecution. Let us first consider in this connection

some of the processes which ensue from the deflection of the death instinct

outwards and the ways in which they influence anxieties relating to external

and internal situations. We may assume that the struggle between life and

death instincts already operates during birth and accentuates the persecutory

anxiety aroused by this painful experience. It would seem that this experience

has the effect of making the external world, including the first external object,

the mother’s breast, appear hostile. To this contributes the fact that the ego

turns the destructive impulses against this primary object. The young infant

feels that frustration by the breast, which in fact implies danger to life, is the

retaliation  for  his  destructive  impulses  towards  it  and  that  the  frustrating

breast is persecuting him. In addition he projects his destructive impulses on

to the breast, that is to say, deflects the death instinct outwards; and in these

ways the attacked breast becomes the external representative of the death
        18
instinct. The ‘bad’ breast is also introjected, and this intensifies, as we may

assume, the internal danger-situation, i.e. the fear of the activity of the death

instinct within. For by the internalization of the ‘bad’ breast, the portion of

the death instinct which had been deflected outwards, with all its associated

dangers,  is  turned  inwards  again  and  the  ego  attaches  its  fear  of  its  own

destructive impulses to the internal bad object. These processes may well

happen simultaneously and therefore my description of them is not to be

taken  as  a  chronological  account.  To  summarize:  the  frustrating  (bad)

external breast becomes, owing to projection, the external representative of

the  death  instinct;  through  introjection  it  reinforces  the  primary  internal

danger-situation; this leads to an increased urge on the part of the ego to

deflect (project) internal dangers (primarily the activity of the death instinct)

into the external world. There is therefore a constant fluctuation between the

fear of internal and external bad objects, between the death instinct acting

within  and  deflected  outwards.  Here  we  see  one  important  aspect  of  the

interaction—from the beginning of life—between projection and introjection.

External  dangers  are  experienced  in  the  light  of  internal  dangers  and  are

therefore intensified; on the other hand, any danger threatening from outside

intensifies  the  perpetual  inner  danger-situation.  This  interaction  exists  in

some measure throughout life. The very fact that the struggle has, to some

extent, been externalized relieves anxiety. Externalization of internal danger-situations is one of the ego’s earliest methods of defence against anxiety and

remains fundamental in development.

The activity of the death instinct deflected outwards, as well as its working

within, cannot be considered apart from the simultaneous activity of the life

instinct. Side by side with the deflection of the death instinct outwards, the

life instinct—by means of the libido—attaches itself to the external object,

the gratifying (good) breast, which becomes the external representative of the

life instinct. The introjection of this good object reinforces the power of the

life  instinct  within.  The  good  internalized  breast,  which  is  felt  to  be  the

source of life, forms a vital part of the ego and its preservation becomes an

imperative  need.  The  introjection  of  this  first  loved  object  is  therefore

inextricably linked with all the processes engendered by the life instinct. The

good internalized breast and the bad devouring breast form the core of the

super-ego in its good and bad aspects; they are the representatives within the

ego of the struggle between the life and death instincts.

The second important part-object to be introjected is the penis of the father

to which also both good and bad qualities are attributed. These two dangerous

objects—the bad breast and the bad penis—are the prototypes of internal and

external  persecutors.  Experiences  of  a  painful  nature,  frustrations  from

internal  and  external  sources,  which  are  felt  as  persecution,  are  primarily

attributed  to  the  external  and  internal  persecuting  objects.  In  all  such

experiences,  persecutory  anxiety  and  aggression  reinforce  each  other.  For

while the infant’s aggressive impulse through projection play a fundamental

part in his building up of persecutory figures, these very figures increase his

persecutory  anxiety  and  in  turn  reinforce  his  aggressive  impulses  and

phantasies against the external and internal objects felt to be dangerous.

  Paranoid disturbances in adults are, in my view, based on the persecutory

anxiety experienced in the first few months of life. In the paranoid patient the

essence of his fears of persecution is the feeling that there is a hostile agency

which  is  bent  on  inflicting  on  him  suffering,  damage  and  ultimately

annihilation. This persecutory agency may be represented by one or many

people or even by the forces of nature. There are innumerable and in every

case  specific  forms  which  the  dreaded  attack  may  take;  but  the  root  of

persecutory  fear  in  the  paranoid  individual  is,  I  believe,  the  fear  of

annihilation of the ego—ultimately by the death instinct.


                                            V 


I shall now discuss more specifically the relation between guilt and anxiety

and in this connection shall first reconsider some of Freud’s and Abraham’s

views regarding anxiety and guilt. Freud approached the problem of guilt

from two main angles. On the one hand he left no doubt that anxiety and guilt

are closely connected with each other. On the other hand he came to the

conclusion that the term ‘guilt’ is only applicable in regard to manifestations

of conscience which are the result of super-ego development. The super-ego,

as  we  know,  in  his  view  comes  into  being  as  a  sequel  to  the  Oedipus

complex. Therefore with children under about four to five years of age, the

terms ‘conscience’ and ‘guilt’ in his view do not yet apply and anxiety in the
                                                19
first few years of life is distinct from guilt.

  According  to  Abraham  (1924)  guilt  arises  in  the  overcoming  of

cannibalistic—i.e. aggressive—impulses during the earlier anal-sadistic stage

(that is, at a much earlier age than Freud assumed); but he did not consider a

differentiation  between  anxiety  and  guilt.  Ferenczi,  who  was  also  not

concerned  with  the  distinction  between  anxiety  and  guilt,  suggested  that

something in the nature of guilt arises during the anal stage. He concluded

that there may be a kind of physiological precursor of the super-ego which he
                            20
calls ‘sphincter-morality’.

  Ernest Jones (1929) dealt with the interaction between hate, fear and guilt.

He  distinguished  between  two  phases  in  the  development  of  guilt  and

suggested for the first stage the term ‘pre-nefarious’ stage of guilt. This he

connected with the sadistic pre-genital stages of super-ego development and

stated that guilt is ‘always and inevitably associated with the hate impulse’.

The second stage is ‘. . . the stage of guilt proper, the function of which is to

protect against the external dangers’.

In my paper ‘A Contribution to the Psychogenesis of Manic-Depressive

States’ I differentiated between two main forms of anxiety—persecutory and

depressive anxiety—but pointed out that the distinction between these two

forms of anxiety is not by any means clear-cut. With this limitation in mind I

think that a differentiation between the two forms of anxiety is valuable from

both the theoretical and the practical point of view. In the paper referred to

above I came to the conclusion that persecutory anxiety relates predominantly

to the annihilation of the ego; depressive anxiety is predominantly related to

the  harm  done  to  internal  and  external  loved  objects  by  the  subject’sdestructive impulses. Depressive anxiety has manifold contents, such as: the

good  object  is  injured,  it  is  suffering,  it  is  in  a  state  of  deterioration;  it

changes into a bad object; it is annihilated, lost and will never be there any

more. I also concluded that depressive anxiety is closely bound up with guilt

and with the tendency to make reparation.

  When I first introduced my concept of the depressive position in the paper

referred to above, I suggested that depressive anxiety and guilt arise with the

introjection  of  the  object  as  a  whole.  My  further  work  on  the  paranoid-
                  21
schizoid position, which precedes the depressive position, has led me to the

conclusion that though in the first stage destructive impulses and persecutory

anxiety predominate, depressive anxiety and guilt already play some part in

the infant’s earliest object-relation, i.e. in his relation to his mother’s breast.

  During the paranoid-schizoid position, that is, during the first three to four

months of life, splitting processes, involving the splitting of the first object

(the breast) as well as of the feelings towards it, are at their height. Hatred

and persecutory anxiety become attached to the frustrating (bad) breast, and

love and reassurance to the gratifying (good) breast. However, even at this

stage such splitting processes are never fully effective; for from the beginning

of life the ego tends towards integrating itself and towards synthesizing the

different  aspects  of  the  object.  (This  tendency  can  be  regarded  as  an

expression  of  the  life  instinct.)  There  appear  to  be  transitory  states  of

integration even in very young infants—becoming more frequent and lasting

as development goes on—in which the cleavage between the good and bad

breast is less marked.

In  such  states  of  integration,  a  measure  of  synthesis  between  love  and

hatred in relation to part-objects comes about, which according to my present

view gives rise to depressive anxiety, guilt and the desire to make reparation
                                                                    22
to the injured loved object—first of all to the good breast. That is to say that

I now link the onset of depressive anxiety with the relation to part-objects.

This modification is the result of further work on the earliest stages of the ego

and of a fuller recognition of the gradual nature of the infant’s emotional

development. There is no change in my view that the basis of depressive

anxiety is the synthesis between destructive impulses and feelings of love

towards one object.

Let us next consider how far this modification influences the concept of

the depressive position. I would now describe this position as follows: during

the period from three to six months considerable progress in the integrationof the ego comes about. Important changes take place in the nature of the

infant’s  object-relations  and  of  his  introjection-processes.  The  infant

perceives and introjects the mother increasingly as a complete person. This

implies a fuller identification and a more stable relation with her. Although

these processes are still primarily focused on the mother, the infant’s relation

to the father (and other people in his environment) undergoes similar changes

and the father too becomes established in his mind as a whole person. At the

same time, splitting processes diminish in strength and are predominantly

related  to  whole  objects,  while  in  the  earlier  stage  they  were  mainly

connected with part-objects.

The  contrasting  aspects  of  the  objects  and  the  conflicting  feelings,

impulses and phantasies towards it, come closer together in the infant’s mind.

Persecutory anxiety persists and plays its part in the depressive position, but

it  lessens  in  quantity  and  depressive  anxiety  gains  the  ascendancy  over

persecutory anxiety. Since it is a loved person (internalized and external)

who  is  felt  to  be  injured  by  aggressive  impulses,  the  infant  suffers  from

intensified depressive feelings, more lasting than the fleeting experiences of

depressive anxiety and guilt in the earlier stage. The more integrated ego is

now  increasingly  confronted  with  a  very  painful  psychic  reality—the

complaints and reproaches emanating from the internalized injured mother

and  father  who  are  now  complete  objects,  persons—and  feels  compelled

under the stress of greater suffering to deal with the painful psychic reality.

This  leads  to  an  over-riding  urge  to  preserve,  repair  or  revive  the  loved

objects:  the  tendency  to  make  reparation.  As  an  alternative  method,  very

likely a simultaneous one, of dealing with these anxieties, the ego resorts
                                  23
strongly to the manic defence.

The developments I have described imply not only important qualitative

and quantitative changes in feelings of love, depressive anxiety and guilt but

also a new combination of factors which constitute the depressive position.

It can be seen from the foregoing description that the modification of my

views regarding the earlier onset of depressive anxiety and guilt have not in

any essentials altered my concept of the depressive position.

At this point I wish to consider more specifically the processes by which

depressive anxiety, guilt and the urge to make reparation come about. The

basis of depressive anxiety is, as I described, the process by which the ego

synthesizes destructive impulses and feelings of love towards one object. The

feeling that the harm done to the loved object is caused by the subject’saggressive impulses I take to be the essence of guilt. (The infant’s feeling of

guilt may extend to every evil befalling the loved object—even the harm

done by his persecutory objects.) The urge to undo or repair this harm results

from the feeling that the subject has caused it, i.e. from guilt. The reparative

tendency can, therefore, be considered as a consequence of the sense of guilt.

The question now arises: is guilt an element in depressive anxiety? Are

they both aspects of the same process, or is one a result or a manifestation of

the other? While I cannot at present give a definite answer to this question, I

would suggest that depressive anxiety, guilt and the reparative urge are often

experienced simultaneously.

It seems probable that depressive anxiety, guilt and the reparative tendency

are only experienced when feelings of love for the object predominate over

destructive  impulses.  In  other  words,  we  may  assume  that  recurrent

experiences  of  love  surmounting  hatred—ultimately  of  the  life  instinct

surmounting  the  death  instinct—are  an  essential  condition  for  the  ego’s

capacity to integrate itself and to synthesize the contrasting aspects of the

object. In such states or moments the relation to the bad aspects of the object,

including persecutory anxiety, has receded.

  However, during the first three or four months of life, a stage at which

(according to my present views) depressive anxiety and guilt arise, splitting

processes and persecutory anxiety are at their height. Therefore persecutory

anxiety very quickly interferes with progress in integration, and experiences

of depressive anxiety, guilt and reparation can only be of a transitory nature.

As  a  result,  the  loved  injured  object  may  very  swiftly  change  into  a

persecutor, and the urge to repair or revive the loved object may turn into the

need to pacify and propitiate a persecutor. But even during the next stage, the

depressive  position,  in  which  the  more  integrated  ego  introjects  and

establishes  increasingly  the  whole  person,  persecutory  anxiety  persists.

During this period, as I described it, the infant experiences not only grief,

depression and guilt, but also persecutory anxiety relating to the bad aspect of

the super-ego; and defences against persecutory anxiety exist side by side

with defences against depressive anxiety.

I have repeatedly pointed out that the differentiation between depressive

and persecutory anxieties is based on a limiting concept. However, in psycho-

analytic  practice  it  has  been  found  by  a  number  of  workers  that  the

differentiation between persecutory and depressive anxiety is helpful in the

understanding and unravelling of emotional situations. To give one instanceof  a  typical  picture  which  may  confront  us  in  the  analysis  of  depressive

patients: during a particular session a patient may suffer from strong feelings

of guilt and despair about his incapacity to restore the damage which he feels

he has caused. Then a complete change occurs: the patient suddenly brings up

material of a persecutory kind. The analyst and analysis are accused of doing

nothing but harm, grievances which lead back to early frustrations are voiced.

The processes which underlie this change can be summarized as follows:

persecutory anxiety has become dominant, the feeling of guilt has receded,

and with it the love for the object seems to have disappeared. In this altered

emotional situation, the object has turned bad, cannot be loved, and therefore

destructive impulses towards it seem justified. This means that persecutory

anxiety  and  defences have  been  reinforced  in  order  to  escape  from  the

overwhelming  burden  of  guilt  and  despair.  In  many  cases,  of  course,  the

patient may show a good deal of persecutory anxiety together with guilt, and

the change to a predominance of persecutory anxiety does not always appear

as  dramatically  as  I  have  here  described  it.  But  in  every  such  case  the

differentiation  between  persecutory  and  depressive  anxiety  helps  our

understanding of the processes we are trying to analyse.

The conceptual distinction between depressive anxiety, guilt and reparation

on the one hand, and persecutory anxiety and the defences against it on the

other,  not  only  proves  helpful  in  analytic  work  but  also  has  wider

implications. It throws light on many problems connected with the study of
                                    24
human emotions and behaviour. One particular field in which I have found

this concept illuminating is the observation and understanding of children.

I  will  here  briefly  summarize  the  theoretical  conclusion  regarding  the

relation between anxiety and guilt which I have put forward in this section.

Guilt is inextricably bound up with anxiety (more exactly, with a specific

form of it, depressive anxiety); it leads to the reparative tendency and arises

during the first few months of life, in connection with the earliest stages of

the super-ego.


                                            VI

 


The  interrelation  between  the  primary  internal  danger  and  the  danger

threatening from without throws light on the problem of ‘objective’ versus

‘neurotic’ anxiety. Freud defined the distinction between objective anxiety

and neurotic anxiety as follows: ‘Real danger is a danger that is known, andrealistic  anxiety  is  anxiety  about  a  known  danger  of  this  sort.  Neurotic

anxiety is anxiety about an unknown danger. Neurotic danger is thus a danger

that has still to be discovered. Analysis has shown that it is an instinctual
        25
danger.’ And, again: ‘A real danger is a danger which threatens a person

from an external object, and a neurotic danger is one which threatens him
                                26
from an instinctual demand.’

In some connections, however, Freud referred to an interaction between
                                  27
these two sources of anxiety, and general analytic experience has shown

that the distinction between objective and neurotic anxiety cannot be sharply

drawn.

I shall here return to Freud’s statement that anxiety is caused by the child
                                                          28
‘missing someone who is loved and longed for’. In describing the infant’s

fundamental fear of loss, Freud said: ‘It cannot as yet distinguish between

temporary absence and permanent loss. As soon as it misses its mother it

behaves as if it were never going to see her again; and repeated consoling

experiences  to  the  contrary  are  necessary  before  it  learns  that  her
                                                                  29
disappearance is usually followed by her re-appearance.’ (My italics.)

In another passage describing the fear of loss of love he said that it is

‘evidently a later prolongation of the infant’s anxiety if it finds its mother

absent. You will realize how real a situation of danger is indicated by this

anxiety. If a mother is absent or has withdrawn her love from her child, it is

no longer sure of the satisfaction of its needs and is perhaps exposed to the
                                        30
most distressing feelings of tension. (My italics).

  However,  a  few  pages  earlier  in  the  same  book,  Freud  described  this

particular danger-situation from the point of view of neurotic anxiety, which

seems to show that he approached this infantile-situation from both angles. In

my view these two main sources of the infant’s fear of loss can be described

as follows: one is the child’s complete dependence on the mother for the

satisfaction of his needs and the relief of tension. The anxiety arising from

this  source  could  be  called  objective  anxiety.  The  other  main  source  of

anxiety derives from the infant’s apprehension that the loved mother has been

destroyed by his sadistic impulses or is in danger of being destroyed, and this

fear—which could be called ‘neurotic anxiety’—relates to the mother as an

indispensable  external  (and  internal)  good  object  and  contributes  to  the

infant’s  feeling  that  she  will  never  return.  There  is  from  the  beginning  a

constant  interaction  between  these  two  sources  of  anxiety,  that  is  to  say,

between  objective  and  neurotic  anxiety  or  in  other  words,  anxiety  fromexternal and internal sources.

  Furthermore, if external danger is from the beginning linked with internal

danger  from  the  death  instinct,  no  danger-situation  arising  from  external

sources could ever be experienced by the young child as a purely external and

known danger. But it is not only the infant who cannot make such a clear

differentiation: to some extent the interaction between external and internal
                                                31
danger-situations persists throughout life.

This was clearly shown in the analysis carried out in war-time. It appeared

that even with normal adults anxiety stirred up by air-raids, bombs, fire, etc.

—i.e.  by  an  ‘objective’  danger-situation—could  only  be  reduced  by

analysing, over and above the impact of the actual situation, the various early

anxieties which were aroused by it. In many people excessive anxiety from

these  sources  led  to  a  powerful  denial  (manic  defence)  of  the  objective

danger-situation, which showed itself in an apparent lack of fear. This was a

common observation with children and could not be explained only by their

incomplete  realization  of  the  actual  danger.  Analysis  revealed  that  the

objective danger-situation had revived the child’s early phantastic anxieties to

such an extent that the objective danger-situation had to be denied. In other

cases the relative stability of children in spite of war-time dangers was not

determined so much by manic defences as by a more successful modification

of early persecutory and depressive anxieties, resulting in a greater feeling of

security  regarding  both  the  inner  and  the  external  world,  and  in  a  good

relationship with their parents. With such children, even when the father was

absent, the reassurance gained from the presence of the mother, and from

home life, counteracted the fears stirred up by objective dangers.

  These observations become understandable if we remember that the young

child’s  perception  of  external  reality  and  external  objects  is  perpetually

influenced and coloured by his phantasies, and that this in some measure

continues throughout life. External experiences which rouse anxiety at once

activate even in normal persons anxiety derived from intrapsychic sources.

The  interaction  between  objective  anxiety  and  neurotic  anxiety—or,  to

express  it  in  other  words,  the  interaction  between  anxiety  arising  from

external and from internal sources—corresponds to the interaction between

external reality and psychic reality.

In estimating whether anxiety is neurotic or not, we have to consider a

point to which Freud repeatedly referred, the quantity of anxiety from inner

sources. This factor is however linked with the ego’s capacity of evolvingadequate  defences  against  anxiety, i.e.  the  proportion  of  the  strength  of

anxiety to the strength of the ego.


                                          VII

 


It was implicit in this presentation of my views that they developed from

an approach to aggression which differed substantially from the main trend in

psycho-analytic thought. The fact that Freud discovered aggression first as an

element in the child’s sexuality—as it were as an adjunct to libido (sadism)—

had the effect that for a long time psycho-analytical interest centred on the

libido and that aggression was more or less considered as an auxiliary to
      32
libido. In 1920 came Freud’s discovery of the death instinct manifesting

itself in destructive impulses and operating in fusion with the life instinct, and

in 1924 followed Abraham’s deeper exploration of sadism in the young child.

But even after these discoveries, as can be seen from the bulk of psycho-

analytical literature, psycho-analytical thought has remained predominantly

concerned with the libido and with the defences against libidinal impulses

and  has  correspondingly  underrated  the  importance  of  aggression  and  its

implications.

  From the beginning of my psycho-analytic work, my interest was focused

on anxiety and its causation, and this brought me nearer to the understanding
                                                          33
of  the  relation  between  aggression  and  anxiety.  The  analyses  of  young

children,  for  which  I  evolved  Play  Technique,  supported  this  angle  of

approach,  for  they  revealed  that  anxiety  in  young  children  could  only  be

alleviated by analysing their sadistic phantasies and impulses with a greater

appreciation of the share aggression has in sadism and in the causation of

anxiety.  This  fuller  evaluation  of  the  importance  of  aggression  led  me  to

certain  theoretical  conclusions  which  I  presented  in  my  paper  ‘The  Early

Stages of the Oedipus Conflict’ (1927). There I put forward the hypothesis

that—both in the normal and pathological development of the child—anxiety

and  guilt  arising  during  the  first  year  of  life  are  closely  connected  with

processes of introjection and projection, with the first stages of the super-ego

development  and  of  the  Oedipus  complex;  and  that  in  these  anxieties

aggression and the defences against it are of paramount importance.

  Further  work  on  these  lines  was  carried  out  in  the  British  Psycho-

Analytical Society from about 1927 onwards. In this Society, a number ofpsycho-analysts,  working  in  close  co-operation,  made  numerous
              34
contributions  to  the  understanding  of  the  cardinal  rôle  of  aggression  in

mental life; while, taking psycho-analytic thought in general, a change of

view in this direction has appeared only in sporadic contributions during the

last ten to fifteen years; these have, however, increased of late.

One of the results of the new work on aggression was the recognition of

the major function of the reparative tendency, which is an expression of the

life  instinct  in  its  struggle  against  the  death  instinct.  Not  only  were  the

destructive impulses thereby seen in better perspective, but a fuller light was

thrown on the interaction of the life and death instincts, and therefore also on

the rôle of the libido in all mental and emotional processes.

  Throughout  this  paper  I  have  made  clear  my  contention  that  the  death

instinct  (destructive  impulses)  is  the  primary  factor  in  the  causation  of

anxiety. It was, however, also implied, in my exposition of the processes

leading  to  anxiety  and  guilt,  that  the  primary  object  against  which  the

destructive impulses are directed is the object of the libido, and that it is

therefore  the interaction  between  aggression  and  libido—ultimately  the

fusion as well as the polarity of the two instincts—which causes anxiety and

guilt.  Another  aspect  of  this  interaction  is  the  mitigation  of  destructive

impulses  by  libido.  An  optimum  in  the  interaction  between  libido  and

aggression implies that the anxiety arising from the perpetual activity of the

death instinct, though never eliminated, is counteracted and kept at bay by the

power of the life instinct.                                            3

 

ON THE CRITERIA FOR THE TERMINATION OF A PSYCHO-

                                      ANALYSIS

 

                                        (1950)

 


THE criteria for the ending of an analysis are an important problem in every

psycho-analyst’s mind. There are a number of criteria on which all of us

would agree. Here I shall suggest a different approach to this problem.

It has often been observed that the termination of an analysis reactivates in

the patient earlier situations of parting, and is in the nature of a weaning

experience. This implies, as my work has shown me, that the emotions felt by

the baby at weaning time, when early infantile conflicts come to a head, are

strongly revived towards the end of an analysis. Accordingly, I arrived at the

conclusion that before terminating an analysis I have to ask myself whether

the conflicts and anxieties experienced during the first year of life have been

sufficiently analysed and worked through in the course of the treatment.

My work on early development (Klein, 1935, 1940, 1946, 1948) has led

me to distinguish between two forms of anxiety: persecutory anxiety, which

is  predominant  during  the  first  few  months  of  life  and  gives  rise  to  the

‘paranoid-schizoid position’, and depressive anxiety, which comes to a head

at about the middle of the first year and gives rise to the depressive position’.

I arrived at the further conclusion that at the beginning of his postnatal life

the infant is experiencing persecutory anxiety both from external and internal

sources:  external,  in  so  far  as  the  experience  of  birth  is  felt  as  an  attack

inflicted on him; and internal, because the threat to the organism, which,

according to Freud, arises from the death instinct, in my view stirs up the fear

of annihilation—the fear of death. It is this fear which I take to be the primary

cause of anxiety.

  Persecutory  anxiety  relates  mainly  to  dangers  felt  to  threaten  the  ego;

depressive  anxiety  relates  to  dangers  felt  to  threaten  the  loved  object,

primarily through the subject’s aggression. Depressive anxiety arises through

synthetic processes in the ego; for as a result of growing integration, love and

hatred and, accordingly, the good and bad aspects of the objects, came closer

together in the infant’s mind. Some measure of integration is also one of thepreconditions  for  the  introjection  of  the  mother  as  a  complete  person.

Depressive feelings and anxiety come to a climax—the depressive position—

at  about  the  middle  of  the  first  year.  By  then  persecutory  anxiety  has

diminished, although still playing an important part.

  Interlinked with depressive anxiety is the sense of guilt relating to harm

done by cannibalistic and sadistic desires. Guilt gives rise to the urge to make

reparation to the harmed loved object, to preserve or revive it—an urge which

deepens feelings of love and promotes object relations.

At weaning time the infant feels that he has lost the first loved object—the

mother’s breast—both as an external and as an introjected object, and that his

loss is due to his hatred, aggression and greed. Weaning thus accentuates his

depressive  feelings  and  amounts  to  a  state  of  mourning.  The  suffering

inherent in the depressive position is bound up with an increasing insight into

psychic  reality  which  in  turn  contributes  to  a  better  understanding  of  the

external  world.  By  means  of  the  growing  adaptation  to  reality  and  the

expanding range of object relations, the infant becomes able to combat and

diminish depressive anxieties and in some measure to establish securely his

good internalized objects, that is to say the helpful and protective aspect of

the super-ego.

  Freud has described the testing of reality as an essential part of the work of

mourning. In my view, it is in early infancy that the testing of reality is first

applied in attempts to overcome the grief inherent in the depressive position;

and whenever in later life mourning is experienced, these early processes are

revived. I have found that in adults the success of the work of mourning

depends not only on establishing within the ego the person who is mourned

(as we learned from Freud and Abraham), but also on re-establishing the first

loved objects, which in early infancy were felt to be endangered or destroyed

by destructive impulses.

  Although the fundamental steps in counteracting the depressive position

are made during the first year of life, persecutory and depressive feelings

recur throughout childhood. These anxieties are worked through and largely

overcome in the course of the infantile neurosis, and normally by the onset of

the latency period adequate defences have developed and some measure of

stabilization  has  come  about.  This  implies  that  genital  primacy  and

satisfactory  object  relations  have  been  achieved  and  that  the  Oedipus

complex has been reduced in power.

I shall now draw a conclusion from the definition already given, namelythat  persecutory  anxiety  relates  to  dangers  felt  to  threaten  the  ego  and

depressive  anxiety  to  dangers  felt  to  threaten  the  loved  object.  I  wish  to

suggest that these two forms of anxiety comprise all anxiety situations the

child goes through. Thus, the fear of being devoured, of being poisoned, of

being castrated, the fear of attacks on the ‘inside’ of the body, come under the

heading of persecutory anxiety, whereas all anxieties relating to loved objects

are  depressive  in  nature.  However,  persecutory  and  depressive  anxieties,

although conceptually distinct from one another, are clinically often mixed.

For instance, I have defined castration fear, the leading anxiety in the male, as

persecutory. This fear is mixed with depressive anxiety in so far as it gives

rise to the feeling that he cannot fertilize a woman, at bottom that he cannot

fertilize the loved mother and is therefore unable to make reparation for the

harm done to her by his sadistic impulses. I need hardly remind you that

impotence often leads to severe depression in men. To take now the leading

anxiety in women. The girl’s fear lest the dreaded mother will attack her body

and  the  babies  it  contains,  which  is  in  my  view  the  fundamental  female

anxiety situation, is by definition persecutory. Yet, as this fear implies the

destruction of her loved objects—the babies she feels to be inside her—it

contains a strong element of depressive anxiety.

In keeping with my thesis, it is a precondition for normal development that

persecutory and depressive anxieties should have been largely reduced and

modified. Therefore, as I hope has become clear in the foregoing exposition,

my approach to the problem of terminating both child and adult analyses can

be  defined  as  follows:  persecutory  and  depressive  anxiety  should  be

sufficiently reduced, and thus—in my view—presupposes the analysis of the

first experiences of mourning.

In passing I should say that even if the analysis goes back to the earliest

stages of development, which is the basis for my new criterion, the results

will still vary according to the severity and structure of the case. In other

words, notwithstanding progress made in our theory and technique, we have

to keep in mind the limitations of psycho-analytic therapy.

The question arises how far the approach I am suggesting is related to

some  of  the  well-known  criteria,  such  as  an  established  potency  and

heterosexuality,  capacity  for  love,  object  relations  and  work,  and  certain

characteristics of the ego which make for mental stability and are bound up

with adequate defences. All these aspects of development are inter-related

with the modification of persecutory and depressive anxiety. Concerning thecapacity for love and object relations, it can easily be seen that these develop

freely only if persecutory and depressive anxiety are not excessive. The issue

is more complex as regards the development of the ego. Two features are

usually emphasized in this connection, growth in stability and in the sense of

reality, but I hold that expansion in the depth of the ego is essential as well.

An intrinsic element of a deep and full personality is wealth of phantasy life

and the capacity for experiencing emotions freely. These characteristics, I

think,  presuppose  that  the  infantile  depressive  position  has  been  worked

through, that is to say, that the whole gamut of love and hatred, anxiety, grief

and guilt in relation to the primary objects has been experienced again and

again. This emotional development is bound up with the nature of defences.

Failure in working through the depressive position is inextricably linked with

a  predominance  of  defences  which  entail  a  stifling  of  emotions  and  of

phantasy  life,  and  hinder  insight.  Such  defences,  which  I  termed  ‘manic

defences’, although not incompatible with a measure of stability and strength

of the ego, go with shallowness. If during analysis we succeed in reducing

persecutory and depressive anxieties and, accordingly, in diminishing manic

defences, one of the results will be an increase in strength as well as in depth

of the ego.

  Even  if  satisfactory  results  have  been  achieved,  the  termination  of  an

analysis is bound to stir up painful feelings and revive early anxieties; it

amounts to a state of mourning. When the loss represented by the end of the

analysis has occurred, the patient still has to carry out by himself part of the

work  of  mourning.  This,  I  think,  explains  the  fact  that  often  after  the

termination of an analysis further progress is achieved; how far this is likely

to happen can be foreseen more easily if we apply the criterion suggested by

me.  For  only  if  persecutory  and  depressive  anxieties  have  been  largely

modified, can the patient carry out by himself the final part of the work of

mourning,  which  again  implies  a  testing  of  reality.  Moreover,  when  we

decide that an analysis can be brought to an end, I think it is very helpful to

let the patient know the date of the termination several months ahead. This

helps  him  to  work  through  and  diminish  the  unavoidable  pain  of  parting

while he is still in analysis and prepares the way for him to finish the work of

mourning successfully on his own.

I  have  made  it  clear  throughout  this  paper  that  the  criterion  I  suggest

presupposes that the analysis has been carried back to the early stages of

development and to deep layers of the mind and has included the workingthrough of persecutory and depressive anxieties.

This leads me to a conclusion regarding technique. During an analysis the

psycho-analyst often appears as an idealized figure. Idealization is used as a

defence against persecutory anxiety and is its corollary. If the analyst allows

excessive idealization to persist—that is to say, if he relies mostly on the

positive  transference—he  may,  it  is  true,  be  able  to  bring  about  some

improvement. The same however, could be said of any successful psycho-

therapy.  It  is  only by  analysing  the  negative  as  well  as  the  positive

transference that anxiety is reduced at the root. In the course of the treatment,

the psycho-analyst comes to represent in the transference situation a variety

of  figures  corresponding  to  those  which  were  introjected  in  early

development  (Klein,  1929;  Strachey,  1934).  He  is,  therefore,  at  times

introjected as a persecutor, at other times as an ideal figure, with all shades

and degrees in between.

As  persecutory  and  depressive  anxieties  are  experienced  and  ultimately

reduced during the analysis, a greater synthesis between the various aspects

of  the  analyst  comes  about  together  with  a  greater  synthesis  between  the

various  aspects  of  the  super-ego.  In  other  words,  the  earliest  frightening

figures undergo an essential alteration in the patient’s mind—one might say

that they basically improve. Good objects—as distinct from idealized ones—

can  be  securely  established  in  the  mind  only  if  the  strong  split  between

persecutory  and  ideal  figures  has  diminished,  if  aggressive  and  libidinal

impulses have come closer together and hatred has become mitigated by love.

Such  advance  in  the  capacity  to  synthesize  is  proof  that  the  splitting

processes, which, in my view, originate in earliest infancy, have diminished

and that integration of the ego in depth has come about. When these positive

features  are  sufficiently  established  we  are  justified  in  thinking  that  the

termination of an analysis is not premature, although it may revive even acute

anxiety.                                            4

 

                  THE ORIGINS OF TRANSFERENCE

 

                                        (1952)

 


IN his ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ Freud (1905) defines

the transference situation in the following way:

‘What  are  transferences?  They  are  new  editions  or  facsimiles  of  the

impulses and phantasies which are aroused and made conscious during the

progress of the analysis; but they have this peculiarity, which is characteristic

for their species, that they replace some earlier person by the person of the

physician. To put it another way: a whole series of psychological experiences

are revived, not as belonging to the past, but as applying to the physician at

the present moment.’

In some form or other transference operates throughout life and influences

all human relations, but here I am only concerned with the manifestations of

transference  in  psycho-analysis.  It  is  characteristic  of  psycho-analytic

procedure that, as it begins to open up roads into the patient’s unconscious,

his past (in its conscious and unconscious aspects) is gradually being revived.

Thereby  his  urge  to  transfer  his  early  experiences,  object-relations  and

emotions, is reinforced and they come to focus on the psycho-analyst; this

implies that the patient deals with the conflicts and anxieties which have been

reactivated, by making use of the same mechanisms and defences as in earlier

situations.

It follows that the deeper we are able to penetrate into the unconscious and

the  further  back  we  can  take  the  analysis,  the  greater  will  be  our

understanding  of  the  transference.  Therefore  a  brief  summary  of  my

conclusions about the earliest stages of development is relevant to my topic.

The first form of anxiety is of a persecutory nature. The working of the

death  instinct  within—which  according  to  Freud  is  directed  against  the

organism—gives rise to the fear of annihilation, and this is the primordial

cause of persecutory anxiety. Furthermore, from the beginning of post-natal

life (I am not concerned here with prenatal processes) destructive impulses

against the object stir up fear of retaliation. These persecutory feelings from

inner sources are intensified by painful external experiences for, from theearliest  days  onwards  frustration  and  discomfort  arouse  in  the  infant  the

feeling that he is being attacked by hostile forces. Therefore the sensations

experienced by the infant at birth and the difficulties of adapting himself to

entirely new conditions give rise to persecutory anxiety. The comfort and

care given after birth, particularly the first feeding experiences, are felt to

come from good forces. In speaking of ‘forces’ I am using a rather adult word

for what the young infant dimly conceives of as objects, either good or bad.

The infant directs his feelings of gratification and love towards the ‘good’

breast, and his destructive impulses and feelings of persecution towards what

he feels to be frustrating, i.e. the ‘bad’ breast. At this stage splitting processes

are at their height and love and hatred as well as the good and bad aspects of

the  breast  are  largely  kept  apart  from  one  another.  The  infant’s  relative

security is based on turning the good object into an ideal one as a protection

against the dangerous and persecuting object. These processes—that is to say

splitting, denial, omnipotence and idealization—are prevalent during the first

three or four months of life (which I termed the ‘paranoid-schizoid position’

(1946)).  In  these  ways  at  a  very  early  stage  persecutory  anxiety  and  its

corollary, idealization, fundamentally influence object relations.

The  primal  processes  of  projection  and  introjection,  being  inextricably

linked with the infant’s emotions and anxieties, initiate object-relations: by

projecting, i.e. deflecting libido and aggression on to the mother’s breast, the

basis for object-relations is established: by introjecting the object, first of all

the breast, relations to internal objects come into being. My use of the term

‘object-relations’  is  based  on  my  contention  that  the  infant  has  from  the

beginning  of  post-natal  life  a  relation  to  the  mother  (although  focusing

primarily on her breast) which is imbued with the fundamental elements of an
                                                                                1
object-relation, i.e. love, hatred, phantasies, anxieties, and defences.

In  my  view—as  I  have  explained  in  detail  on  other  occasions—the

introjection  of  the  breast  is  the  beginning  of  super-ego  formation  which

extends over years. We have grounds for assuming that from the first feeding

experience onwards the infant introjects the breast in its various aspects. The

core of the super-ego is thus the mother’s breast, both good and bad. Owing

to  the  simultaneous  operation  of  introjection  and  projection,  relations  to

external and internal objects interact. The father too, who soon plays a rôle in

the child’s life, early on becomes part of the infant’s internal world. It is

characteristic of the infant’s emotional life that there are rapid fluctuations

between  love  and  hate;  between  external  and  internal  situations;  betweenperception of reality and the phantasies relating to it; and, accordingly, an

interplay  between  persecutory  anxiety  and  idealization—both  referring  to

internal and external objects; the idealized object being a corollary of the

persecutory, extremely bad one.

The ego’s growing capacity for integration and synthesis leads more and

more, even during these first few months, to states in which love and hatred,

and  correspondingly  the  good  and  bad  aspects  of  objects,  are  being

synthesized; and this gives rise to the second form of anxiety—depressive

anxiety—for the infant’s aggressive impulses and desires towards the bad

breast (mother) are now felt to be a danger to the good breast (mother) as

well. In the second quarter of the first year these emotions are reinforced,

because  at  this  stage  the  infant  increasingly  perceives  and  introjects  the

mother as a person. Depressive anxiety is intensified, for the infant feels he

has destroyed or is destroying a whole object by his greed and uncontrollable

aggression. Moreover, owing to the growing synthesis of his emotions, he

now feels that these destructive impulses are directed against a loved person.

Similar processes operate in relation to the father and other members of the

family.  These  anxieties  and  corresponding  defences  constitute  the

‘depressive-position’, which comes to a head about the middle of the first

year and whose essence is the anxiety and guilt relating to the destruction and

loss of the loved internal and external objects.

It  is  at  this  stage,  and  bound  up  with  the  depressive  position,  that  the

Oedipus complex sets in. Anxiety and guilt add a powerful impetus towards

the beginning of the Oedipus complex. For anxiety and guilt increase the

need to externalize (project) bad figures and to internalize (introject) good

ones; to attach desires, love, feelings of guilt, and reparative tendencies to

some  objects,  and  hate  and  anxiety  to  others;  to  find  representatives  for

internal figures in the external world. It is, however, not only the search for

new objects which dominates the infant’s needs, but also the drive towards

the new aims: away from the breast towards the penis, i.e. from oral desires

towards  genital  ones.  Many  factors  contribute  to  these  developments:  the

forward drive of the libido, the growing integration of the ego, physical and

mental skills and progressive adaptation to the external world. These trends

are bound up with the process of symbol formation, which enables the infant

to transfer not only interest, but also emotions and phantasies, anxiety and

guilt, from one object to another.

The  processes  I  have  described  are  linked  with  another  fundamentalphenomenon governing mental life. I believe that the pressure exerted by the

earliest  anxiety  situations  is  one  of  the  factors  which  brings  about  the

repetition compulsion. I shall return to this hypothesis at a later point.

  Some  of  my  conclusions  about  the  earliest  stages  of  infancy  are  a

continuation of Freud’s discoveries; on certain points, however, divergencies

have arisen, one of which is very relevant to my present topic. I am referring

to my contention that object-relations are operative from the beginning of

post-natal life.

For many years I have held the view that auto-erotism and narcissism are

in  the  young  infant  contemporaneous  with  the  first  relation  to  objects—

external and internalized. I shall briefly restate my hypothesis: auto-erotism

and narcissism include the love for and relation with the internalized good

object which in phantasy forms part of the loved body and self. It is to this

internalized object that in auto-erotic gratification and narcissistic states a

withdrawal  takes  place.  Concurrently,  from  birth  onwards,  a  relation  to

objects,  primarily  the  mother  (her  breast)  is  present.  This  hypothesis

contradicts  Freud’s  concept  of  auto-erotic  and  narcissistic stages  which

preclude an object-relation. However, the difference between Freud’s view

and my own is less wide than appears at first sight, since Freud’s statements

on  this  issue  are  not  unequivocal.  In  various  contexts  he  explicitly  and

implicitly expressed opinions which suggested a relation to an object, the

mother’s breast, preceding auto-erotism and narcissism. One reference must

suffice; in the first of two Encyclopaedia articles, Freud (1922) said;

‘In  the  first  instance  the  oral  component  instinct  finds  satisfaction  by

attaching itself to the sating of the desire for nourishment; and its object is the

mother’s breast. It then detaches itself, becomes independent and at the same

time auto-erotic, that is, it finds an object in the child’s own body’ (p. 245).

  Freud’s use of the term object is here somewhat different from my use of

this term, for he is referring to the object of an instinctual aim, while I mean

in  addition  to  this,  an  object-relation  involving  the  infant’s  emotions,

phantasies, anxieties, and defences. Nevertheless, in the sentence referred to,

Freud  clearly  speaks  of  a  libidinal  attachment  to  an  object,  the  mother’s

breast, which precedes auto-erotism and narcissism.

In this context I wish to remind you also of Freud’s findings about early
                                                  2
identifications.  In The  Ego  and  the  Id,  speaking  of  abandoned  object

cathexes,  he  said;  ‘  .  .  .  the  effects  of  the  first  identification  in  earliest

childhood will be general and lasting. This leads us back to the origin of theego-ideal; . . .’ Freud then defines the first and most important identifications

which lie hidden behind the ego-ideal as the identification with the father, or

with the parents, and places them, as he expresses it, in the ‘pre-history of

every person’. These formulations come close to what I described as the first

introjected  objects,  for  by  definition  identifications  are  the  result  of

introjection. From the statement I have just discussed and the passage quoted

from the Encyclopaedia article it can be deduced that Freud, although he did

not pursue this line of thought further, did assume that in earliest infancy both

an object and introjective processes play a part.

That is to say, as regards auto-erotism and narcissism we meet with an

inconsistency  in  Freud’s  views.  Such  inconsistencies  which  exist  on  a

number of points of theory clearly show, I think, that on these particular

issues Freud had not yet arrived at a final decision. In respect of the theory of

anxiety he stated this explicitly in Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety (1926,

Chapter 8). His realization that much about the early stages of development

was still unknown or obscure to him is also exemplified by his speaking of

the first years of the girl’s life as ‘. . . (Freud, 1931) grey with age and

shadowy . . .’.

I do not know Anna Freud’s view about this aspect of Freud’s work. But,

as regards the question of auto-erotism and narcissism, she seems only to

have  taken  into  account  Freud’s  conclusion  that  an  auto-erotic  and  a

narcissistic stage precede object-relations, and not to have allowed for the

other possibilities implied in some of Freud’s statements such as the ones I

referred to above. This is one of the reasons why the divergence between

Anna Freud’s conception and my conception of early infancy is far greater

than  that  between  Freud’s  views,  taken  as  a  whole,  and  my  views.  I  am

stating this because I believe it is essential to clarify the extent and nature of

the  differences  between  the  two  schools  of  psycho-analytic  thought

represented by Anna Freud and myself. Such clarification is required in the

interests of psycho-analytic training and also because it could help to open up

fruitful  discussions  between  psycho-analysts  and  thereby  contribute  to  a

greater general understanding of the fundamental problems of early infancy.

The hypothesis that a stage extending over several months precedes object-

relations implies that—except for the libido attached to the infant’s own body

—impulses, phantasies anxieties, and defences either are not present in him,

or are not related to an object, that is to say, they would operate in vacuo. The

analysis of very young children has taught me that there is no instinctualurge, no anxiety situation, no mental process which does not involve objects,

external  or  internal;  in  other  words,  object-relations  are  at  the centre  of

emotional  life.  Furthermore,  love  and  hatred,  phantasies,  anxieties,  and

defences are also operative from the beginning and are ab initio indivisibly

linked with object-relations. This insight showed me many phenomena in a

new light.

I shall now draw the conclusion on which the present paper rests: I hold

that transference originates in the same processes which in the earliest stages

determine object-relations. Therefore we have to go back again and again in

analysis to the fluctuations between objects, loved and hated, external and

internal,  which  dominate  early  infancy.  We  can  fully  appreciate  the

interconnection  between  positive  and  negative  transferences  only  if  we

explore the early interplay between love and hate, and the vicious circle of

aggression, anxieties, feelings of guilt and increased aggression, as well as

the various aspects of objects towards whom these conflicting emotions and

anxieties  are  directed.  On  the  other  hand,  through  exploring  these  early

processes I became convinced that the analysis of the negative transference,
                                                  3
which had received relatively little attention in psycho-analytic technique, is

a precondition for analysing the deeper layers of the mind. The analysis of

the  negative  as  well  as  of  the  positive  transference  and  of  their

interconnection is, as I have held for many years, an indispensable principle

for the treatment of all types of patients, children and adults alike. I have

substantiated this view in most of my writings from 1927 onwards.

This approach, which in the past made possible the psychoanalysis of very

young children, has in recent years proved extremely fruitful for the analysis

of schizophrenic patients. Until about 1920 it was assumed that schizophrenic

patients were incapable of forming a transference and therefore could not be

psycho-analysed. Since then the psycho-analysis of schizophrenics has been

attempted by various techniques. The most radical change of view in this

respect, however, has occurred more recently and is closely connected with

the greater knowledge of the mechanisms, anxieties, and defences operative

in earliest infancy. Since some of these defences, evolved in primal object-

relations against both love and hatred, have been discovered, the fact that

schizophrenic  patients  are  capable  of  developing  both  a  positive  and  a

negative transference has been fully understood; this finding is confirmed if
                                                                          4
we consistently apply in the treatment of schizophrenic patients the principle

that it is as necessary to analyse the negative as the positive transference—that in fact the one cannot be analysed without the other.

  Retrospectively  it  can  be  seen  that  these  considerable  advances  in

technique are supported in psycho-analytic theory by Freud’s discovery of

the  life  and  death  instincts,  which  has  fundamentally  added  to  the

understanding  of  the  origin  of  ambivalence.  Because  the  life  and  death

instincts  and  therefore  love  and  hatred,  are  at  bottom  in  the  closest

interaction, negative and positive transference are basically inter-linked.

The understanding of earliest object-relations and the processes they imply

has essentially influenced technique from various angles. It has long been

known that the psycho-analyst in the transference situation may stand for

mother, father, or other people, that he is also at times playing in the patient’s

mind the part of the super-ego, at other times that of the id or the ego. Our

present  knowledge  enables  us  to  penetrate  to  the  specific  details  of  the

various rôles allotted by the patient to the analyst. There are in fact very few

people  in  the  young  infant’s  life,  but  he  feels  them  to  be  a  multitude  of

objects  because  they  appear  to  him  in  different  aspects.  Accordingly,  the

analyst may at a given moment represent a part of the self, of the super-ego

or any one of a wide range of internalized figures. Similarly it does not carry

us far enough if we realize that the analyst stands for the actual father or

mother, unless we understand which aspect of the parents has been revived.

The  picture  of  the  parents  in  the  patient’s  mind  has  in  varying  degrees

undergone  distortion  through  the  infantile  processes  of  projection  and

idealization, and has often retained much of its phantastic nature. Altogether,

in the young infant’s mind every external experience is interwoven with his

phantasies and on the other hand every phantasy contains elements of actual

experience, and it is only by analysing the transference situation to its depth

that  we  are  able  to  discover  the  past  both  in  its  realistic  and  phantastic

aspects. It is also the origin of these fluctuations in earliest infancy which

accounts for their strength in the transference, and for the swift changes—

sometimes even within one session—between father and mother, between

omnipotently kind objects and dangerous persecutors, between internal and

external figures. Sometimes the analyst appears simultaneously to represent

both  parents—in  that  case  often  in  a  hostile  alliance  against  the  patient,

whereby the negative transference acquires great intensity. What has then

been revived or has become manifest in the transference is the mixture in the

patient’s phantasy of the parents as one figure, the ‘combined parent figure’
                                  5
as  I  described  it  elsewhere.  This  is  one  of  the  phantasy  formationscharacteristic of the earliest stages of the Oedipus complex and which, if

maintained  in  strength  is  detrimental  both  to  object-relations  and  sexual

development. The phantasy of the combined parents draws its force from

another  element  of  early  emotional  life—i.e.  from  the  powerful  envy

associated with frustrated oral desires. Through the analysis of such early

situations  we  learn  that  in  the  baby’s  mind  when  he  is  frustrated  (or

dissatisfied from inner causes) his frustration is coupled with the feeling that

another object (soon represented by the father) receives from the mother the

coveted gratification and love denied to himself at that moment. Here is one

root of the phantasy that the parents are combined in an everlasting mutual

gratification of an oral, anal and genital nature. And this is in my view the

prototype of situations of both envy and jealousy.

  There  is  another  aspect  of  the  analysis  of  transference  which  needs

mentioning. We are accustomed to speak of the transference situation. But do

we always keep in mind the fundamental importance of this concept? It is my

experience that in unravelling the details of the transference it is essential to

think in terms of total situations transferred from the past into the present, as

well as of emotions, defences, and object-relations.

For many years—and this is up to a point still true today—transference

was understood in terms of direct references to the analyst in the patient’s

material. My conception of transference as rooted in the earliest stages of

development and in deep layers of the unconscious is much wider and entails

a  technique  by  which  from  the  whole  material  presented  the unconscious

elements of the transference are deduced. For instance, reports of patients

about their everyday life, relations, and activities not only give an insight into

the functioning of the ego, but also reveal—if we explore their unconscious

content—the  defences  against  the  anxieties  stirred  up  in  the  transference

situation. For the patient is bound to deal with conflicts and anxieties re-

experienced towards the analyst by the same methods he used in the past.

That is to say, he turns away from the analyst as he attempted to turn away

from his primal objects; he tries to split the relations to him, keeping him

either as a good or as a bad figure: he deflects some of the feelings and

attitudes experienced towards the analyst on to other people in his current
                                        6
life, and this is part of ‘acting out’.

In keeping with my subject matter, I have predominantly discussed here

the  earliest  experiences,  situations,  and  emotions  from  which  transference

springs. On these foundations, however, are built the later object-relationsand  the  emotional  and  intellectual  developments  which  necessitate  the

analyst’s attention no less than the earliest ones; that is to say, our field of

investigation covers all that lies between the current situation and the earliest

experiences. In fact it is not possible to find access to earliest emotions and

object-relations except by examining their vicissitudes in the light of later

developments. It is only by linking again and again (and that means hard and

patient work) later experiences with earlier ones and vice versa, it is only by

consistently exploring their interplay, that present and past can come together

in the patient’s mind. This is one aspect of the process of integration which,

as the analysis progresses, encompasses the whole of the patient’s mental life.

When anxiety and guilt diminish and love and hate can be better synthesized,

splitting  processes—a  fundamental  defence  against  anxiety—as  well  as

repressions lessen while the ego gains in strength and coherence; the cleavage

between idealized and persecutory objects diminishes; the phantastic aspects

of objects lose in strength; all of which implies that unconscious phantasy life

—less sharply divided off from the unconscious part of the mind—can be

better utilized in ego activities, with a consequent general enrichment of the

personality. I am touching here on the differences—as contrasted with the

similarities—between  transference  and  the  first  object-relations.  These

differences are a measure of the curative effect of the analytic procedure.

I suggested above that one of the factors which bring about the repetition

compulsion is the pressure exerted by the earliest anxiety situations. When

persecutory and depressive anxiety and guilt diminish, there is less urge to

repeat  fundamental  experiences  over  and  over  again,  and  therefore  early

patterns  and  modes  of  feelings  are  maintained  with  less  tenacity.  These

fundamental  changes  come  about  through  the  consistent  analysis  of  the

transference; they are bound up with a deep-reaching revision of the earliest

object-relations and are reflected in the patient’s current life as well as in the

altered attitudes towards the analyst.                                            5

 

THE MUTUAL INFLUENCES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF

                                  EGO AND ID

 

                                        (1952)

 


IN ‘Analysis Terminable and Interminable’ (S.E. 23) which contains Freud’s

latest  conclusions  about  the  ego,  he  assumed  ‘.  .  .  the  existence  and

importance  of  original,  innate  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the  ego’.  I

have for many years held the view, and expressed it in my book, The Psycho-

Analysis of Children (1932), that the ego functions from the beginning and

that among its first activities are the defence against anxiety and the use of

processes of introjection and projection. In that book I also suggested that the

ego’s initial capacity to tolerate anxiety depends on its innate strength, that is

to say, on constitutional factors. I have also repeatedly expressed the view

that  the  ego  establishes  object  relations  from  the  first  contacts  with  the

external  world.  More  recently  I  defined  the  drive  toward  integration  as
                                          1
another of the ego’s primal functions.

I  shall  now  consider  the  part  which  the  instincts—and  particularly  the

struggle between life and death instincts—play in these functions of the ego.

It is inherent in Freud’s conception of the life and death instincts that the id as

the reservoir of the instincts operates ab initio. With this conception I fully

agree. I differ, however, from Freud in that I put forward the hypothesis that

the primary cause of anxiety is the fear of annihilation, of death, arising from

the working of the death instinct within. The struggle between life and death

instincts emanates from the id and involves the ego. The primordial fear of

being annihilated forces the ego into action and engenders the first defences.

The ultimate source of these ego activities lies in the operation of the life

instinct. The ego’s urge toward integration and organization clearly reveals

its derivation from the life instinct; as Freud put it ‘. . . . the main purpose of
                                                  2
Eros—that  of  uniting  and  binding  .  .  .’  Opposed  to  the  drive  toward

integration and yet alternating with it, there are splitting processes which,

together  with  introjection  and  projection,  represent  some  of  the  most

fundamental  early  mechanisms.  All  these,  under  the  impetus  of  the  lifeinstinct, are from the beginning pressed into the service of defence.

  Another major contribution from instinctual drives to the primal functions

of the ego needs consideration here. It is in keeping with my conception of

early infancy that phantasy activity, being rooted in the instincts, is—to use

an  expression  of  Susan  Isaacs—their  mental  corollary.  I  believe  that

phantasies operate from the outset, as do the instincts, and are the mental

expression  of  the  activity  of  both  the  life  and  death  instincts.  Phantasy

activity  underlies  the  mechanisms  of  introjection  and  projection,  which

enable  the  ego  to  perform  one  of  the  basic  functions  mentioned  above,

namely to establish object-relations. By projection, by turning outward libido

and aggression and imbuing the object with them, the infant’s first object-

relation comes about. This is the process which, in my opinion, underlies the

cathexis of objects. Owing to the process of introjection, this first object is

simultaneously taken into the self. From the outset the relations to external

and internal objects interact. The first of these ‘internalized objects’, as I

termed  them,  is  a  part-object,  the  mother’s  breast;  in  my  experience  this

applies even when the infant is bottlefed, but it would take me too far if I

were to discuss here the processes by which this symbolic equation comes

about. The breast, to which are soon added other features of the mother, as an

internalized object vitally influences ego development. As the relation to the

whole object develops, the mother and the father, and other members of the

family, are introjected as persons in good or bad aspects, according to the

infant’s  experiences  as  well  as  according  to  his  alternating  feelings  and

fantasies. A world of good and bad objects is thus built up within, and here is

the source of internal persecution as well as of internal riches and stability.

During the first three or four months, persecutory anxiety is prevalent and

exerts  a  pressure  on  the  ego  which  severely  tests  its  capacity  to  tolerate

anxiety. This persecutory anxiety at times weakens the ego, at other times it

acts  as  an  impetus  toward  the  growth  of  integration  and  intellect.  In  the

second quarter of the first year the infant’s need to preserve the loved internal

object, which is felt to be endangered by his aggressive impulses, and the

resulting depressive anxiety and guilt, again have a twofold effect on the ego:

they may threaten to overcome it as well as spur it on toward reparation and

sublimations. In these various ways at which I can only hint here, the ego is
                                                                      3
both assailed and enriched by its relation to internal objects.

The specific system of phantasies centring on the infant’s internal world is

of  supreme  importance  for  the  development  of  the  ego.  The  internalizedobjects are felt by the young infant to have a life of their own, harmonizing or

conflicting  with  each  other  and  with  the  ego,  according  to  the  infant’s

emotions and experiences. When the infant feels he contains good objects, he

experiences trust, confidence and security. When he feels he contains bad

objects he experiences persecution and suspicion. The infant’s good and bad

relation to internal objects develops concurrently with that to external objects

and  perpetually  influences  its  course.  On  the  other  hand,  the  relation  to

internal  objects  is  from  the  outset  influenced  by  the  frustrations  and

gratifications which form part of the infant’s everyday life. There is thus a

constant interaction between the internal object world, which reflects in a

phantastic way the impressions gained from without, and the external world

which is decisively influenced by projection.

As I have often described, the internalized objects also form the core of the
          4
super-ego which develops throughout the first years of childhood, reaching a

climax at the stage when—according to classical theory—the super-ego as

the heir of the Oedipus complex comes into being.

  Since the development of ego and super-ego is bound up with processes of

introjection and projection, they are inextricably linked from the outset, and

since their development is vitally influenced by instinctual drives, all three

regions of the mind are from the beginning of life in the closest interaction. I

realize that in speaking here about the three regions of the mind I am not

keeping  within  the  topic  suggested  for  discussion;  but  my  conception  of

earliest infancy makes it impossible for me to consider exclusively the mutual

influences of ego and id.

  Because the perpetual interaction between the life and death instincts and

the conflict arising from their antithesis (fusion and defusion) govern mental

life there is in the unconscious an ever-changing flow of interacting events, of

fluctuating emotions and anxieties. I have attempted to give an indication of

the multitude of processes, focusing on the relation of internal and external

objects which from the earliest stage onward exist in the unconscious, and I

shall now draw some conclusions:

(1) The hypothesis which I have broadly outlined here represents a much

wider  view  of  early  unconscious  processes  than  was  implied  in  Freud’s

concept of the structure of the mind.

(2)  If  we  assume  that  the  super-ego  develops  out  of  these  early

unconscious processes which also mould the ego, determine its functions, and

shape its relation to the external world, the foundations of ego development,as well as of super-ego formation, need to be re-examined.

(3) My hypothesis would thus lead to a reassessment of the nature and

scope of the super-ego and of the ego, as well as of the interrelation between

the parts of the mind which make up the self.

I shall end by restating a well-known fact—one of which, however, we

become more and more convinced the deeper we penetrate into the mind. It is

the recognition that the unconscious is at the root of all mental processes,

determines the whole of mental life, and therefore that only by exploring the

unconscious in depth and width are we able to analyse the total personality.                                            6

 

  SOME THEORETICAL CONCLUSIONS REGARDING THE

                                                                        1
                  EMOTIONAL LIFE OF THE INFANT

 

                                        (1952)

 


MY study of the infant’s mind has made me more and more aware of the

bewildering  complexity  of  the  processes  which  operate,  to  a  large  extent

simultaneously, in the early stages of development. In writing this chapter I

have  therefore  attempted  to  elucidate  some  aspects  only  of  the  infant’s

emotional life during his first year, and have selected these with particular

emphasis on anxieties, defences and object-relations.


                                                                                        2
THE FIRST THREE OR FOUR MONTHS OF LIFE (THE PARANOID-SCHIZOID POSITION)

 
                                            I

 


At  the  beginning  of  post-natal  life  the  infant  experiences  anxiety  from

internal and external sources. I have for many years held the view that the

working of the death instinct within gives rise to the fear of annihilation and

that this is the primary cause of persecutory anxiety. The first external source

of anxiety can be found in the experience of birth. This experience, which,

according to Freud, provides the pattern for all later anxiety-situations, is
                                                                                      3
bound  to  influence  the  infant’s  first  relations  with  the  external  world. It

would appear that the pain and discomfort he has suffered, as well as the loss

of the intra-uterine state, are felt by him as an attack by hostile forces, i.e. as
            4
persecution. Persecutory anxiety, therefore, enters from the beginning into

his relation to objects in so far as he is exposed to privations.

The hypothesis that the infant’s first experiences of feeding and of his

mother’s  presence  initiate  an  object-relation  to  her  is  one  of  the  basic
                                      5
concepts put forward in this book. This relation is at first a relation to a part-

object,  for  both  oral-libidinal  and  oral-destructive  impulses  from  the

beginning of life are directed towards the mother’s breast in particular. We

assume that there is always an interaction, although in varying proportions,between  libidinal  and  aggressive  impulses,  corresponding  to  the  fusion

between  life  and  death  instincts.  It  could  be  conceived  that  in  periods  of

freedom  from  hunger  and  tension  there  is  an  optimal  balance  between

libidinal and aggressive impulses. This equilibrium is disturbed whenever,

owing to privations from internal or external sources, aggressive impulses are

reinforced. I suggest that such an alteration in the balance between libido and

aggression gives rise to the emotion called greed, which is first and foremost

of an oral nature. Any increase in greed strengthens feelings of frustration

and in turn the aggressive impulses. In those children in whom the innate

aggressive component is strong, persecutory anxiety, frustration and greed

are easily aroused and this contributes to the infant’s difficulty in tolerating

privation  and  in  dealing  with  anxiety.  Accordingly,  the  strength  of  the

destructive  impulses  in  their  interaction  with  libidinal  impulses  would

provide the constitutional basis for the intensity of greed. However, while in

some cases persecutory anxiety may increase greed, in others (as I suggested

in The Psycho-Analysis of Children) it may become the cause of the earliest

feeding inhibitions.

The  recurrent  experiences  of  gratification  and  frustration  are  powerful

stimuli for libidinal and destructive impulses, for love and hatred. As a result,

the breast, inasmuch as it is gratifying, is loved and felt to be ‘good’; in so far

as it is a source of frustration, it is hated and felt to be ‘bad’. This strong

antithesis between the good breast and the bad breast is largely due to lack of

integration of the ego, as well as to splitting processes within the ego and in

relation to the object. There are, however, grounds for assuming that even

during the first three or four months of life the good and the bad object are

not  wholly  distinct  from  one  another  in  the  infant’s  mind.  The  mother’s

breast, both in its good and bad aspects, also seems to merge for him with her

bodily presence; and the relation to her as a person is thus gradually built up

from the earliest stage onwards.

In addition to the experiences of gratification and frustration derived from

external factors, a variety of endopsychic processes—primarily introjection

and  projection—contribute  to  the  twofold  relation  to  the  first  object.  The

infant projects his love impulses and attributes them to the gratifying (good)

breast, just as he projects his destructive impulses outwards and attributes

them to the frustrating (bad) breast. Simultaneously, by introjection, a good
                                                    6
breast and a bad breast are established inside. Thus the picture of the object,

external and internalized, is distorted in the infant’s mind by his phantasies,which are bound up with the projection of his impulses on to the object. The

good breast—external and internal—becomes the prototype of all helpful and

gratifying objects, the bad breast the prototype of all external and internal

persecutory objects. The various factors which enter into the infant’s feelings

of being gratified such as the alleviation of hunger, the pleasure of sucking,

the  freedom  from  discomfort  and  tension, i.e.  from  privations,  and  the

experience  of  being  loved—all  these  are  attributed  to  the  good  breast.

Conversely,  every  frustration  and  discomfort  are  attributed  to  the  bad

(persecuting) breast.

I shall first describe the ramifications of the infant’s relation to the bad

breast. If we consider the picture which exists in the infant’s mind—as we

can see it retrospectively in the analyses of children and adults—we find that

the hated breast has acquired the oral-destructive qualities of the infant’s own

impulses when he is in states of frustration and hatred. In his destructive

phantasies he bites and tears up the breast, devours it, annihilates it; and he

feels that the breast will attack him in the same way. As urethral- and anal-

sadistic impulses gain in strength, the infant in his mind attacks the breast

with poisonous urine and explosive faeces, and therefore expects it to be

poisonous and explosive towards him. The details of his sadistic phantasies

determine  the  content  of  his  fear  of  internal  and  external  persecutors,
                                              7
primarily of the retaliating (bad) breast.

  Since the phantasied attacks on the object are fundamentally influenced by

greed,  the  fear  of  the  object’s  greed,  owing  to  projection,  is  an  essential

element in persecutory anxiety: the bad breast will devour him in the same

greedy way as he desires to devour it.

  Even during the earliest stage, however, persecutory anxiety is to some

extent  counteracted  by  the  infant’s  relation  to  the  good  breast.  I  have

indicated above that although his feelings focus on the feeding relationship

with the mother, represented by her breast, other aspects of the mother enter

already  into  the  earliest  relation  to  her;  for  even  the  very  young  infant

responds to his mother’s smile, her hands, her voice, her holding him and

attending  to  his  needs.  The  gratification  and  love  which  the  infant

experiences  in  these  situations  all  help  to  counteract  persecutory  anxiety,

even the feelings of loss and persecution aroused by the experience of birth.

His physical nearness to his mother during feeding—essentially his relation

to  the  good  breast—recurrently  helps  him  to  overcome  the  longing  for  a

former lost state, alleviates persecutory anxiety and increases the trust in thegood object. (See note 1, p. 89.)


                                            II

 


It is characteristic of the emotions of the very young infant that they are of

an extreme and powerful nature. The frustrating (bad) object is felt to be a

terrifying  persecutor,  the  good  breast  tends  to  turn  into  the  ‘ideal’  breast

which  should  fulfil  the  greedy  desire  for  unlimited,  immediate  and

everlasting gratification. Thus feelings arise about a perfect and inexhaustible

breast, always available, always gratifying. Another factor which makes for

idealization of the good breast is the strength of the infant’s persecutory fear,

which creates the need to be protected from persecutors and therefore goes to

increase the power of an all-gratifying object. The idealized breast forms the

corollary of the persecuting breast; and in so far as idealization is derived

from the need to be protected from persecuting objects, it is a method of

defence against anxiety.

The instance of hallucinatory gratification may help us to understand the

ways  in  which  the  process  of  idealization  comes  about.  In  this  state,

frustration and anxiety derived from various sources are done away with, the

lost  external  breast  is  regained  and  the  feeling  of  having  the  ideal  breast

inside  (possessing  it)  is  reactivated.  We  may  also  assume  that  the  infant

hallucinates the longed-for pre-natal state. Because the hallucinated breast is

inexhaustible, greed is momentarily satisfied. (But sooner or later, the feeling

of hunger turns the child back to the external world and then frustration, with

all  the  emotions  to  which  it  gives  rise,  is  again  experienced.)  In  wish-

fulfilling hallucination, a number of fundamental mechanisms and defences

come into play. One of them is the omnipotent control of the internal and

external object, for the ego assumes complete possession of both the external

and internal breast. Furthermore, in hallucination the persecuting breast is

kept widely apart from the ideal breast, and the experience of being frustrated

from the experience of being gratified. It seems that such a cleavage, which

amounts to a splitting of the object and of the feelings towards it, is linked

with the process of denial. Denial in its most extreme form—as we find it in

hallucinatory  gratification—amounts  to  an  annihilation  of  any  frustrating

object  or  situation,  and  is  thus  bound  up  with  the  strong  feeling  of

omnipotence which obtains in the early stages of life. The situation of being

frustrated, the object which causes it, the bad feelings to which frustrationgives rise (as well as split-off parts of the ego) are felt to have gone out of

existence,  to  have  been  annihilated,  and  by  these  means  gratification  and

relief from persecutory anxiety are obtained. Annihilation of the persecutory

object and of a persecutory situation is bound up with omnipotent control of

the object in its most extreme form. I would suggest that in some measure

these processes are operative in idealization as well.

It  would  appear  that  the  early  ego  also  employs  the  mechanism  of

annihilation of one split-off aspect of the object and situation in states other

than  wish-fulfilling  hallucinations.  For  instance,  in  hallucinations  of

persecution, the frightening aspect of the object and situation seems to prevail

to such an extent that the good aspect is felt to have been utterly destroyed—

a process which I cannot discuss here. It seems that the extent to which the

ego keeps the two aspects apart varies considerably in different states and on

this may depend whether or not the aspect which is denied is felt to have

gone completely out of existence.

  Persecutory anxiety essentially influences these processes. We may assume

that when persecutory anxiety is less strong, splitting is less far-reaching and

the ego is therefore able to integrate itself and to synthesize in some measure

the  feelings  towards  the  object.  It  might  well  be  that  any  such  step  in

integration can only come about if, at that moment, love towards the object

predominates over the destructive impulses (ultimately the life instinct over

the death instinct). The ego’s tendency to integrate itself can, therefore, I

think, be considered as an expression of the life instinct.

  Synthesis between feelings of love and destructive impulses towards one

and the same object—the breast—gives rise to depressive anxiety, guilt and

the urge to make reparation to the injured loved object, the good breast. This

implies that ambivalence is at times experienced in relation to a part-object—
                      8
the  mother’s  breast.  During  the  first  few  months  of  life,  such  states  of

integration  are  short-lived.  At  this  stage  the  ego’s  capacity  to  achieve

integration is naturally still very limited and to this contributes the strength of

persecutory anxiety and of the splitting processes which are at their height. It

seems  that,  as  development  proceeds,  experiences  of  synthesis  and,  in

consequence, of depressive anxiety, become more frequent and last longer;

all this forms part of the growth of integration. With progress in integration

and synthesis of the contrasting emotions towards the object, mitigation of
                                                          9
destructive impulses by libido becomes possible. This however leads to an

actual diminution of anxiety which is a fundamental condition for normaldevelopment.

As I suggested, there are great variations in the strength, frequency and

duration of splitting processes (not only between individuals but also in the

same infant at different times). It is part of the complexity of early emotional

life that a multitude of processes operate in swiftest alternation, or even, it

seems, simultaneously. For instance, it appears that together with splitting the

breast  into  two  aspects,  loved  and  hated  (good  and  bad),  splitting  of  a

different nature exists which gives rise to the feeling that the ego, as well as
                                                                                          10
its  object,  is  in  pieces;  these  processes  underlie  states  of  disintegration.

Such states, as I pointed out above, alternate with others in which a measure

of integration of the ego and synthesis of the object increasingly comes about.

The early methods of splitting fundamentally influence the ways in which,

at a somewhat later stage, repression is carried out and this in turn determines

the degree of interaction between conscious and unconscious. In other words,

the extent to which the various parts of the mind remain ‘porous’ in relation

to one another is determined largely by the strength or weakness of the early
                        11
schizoid mechanisms. External factors play a vital part from the beginning;

for  we  have  reason  to  assume  that  every  stimulus  to  persecutory  fear

reinforces the schizoid mechanisms, i.e. the tendency of the ego to split itself

and the object; while every good experience strengthens the trust in the good

object and makes for integration of the ego and synthesis of the object.


                                            III

 


  Some of Freud’s conclusions imply that the ego develops by introjecting

objects.  As  regards  the  earliest  phase,  the  good  breast,  introjected  in

situations of gratification and happiness, becomes in my view a vital part of

the ego and strengthens its capacity for integration. For this internal good

breast—forming also the helpful and benign aspect of the early super-ego—

strengthens the infant’s capacity to love and trust his objects, heightens the

stimulus for introjection of good objects and situations, and is therefore an

essential source of reassurance against anxiety; it becomes the representative

of the life instinct within. The good object can, however, only fulfil these

functions if it is felt to be in an undamaged state, which implies that it has

been internalized predominantly with feelings of gratification and love. Such

feelings  presuppose  that  gratification  by  sucking  has  been  relativelyundisturbed  by  external  or  internal  factors.  The  main  source  of  internal

disturbance lies in excessive aggressive impulses, which increase greed and

diminish the capacity to bear frustration. In other terms, when, in the fusion

of the two instincts, the life instinct predominates over the death instinct—

and correspondingly libido over aggression—the good breast can be more

securely established in the infant’s mind.

  However,  the  infant’s  oral-sadistic  desires,  which  are  active  from  the

beginning  of  life  and  are  easily  stirred  by  frustration  from  external  and

internal sources, inevitably again and again give rise to a feeling that the

breast is destroyed and in bits inside him, as a result of his greedy devouring

attacks upon it. These two aspects of introjection exist side by side.

  Whether feelings of frustration or gratification predominate in the infant’s

relation to the breast is no doubt largely influenced by external circumstances

but  there  is  little  doubt  that  constitutional  factors,  influencing  from  the

beginning the strength of the ego, have to be taken into account. I formerly

made the suggestion that the ego’s capacity to bear tension and anxiety, and
                                                                                          12
therefore in some measure to tolerate frustration, is a constitutional factor.

This greater inborn capacity to bear anxiety seems ultimately to depend on

the prevalence of libido over aggressive impulses, that is to say, on the part

which the life instinct plays from the outset in the fusion of the two instincts.

My  hypothesis  that  the  oral  libido  expressed  in  the  sucking  function

enables  the  infant  to  introject  the  breast  (and  nipple)  as  a  relatively

undestroyed object does not run counter to the assumption that destructive

impulses are most powerful in the earliest stages. The factors which influence

the fusion and defusion of the two instincts are still obscure, but there is little

reason to doubt that in the relation to the first object—the breast—the ego is
                                                                                      13
at times able, by means of splitting, to keep libido apart from aggression.

I shall now turn to the part which projection plays in the vicissitudes of
                                                            14
persecutory  anxiety.  I  have  described  elsewhere  how  the  oral-sadistic

impulses to devour and scoop out the mother’s breast become elaborated into

the phantasies of devouring and scooping out the mother’s body. Attacks

derived from all other sources of sadism soon become linked with these oral

attacks and two main lines of sadistic phantasies develop. One form—mainly

oral-sadistic and bound up with greed—is to empty the mother’s body of

everything  good  and  desirable.  The  other  form  of  phantasied  attack—

predominantly anal—is to fill her body with the bad substances and parts of

the  self  which  are  split  off  and  projected  into  her.  These  are  mainlyrepresented by excrements which become the means of damaging, destroying

or controlling the attacked object. Or the whole self—felt to be the ‘bad’ self

—enters  the  mother’s  body  and  takes  control  of  it.  In  these  various

phantasies, the ego takes possession by projection of an external object—first

of all the mother—and makes it into an extension of the self. The object

becomes to some extent a representative of the ego, and these processes are

in  my  view  the  basis  for  identification  by  projection  or  ‘projective
                15
identification’.  Identification  by  introjection  and  identification  by

projection appear to be complementary processes. It seems that the processes

underlying projective identification operate already in the earliest relation to

the  breast.  The  ‘vampire-like’  sucking,  the  scooping  out  of  the  breast,

develop in the infant’s phantasy into making his way into the breast and

further into the mother’s body. Accordingly, projective identification would

start simultaneously with the greedy oral-sadistic introjection of the breast.

This hypothesis is in keeping with the view often expressed by the writer that

introjection  and  projection  interact  from  the  beginning  of  life.  The

introjection  of  a  persecutory  object  is,  as  we  have  seen,  to  some  extent

determined by the projection of destructive impulses on to the object. The

drive to project (expel) badness is increased by fear of internal persecutors.

When  projection  is  dominated  by  persecutory  fear,  the  object  into  whom

badness  (the  bad  self)  has  been  projected  becomes  the  persecutor par

excellence, because it has been endowed with all the bad qualities of the

subject.  The  re-introjection  of  this  object  reinforces  acutely  the  fear  of

internal and external persecutors. (The death instinct, or rather, the dangers

attaching  to  it,  has  again  been  turned  inwards.)  There  is  thus  a  constant

interaction  between  persecutory  fear  relating  to  the  internal  and  external

worlds,  an  interaction  in  which  the  processes  involved  in  projective

identification play a vital part.

The projection of love-feelings—underlying the process of attaching libido

to the object—is, as I suggested, a precondition for finding a good object.

The introjection of a good object stimulates the projection of good feelings

outwards  and  this  in  turn  by  re-introjection  strengthens  the  feeling  of

possessing a good internal object. To the projection of the bad self into the

object and the external world corresponds the projection of good parts of the

self, or of the whole good self. Re-introjection of the good object and of the

good self reduces persecutory anxiety. Thus the relation to both the internal

and external world improves simultaneously and the ego gains in strength andin integration.

  Progress in integration which, as I suggested in an earlier section, depends

on love-impulses predominating temporarily over destructive impulses, leads

to  transitory  states  in  which  the  ego  synthesizes  feelings  of  love  and

destructive  impulses  towards  one  object  (first  the  mother’s  breast).  This

synthetic process initiates further important steps in development (which may

well occur simultaneously): the painful emotions of depressive anxiety and

guilt arise; aggression is mitigated by libido; in consequence, persecutory

anxiety is diminished; anxiety relating to the fate of the endangered external

and internal object leads to a stronger identification with it; the ego therefore

strives to make reparation and also inhibits aggressive impulses felt to be
                                  16
dangerous to the loved object.

  With growing integration of the ego, experiences of depressive anxiety

increase  in  frequency  and  duration.  Simultaneously,  as  the  range  of

perception  increases,  in  the  infant’s  mind  the  concept  of  the  mother  as  a

whole and unique person develops out of a relation to parts of her body and

to various aspects of her personality (such as her smell, touch, voice, smile,

the sound of her footsteps, etc.). Depressive anxiety and guilt gradually focus

on the mother as a person and increase in intensity; the depressive position

comes to the fore.


                                            IV

 


I have so far described some aspects of mental life during the first three or

four months. (It must be kept in mind, though, that only a rough estimate can

be  given  of  the  duration  of  stages  of  development,  as  there  are  great

individual variations.) In the picture of this stage, as I presented it, certain

features  stand  out  as  characteristic.  The  paranoid-schizoid  position  is

dominant.  The  interaction  between  the  processes  of  introjection  and

projection—re-introjection and re-projection—determines ego-development.

The relation to the loved and hated—good and bad—breast is the infant’s

first object-relation. Destructive impulses and persecutory anxiety are at their

height. The desire for unlimited gratification, as well as persecutory anxiety,

contribute to the infant’s feeling that both an ideal breast and a dangerous

devouring breast exist, which are largely kept apart from each other in the

infant’s mind. These two aspects of the mother’s breast are introjected and

form the core of the super-ego. Splitting, omnipotence, idealization, denialand control of internal and external objects are dominant at that stage. These

first  methods  of  defence  are  of  an  extreme  nature,  in  keeping  with  the

intensity of early emotions and the limited capacity of the ego to bear acute

anxiety. While in some ways these defences impede the path of integration,

they are essential for the whole development of the ego, for they again and

again  relieve  the  young  infant’s  anxieties.  This  relative  and  temporary

security is achieved predominantly by the persecutory object being kept apart

from  the  good  one.  The  presence  in  the  mind  of  the  good  (ideal)  object

enables the ego to maintain at times strong feelings of love and gratification.

The  good  object  also  affords  protection  against  the  persecuting  object

because  it  is  felt  to  have  replaced  it  (as  instanced  by  wish-fulfilling

hallucination).  These  processes  underlie,  I  think,  the  observable  fact  that

young infants alternate so swiftly between states of complete gratification and

of great distress. At this early stage the ego’s ability to deal with anxiety by

allowing the contrasting emotions towards the mother, and accordingly the

two aspects of her, to come together is still very limited. This implies that a

mitigation of the fear of the bad object by the trust in the good one and

depressive anxiety only arise in fleeting experiences. Out of the alternating

processes  of  disintegration  and  integration  develops  gradually  a  more

integrated ego, with an increased capacity to deal with persecutory anxiety.

The infant’s relation to parts of his mother’s body, focusing on her breast,

gradually changes into a relation to her as a person.

  These processes present in earliest infancy may be considered under a few

headings:

(a) An ego which has some rudiments of integration and cohesion, and

progresses increasingly in that direction. It also performs from the beginning

of post-natal life some fundamental functions; thus it uses splitting processes

and  the  inhibition  of  instinctual  desires  as  some  of  the  defences  against

persecutory anxiety, which is experienced by the ego from birth onwards.

(b) Object-relations, which are shaped by libido and aggression, by love

and hatred, and permeated on the one hand by persecutory anxiety, on the

other  by  its  corollary,  the  omnipotent  reassurance  derived  from  the

idealization of the object.

(c)  Introjection  and  projection,  bound  up  with  the  phantasy-life  of  the

infant and all his emotions, and consequently internalized objects of a good

and bad nature, which initiate super-ego development.

As the ego becomes increasingly able to sustain anxiety, the methods ofdefence  alter  correspondingly.  To  this  contributes  the  growing  sense  of

reality and the widening range of gratification, interests and object-relations.

Destructive impulses and persecutory anxiety decrease in power; depressive

anxiety gains in strength and comes to a climax at the period which I shall

describe in the next section.


                        THE INFANTILE DEPRESSIVE POSITION

 
                                            I

 


  During the second quarter of the first year certain changes in the infant’s

intellectual and emotional development become marked. His relation to the

external world, to people as well as to things, grows more differentiated. The

range of his gratifications and interests widens, and his power of expressing

his emotions and communicating with people increases. These observable

changes  are  evidence  of  the  gradual  development  of  the  ego.  Integration,

consciousness, intellectual capacities, the relation to the external world and

other  functions  of  the  ego  are  steadily  developing.  At  the  same  time  the

infant’s sexual organization is progressing; urethral, anal and genital trends

increase  in  strength,  though  oral  impulses  and  desires  still  predominate.

There  is  thus  a  confluence  of  different  sources  of  libido  and  aggression,

which colours the infant’s emotional life and brings into prominence various

new  anxiety-situations;  the  range  of  phantasies  is  widening,  they  become

more  elaborated  and  differentiated.  Correspondingly  there  are  important

changes in the nature of defences.

All these developments are reflected in the infant’s relation to his mother

(and to some extent to his father and to other people). The relation to the

mother as a person, which has been gradually developing while the breast

still  figured  as  the  main  object,  becomes  more  fully  established  and  the

identification with her gains in strength when the infant can perceive and

introject the mother as a person (or, in other words, as a ‘complete object’).

  While some measure of integration is a precondition for the ego’s capacity

to introject the mother and the father as whole persons, further development

on  the  line  of  integration  and  synthesis  is  initiated  when  the  depressive

position comes to the fore. The various aspects—loved and hated, good and

bad—of the objects come closer together, and these objects are now whole

persons. The processes of synthesis operate over the whole field of externaland internal object-relations. They comprise the contrasting aspects of the

internalized objects (the early super-ego) on the one hand and of the external

objects on the other; but the ego is also driven to diminish the discrepancy

between the external and internal world, or rather, the discrepancy between

external  and  internal  figures.  Together  with  these  synthetic  processes  go

further steps in integration of the ego, which result in a greater coherence

between the split-off parts of the ego. All these processes of integration and

synthesis cause the conflict between love and hatred to come out in full force.

The ensuing depressive anxiety and feeling of guilt alter not only in quantity

but also in quality. Ambivalence is now experienced predominantly towards a

complete object. Love and hatred have come much closer together and the

‘good’ and ‘bad’ breast, ‘good’ and ‘bad’ mother, cannot be kept as widely

separated as in the earlier stage. Although the power of destructive impulses

diminishes, these impulses are felt to be a great danger to the loved object,

now  perceived  as  a  person.  Greed  and  the  defences  against  it  play  a

significant part at this stage, for the anxiety of losing irretrievably the loved

and indispensable object tends to increase greed. Greed, however, is felt to be

uncontrollable and destructive and to endanger the loved external and internal

objects. The ego therefore increasingly inhibits instinctual desires and this
                                                                                          17
may lead to severe difficulties in the infant’s enjoying or accepting food,

and later to serious inhibitions in establishing both affectionate and erotic

relations.

The steps in integration and synthesis described above result in a greater

capacity of the ego to acknowledge the increasingly poignant psychic reality.

The  anxiety  relating  to  the  internalized  mother  who  is  felt  to  be  injured,

suffering, in danger of being annihilated or already annihilated and lost for

ever,  leads  to  a  stronger  identification  with  the  injured  object.  This

identification  reinforces  both  the  drive  to  make  reparation  and  the  ego’s

attempts to inhibit aggressive impulses. The ego also again and again makes

use  of  the  manic  defence.  As  we  have  seen  already,  deniai,  idealization,

splitting and control of internal and external objects are used by the ego in

order to counteract persecutory anxiety. These omnipotent methods are, in

some measure, maintained when the depressive position arises but they are

now predominantly used in order to counteract depressive anxiety. They also

undergo changes, in keeping with the steps in integration and synthesis, that

is  to  say  they  become  less  extreme  and  correspond  more  to  the  growing

capacity of the ego to face psychic reality. With this altered form and aim,these early methods now constitute the manic defence.

  Faced with a multitude of anxiety-situations, the ego tends to deny them

and, when anxiety is paramount, the ego even denies the fact that it loves the

object at all. The result may be a lasting stifling of love and turning away

from  the  primary  objects  and  an  increase  in  persecutory  anxiety, i.e.
                                                    18
regression to the paranoid-schizoid position.

The  ego’s  attempts  to  control  external  and  internal  objects—a  method

which,  during  the  paranoid-schizoid  position,  is  mainly  directed  against

persecutory anxiety—also undergo changes. When depressive anxiety has the

ascendancy, control of objects and impulses is mainly used by the ego to

prevent  frustration,  to  forestall  aggression  and  the  ensuing  danger  to  the

loved objects—that is to say, to keep depressive anxiety at bay.

  There is also a difference in the use of splitting the object and the self. The

ego,  although  earlier  methods  of  splitting  continue  in  some  degree,  now

divides the complete object into an uninjured live object and an injured and

endangered one (perhaps dying or dead); splitting thus becomes largely a

defence against depressive anxiety.

At the same time, important steps in ego-development take place, which

not only enable the ego to evolve more adequate defences against anxiety but

also  eventually  result  in  an  actual  diminution  of  anxiety.  The  continued

experience of facing psychic reality, implied in the working through of the

depressive  position,  increases  the  infant’s  understanding  of  the  external

world. Accordingly the picture of his parents, which was at first distorted into

idealized and terrifying figures, comes gradually nearer to reality.

As has been discussed earlier in this chapter, when the infant introjects a

more  reassuring  external  reality,  his  internal  world  improves;  and  this  by

projection  in  turn  benefits  his  picture  of  the  external  world.  Gradually,

therefore,  as  the  infant  re-introjects  again  and  again  a  more  realistic  and

reassuring  external  world  and  also  in  some  measure  establishes  within

himself complete and uninjured objects, essential developments in the super-

ego  organization  take  place.  As,  however,  good  and  bad  internal  objects

come closer together—the bad aspects being mitigated by the good ones—the

relation between the ego and super-ego alters, that is to say, a progressive

assimilation of the super-ego by the ego takes place. (See note 2, p. 90.)

At this stage, the drive to make reparation to the injured object comes into

full play. This tendency, as we have seen earlier, is inextricably linked with

feelings  of  guilt.  When  the  infant  feels  that  his  destructive  impulses  andphantasies are directed against the complete person of his loved object, guilt

arises in full strength and, together with it, the over-riding urge to repair,

preserve  or  revive  the  loved  injured  object.  These  emotions  in  my  view

amount to states of mourning, and the defences operating to attempts on the

part of the ego to overcome mourning.

  Since  the  tendency  to  make  reparation  ultimately  derives  from  the  life

instinct, it draws on libidinal phantasies and desires. This tendency enters into

all sublimations, and remains from that stage onwards the great means by

which depression is kept at bay and diminished.

It appears that there is no aspect of mental life which is not, in the early

stages, used by the ego in defence against anxiety. The reparative tendency

too, first employed in an omnipotent way, becomes an important defence.

The infant’s feelings (phantasy) might be described as follows: ‘My mother is

disappearing, she may never return, she is suffering, she is dead. No, this

can’t be, for I can revive her.’

  Omnipotence decreases as the infant gradually gains a greater confidence
                                                          19
both in his objects and in his reparative powers. He feels that all steps in

development, all new achievements are giving pleasure to the people around

him and that in this way he expresses his love, counter-balances or undoes

the harm done by his aggressive impulses and makes reparation to his injured

loved objects.

  Thus the foundations for normal development are laid: relations to people

develop,  persecutory  anxiety  relating  to  internal  and  external  objects

diminishes,  the  good  internal  objects  become  more  firmly  established,  a

feeling of greater security ensues, and all this strengthens and enriches the

ego. The stronger and more coherent ego, although it makes much use of the

manic defence, again and again brings together and synthesizes the split-off

aspects of the object and of the self. Gradually the processes of splitting and

synthesizing are applied to aspects kept apart less widely from one another;

perception of reality increases and objects appear in a more realistic light. All

these  developments  lead  to  a  growing  adaptation  to  external  and  internal
      20
reality.

  There is a corresponding change in the infant’s attitude towards frustration.

As  we  have  seen,  in  the  earliest  stage  the  bad  persecutory  aspect  of  the

mother  (her  breast)  came  to  stand  in  the  child’s  mind  for  everything

frustrating and evil, internal as well as external. When the infant’s sense of

reality in relation to his objects and trust in them increases, he becomes morecapable  of  distinguishing  between  frustration  imposed  from  without  and

phantastic internal dangers. Accordingly hatred and aggression become more

closely related to the actual frustration or harm derived from external factors.

This is a step towards a more realistic and objective method of dealing with

his own aggression, which rouses less guilt and ultimately enables the child

to experience, as well as to sublimate, his aggression in a more ego-syntonic

way.

In addition, this more realistic attitude towards frustration—which implies

that persecutory fear relating to internal and external objects has diminished

—leads to a greater capacity in the infant to re-establish the good relation to

his mother and to other people when the frustrating experience no longer

operates. In other words, the growing adaptation to reality—bound up with

changes  in  the  working  of  introjection  and  projection—results  in  a  more

secure relation to the external and internal world. This leads to a lessening of

ambivalence  and  aggression  which  makes  it  possible  for  the  drive  for

reparation to play its full part. In these ways the process of mourning arising

from the depressive position is gradually worked through.

  When the infant reaches the crucial stage of about three to six months and

is  faced  with  the  conflicts,  guilt  and  sorrow  inherent  in  the  depressive

position,  his  capacity  for  dealing  with  his  anxiety  is  to  some  degree

determined by his earlier development; that is to say by the extent to which

during the first three or four months of life he has been able to take in and

establish his good object which forms the core of his ego. If this process has

been  successful—and  this  implies  that  persecutory  anxiety  and  splitting

processes are not excessive and that a measure of integration has come about

—persecutory anxiety and schizoid mechanisms gradually lose in strength,

the  ego  is  able  to  introject  and  establish  the  complete  object  and  to  go

through the depressive position. If, however, the ego is unable to deal with

the many severe anxiety-situations arising at this stage—a failure determined

by fundamental internal factors as well as by external experiences—a strong

regression  from  the  depressive  position  to  the  earlier  paranoid-schizoid

position may take place. This would also impede the processes of introjection

of the complete object and strongly affect the development during the first

year of life and throughout childhood.


                                            II

 My hypothesis of the infantile depressive position is based on fundamental

psycho-analytic concepts regarding the early stages of life; that is to say,

primary introjection and the preponderance of oral libido and cannibalistic

impulses in young infants. These discoveries by Freud and Abraham have

materially  contributed  to  the  understanding  of  the  etiology  of  mental

illnesses.  By  developing  these  concepts  and  relating  them  to  the

understanding of infants, as it emerged from the analyses of young children, I

came to realize the complexity of early processes and experiences and their

effect on the infant’s emotional life; and this in turn was bound to throw more

light on the etiology of mental disturbances. One of my conclusions was that

there exists a particularly close link between the infantile depressive position
                                                          21
and the phenomena of mourning and melancholia.

  Continuing Freud’s work on melancholia, Abraham pointed out one of the

fundamental  differences  between  normal  mourning  on  the  one  hand  and

abnormal mourning on the other. (See Note 3, p. 19.) In normal mourning the

individual  succeeds  in  establishing  the  lost  loved  person  within  his  ego,

whereas  in  melancholia  and  abnormal  mourning  this  process  is  not

successful. Abraham also described some of the fundamental factors upon

which that success or failure depends. If cannibalistic impulses are excessive,

the introjection of the lost loved object miscarries, and this leads to illness. In

normal mourning, too, the subject is driven to reinstate the lost loved person

within the ego; but this process succeeds. Not only are the cathexes attached

to the lost loved object withdrawn and reinvested, as Freud put it, but during

this process the lost object is established within.

In my paper on ‘Mourning and its Relation to Manic-Depressive States’, I

expressed the following view: ‘My experience leads me to conclude that,

while  it  is  true  that  the  characteristic  feature  of  normal  mourning  is  the

individual’s setting up the lost loved object inside himself, he is not doing so

for the first time but, through the work of mourning, is reinstating that object

as well as all his loved internal objects which he feels he has lost.’ Whenever

grief  arises,  it  undermines  the  feeling  of  secure  possession  of  the  loved

internal objects, for it revives the early anxieties about injured and destroyed

objects—about  a  shattered  inner  world.  Feelings  of  guilt  and  persecutory

anxieties—the infantile depressive position—are reactivated in full strength.

A successful reinstating of the external love object which is being mourned,

and  whose  introjection  is  intensified  through  the  process  of  mourning,

implies that the loved internal objects are restored and regained. Thereforethe testing of reality characteristic of the process of mourning is not only the

means of renewing the links to the external world but of re-establishing the

disrupted inner world. Mourning thus involves the repetition of the emotional

situation the infant experienced during the depressive position. For under the

stress of fear of loss of the loved mother, the infant struggles with the task of

establishing and integrating his inner world, of building up securely the good

objects within himself.

One of the fundamental factors in determining whether or not the loss of a

loved object (through death or other causes) will lead to manic-depressive

illness  or  will  be  normally  overcome  is,  in  my  experience,  the  extent  to

which, in the first year of life, the depressive position has been successfully

worked through and the loved introjected objects securely established within.

The  depressive  position  is  bound  up  with  fundamental  changes  in  the

infant’s libidinal organization, for during this period—about the middle of the

first year—the infant enters upon the early stages of the direct and inverted

Oedipus complex. I shall restrict myself here to the broadest outline only in
                                                                          22
giving an account of the early stages of the Oedipus complex. These early

stages are characterized by the important rôle which part-objects still play in

the infant’s mind while the relation to complete objects is being established.

Also, though genital desires are coming strongly to the fore, the oral libido is

still leading. Powerful oral desires, increased by the frustration experienced in

relation to the mother, are transferred from the mother’s breast to the father’s
    23
penis. Genital desires in the infant of either sex coalesce with oral desires

and  therefore  an  oral,  as  well  as  a  genital,  relation  to  the  father’s  penis

ensues. Genital desires are also directed towards the mother. The infant’s

desires  for  the  father’s  penis  are  bound  up  with  jealousy  of  the  mother

because he feels she receives this desired object. These manifold emotions

and wishes in either sex underlie both the inverted and the direct Oedipus

complex.

  Another aspect of the early Oedipus stages is bound up with the essential

part which the mother’s ‘inside’, and his own ‘inside’, play in the young

infant’s  mind.  During  the  preceding  period,  when  destructive  impulses

prevail (paranoid-schizoid position), the infant’s urge to enter his mother’s

body, and take possession of its contents, is predominantly of an oral and anal

nature. This urge is still active in the following stage (depressive position),

but  when  genital  desires  increase  it  is  directed  more  towards  the  father’s

penis  (equated  to  babies  and  faeces)  which,  he  feels,  the  mother’s  bodycontains. Simultaneously the oral desires for the father’s penis lead to its

internalization, and this internalized penis—both as a good and bad object—

comes to play an important part in the infant’s internal object world.

The  early  stages  of  the  Oedipus  development  are  of  the  greatest

complexity: desires from various sources converge; these desires are directed

towards part-objects as well as towards whole objects; the father’s penis, both

desired and hated, exists not only as a part of the father’s body, but is also

simultaneously felt by the infant to be inside himself and inside the mother’s

body.

  Envy appears to be inherent in oral greed. My analytic work has shown me

that envy (alternating with feelings of love and gratification) is first directed

towards the feeding breast. To this primary envy jealousy is added when the

Oedipus situation arises. The infant’s feelings in relation to both parents seem

to run like this: when he is frustrated, father or mother enjoys the desired

object of which he is deprived—mother’s breast, father’s penis—and enjoys

it constantly. It is characteristic of the young infant’s intense emotions and

greed  that  he  should  attribute  to  the  parents  a  constant  state  of  mutual

gratification of an oral, anal and genital nature.

  These sexual theories are the foundation for combined parent figures such

as: the mother containing the father’s penis or the whole father; the father

containing  the  mother’s  breast  or  the  whole  mother;  the  parents  fused
                                      24
inseparably in sexual intercourse. Phantasies of this nature also contribute

to  the  notion  of  ‘the  woman  with  a  penis’.  Furthermore,  owing  to

internalization,  the  infant  establishes  such  combined  parent  figures  within

himself,  and  this  proves  fundamental  for  many  anxiety-situations  of  a

psychotic nature.

As, gradually, a more realistic relation to the parents develops, the infant

comes to consider them as separate individuals, that is to say, the primitive
                                              25
combined parent figures lose in strength.

  These developments are interlinked with the depressive position. In both

sexes, the fear of the loss of the mother, the primary loved object—that is to

say,  depressive  anxiety—contributes  to  the  need  for  substitutes;  and  the

infant  first  turns  to  the  father,  who  at  this  stage  is  also  introjected  as  a

complete person, to fulfil this need.

In these ways, libido and depressive anxiety are deflected to some extent

from the mother, and this process of distribution stimulates object-relations as

well as diminishes the intensity of depressive feelings. The early stages of thedirect and inverted Oedipus complex thus bring relief to the anxieties of the

child and help him to overcome the depressive position. At the same time,

however, new conflicts and anxieties arise, since the Oedipus wishes towards

the  parents  imply  that  envy,  rivalry  and  jealousy—at  this  stage  still

powerfully stirred by oral-sadistic impulses—are now experienced towards

two people who are both hated and loved. The working through of these

conflicts, first arising in the early stages of the Oedipus complex, is part of

the process of modification of anxiety which extends beyond babyhood into

the first years of childhood.

To sum up: the depressive position plays a vital part in the child’s early

development and, normally, when the infantile neurosis comes to an end at

about five years of age, persecutory and depressive anxieties have undergone

modification.  The  fundamental  steps  in  working  through  the  depressive

position  are,  however,  made  when  the  infant  is  establishing  the  complete

object—that is to say, during the second half of the first year—and one might

contend that if these processes are successful, one of the preconditions for

normal  development  is  fulfilled.  During  this  period  persecutory  and

depressive  anxiety  are  again  and  again  activated,  as  for  instance  in  the

experiences of teething and weaning. This interaction between anxiety and

physical  factors  is  one  aspect  of  the  complex  processes  of  development

(involving all the infant’s emotions and phantasies) during the first year; to

some extent indeed this applies to the whole of life.

I  have  emphasized  throughout  this  chapter  that  the  changes  in  the

emotional development and object-relations of the infant are of a gradual

nature. The fact that the depressive position develops gradually explains why,
                                                                              26
usually, its effect on the infant does not appear in a sudden way. Also we

have to keep in mind that while depressive feelings are experienced, the ego

simultaneously develops methods of counteracting them. This, is my view, is

one of the fundamental differences between the infant who is experiencing

anxieties of a psychotic nature and the psychotic adult; for, at the same time

as  the  infant  goes  through  these  anxieties,  the  processes  leading  to  their

modification are already at work. (See Note 4, p. 92.)



            FURTHER DEVELOPMENT AND THE MODIFICATION OF ANXIETY

 
                                            I

 The infantile neurosis can be regarded as a combination of processes by

which  anxieties  of  a  psychotic  nature  are  bound,  worked  through  and

modified.  Fundamental  steps  in  the  modification  of  persecutory  and

depressive  anxiety  are  part  of  the  development  during  the  first  year.  The

infantile neurosis, as I see it, therefore begins within the first year of life and

comes to an end when, with the onset of the latency period, modification of

early anxieties has been achieved.

All aspects of development contribute towards the process of modifying

anxiety and, therefore, the vicissitudes of anxiety can only be understood in

their  interaction  with  all  developmental  factors.  For  instance,  acquiring

physical skills; play activities; the development of speech and intellectual

progress in general; habits of cleanliness; the growth of sublimations; the

widening of the range of object-relations; the progress in the child’s libidinal

organization—all  these  achievements  are  inextricably  interwoven  with

aspects of the infantile neurosis, ultimately with the vicissitudes of anxiety

and the defences evolved against it. Here I can only single out a few of these

interacting factors and indicate how they contribute to the modification of

anxiety.

The  first  persecutory  objects,  external  and  internal,  are—as  discussed

already—the mother’s bad breast and the father’s bad penis; and persecutory

fears  relating  to  internal  and  external  objects  interact.  These  anxieties,

focusing first on the parents, find expression in the early phobias and greatly

affect the relation of the child to his parents. Both persecutory and depressive

anxiety  contribute  fundamentally  to  the  conflicts  arising  in  the  Oedipus
        27
situation and influence libidinal development.

The genital desires towards both parents, which initiate the early stages of

the  Oedipus  complex  (at  about  the  middle  of  the  first  year),  are  at  first

interwoven  with  oral,  anal  and  urethral  desires  and  phantasies,  both  of  a

libidinal and aggressive nature. The anxieties of a psychotic nature, to which

destructive impulses from all these sources give rise, tend to reinforce these

impulses  and,  if  excessive,  make  for  strong  fixations  to  the  pre-genital
      28
stages.

The libidinal development is thus at every step influenced by anxiety. For

anxiety  leads  to  fixation  to  pre-genital  stages  and  again  and  again  to

regression to them. On the other hand, anxiety and guilt and the ensuing

reparative tendency add impetus to libidinal desires and stimulate the forward

trend of the libido; for giving and experiencing libidinal gratification alleviateanxiety  and  also  satisfy  the  urge  to  make  reparation.  Anxiety  and  guilt,

therefore,  at  times  check,  and  at  other  times  enhance  the  libidinal

development. This varies not only between one individual and another but

may  vary  in  one  and  the  same  individual,  according  to  the  intricate

interaction between internal and external factors at any given time.

In the fluctuating positions of the direct and inverted Oedipus complex, all

the early anxieties are experienced; for jealousy, rivalry and hatred in these

positions  again  and  again  stir  up  persecutory  and  depressive  anxiety.

Anxieties focusing on the parents as internal objects, however, are gradually

worked through and diminished as the infant derives an increasing feeling of

security from the relation to the external parents.

In  the  interplay  between  progression  and  regression,  which  is  strongly

influenced  by  anxiety,  genital  trends  gradually  gain  the  ascendant.  As  a

result, the capacity for reparation increases, its range widens and sublimations

gain in strength and stability; for on the genital level they are bound up with

the most creative urge of man. Genital sublimations in the feminine position

are linked with fertility—the power to give life—and thus also with the re-

creation of lost or injured objects. In the male position, the element of life-

giving  is  reinforced  by  the  phantasies  of  fertilizing  and  thus  restoring  or

reviving the injured or destroyed mother. The genital, therefore, represents

not only the organ of procreation but also the means of repairing and creating

anew.

The  ascendancy  of  genital  trends  implies  a  great  progress  in  ego-

integration, for these trends take over libidinal and reparative desires of a pre-

genital nature and thus a synthesis between pre-genital and genital reparative

tendencies comes about. For instance, the capacity to receive ‘goodness’, in

the first place the desired food and love from the mother, and the urge to feed

her in return, and thus to restore her—the basis for oral sublimations—are a

precondition for a successful genital development.

The growing strength of the genital libido, which includes progress in the

capacity to make reparation, goes side by side with a gradual lessening of the

anxiety and guilt aroused by destructive tendencies, notwithstanding that in

the oedipal situation genital desires are the cause of conflict and guilt. It

follows that genital primacy implies a diminution of oral, urethral and anal

trends and anxieties. In the process of working through the Oedipus conflicts

and achieving genital primacy, the child becomes able to establish his good

objects securely in his inner world and to develop a stable relation to hisparents. All this means that he is gradually working through and modifying

persecutory and depressive anxiety.

  There are grounds to assume that as soon as the infant turns his interest

towards objects other than the mother’s breast—such as parts of her body,

other objects around him, parts of his own body, etc.—a process starts which

is  fundamental  for  the  growth  of  sublimations  and  object-relations.  Love,

desires (both aggressive and libidinal) and anxieties are transferred from the

first  and  unique  object,  the  mother,  to  other  objects;  and  new  interests

develop which become substitutes for the relation to the primary object. This

primary object is, however, not only the external but also the internalized

good breast; and this deflection of the emotions and creative feelings, which

become related to the external world, is bound up with projection. In all these

processes, the function of symbol-formation and phantasy activity is of great
              29
significance.  When  depressive  anxiety  arises,  and  particularly  with  the

onset of the depressive position, the ego feels driven to project, deflect and

distribute  desires  and  emotions,  as  well  as  guilt  and  the  urge  to  make

reparation, on to new objects and interests. These processes, in my view, are

a mainspring for sublimations throughout life. It is, however, a precondition

for a successful development of sublimations (as well as of object-relations

and  of  the  libidinal  organization),  that  love  for  the  first  objects  can  be

maintained while desires and anxieties are deflected and distributed. For, if

grievance  and  hatred  towards  the  first  objects  predominate,  they  tend  to

endanger sublimations and the relation to substitute objects.

  Another disturbance of the capacity for reparation and consequently for

sublimations  arises  if,  owing  to  a  failure  in  overcoming  the  depressive

position, the hope of making reparation is impeded or, to put it otherwise, if

there is despair about the destruction wrought on loved objects.


                                            II

 


As suggested above, all aspects of development are bound up with infantile

neurosis. A characteristic feature of the infantile neurosis is the early phobias

which begin during the first year of life and, changing in form and content,

appear and reappear throughout the years of childhood. Both persecutory and

depressive  anxieties  underlie  the  early  phobias,  which  include  difficulties

with food, pavor nocturnus, anxiety relating to the mother’s absence, fear of

strangers, disturbances in relations with the parents and object-relations ingeneral. The need to externalize persecutory objects is an intrinsic element in
                                30
the  mechanism  of  phobias.  This  need  derives  from  persecutory  anxiety

(relating  to  the  ego)  as  well  as  from  depressive  anxiety  (centring  on  the

dangers  threatening  the  good  internal  objects  from  internal  persecutors).

Fears  of  internal  persecution  also  find  expression  in  hypochrondriacal

anxieties.  They  also  contribute  to  a  variety  of  physical  illnesses, e.g.  the
                                      31
frequent colds of young children.

Oral, urethral and anal anxieties (which enter into both the acquiring and

the  inhibiting  of  habits  of  cleanliness)  are  basic  features  in  the

symptomatology of the infantile neurosis. It is also a characteristic feature of

infantile neurosis that during the first years of life relapses of various kinds

occur. As we have seen above, if anxiety of a persecutory and depressive

nature  is  reinforced,  a  regression  to  the  earlier  stages  and  to  the

corresponding anxiety-situations takes place. Such regression manifests itself

for instance in the breaking down of already established habits of cleanliness;

or phobias apparently overcome may reappear in slightly changed forms.

  During the second year, obsessional trends come to the fore; they both

express and bind oral, urethral and anal anxieties. Obsessional features can be

observed in bed-time rituals, rituals to do with cleanliness or food and so on,

and in a general need for repetition (e.g. the desire to be told again and again

the same stories, even with the same expressions, or to play the same games

over and over again). These phenomena, though part of the child’s normal

development,  can  be  described  as  neurotic  symptoms.  The  lessening  or

overcoming of these symptoms amounts to a modification of oral, urethral

and anal anxieties; this, in turn, implies a modification of persecutory and

depressive anxieties.

The capacity of the ego step by step to evolve defences which enable it in

some measure to work through anxieties is an essential part of the process of

modification of anxiety. In the earliest stage (paranoid-schizoid), anxiety is

counteracted  by  extreme  and  powerful  defences,  such  as  splitting,
                            32
omnipotence and denial. In the following stage (depressive position), the

defences  undergo,  as  we  have  seen,  significant  changes  which  are

characterized  by  the  ego’s  greater  capacity  to  sustain  anxiety.  As  in  the

second  year  further  progress  in  ego-development  takes  place,  the  infant

makes use of his growing adaptation to external reality and of his growing

control  of  bodily  functions  in  the  testing  of  internal  dangers  by  external

reality.All these changes are characteristic of the obsessional mechanisms which

can also be regarded as a very important defence. For instance, by acquiring

habits of cleanliness, the infant’s anxieties about his dangerous faeces (i.e. his

destructiveness), his bad internalized objects and internal chaos are again and

again temporarily diminished. Control of the sphincter proves to him that he

can control inner dangers and his internal objects. Furthermore, the actual

excrements serve as evidence against his phantastic fears of their destructive

quality. They can now be ejected in conformity with the demands of mother

or  nurse  who,  by  showing  approval  of  the  conditions  under  which  the

excrements are produced, also seem to approve of the nature of the faeces,
                                      33
and this makes the faeces ‘good’. As a result, the infant might feel that the

harm which, in his aggressive phantasies, was done by his excrements to his

internal  and  external  objects  can  be  undone.  The  acquiring  of  habits  of

cleanliness, therefore, also diminishes guilt and satisfies the drive to make
          34
reparation.

  Obsessional mechanisms form an important part of ego-development. They

enable the ego to keep anxiety temporarily at bay. This in turn helps the ego

to  achieve  greater  integration  and  strength;  thereby  the  gradual  working

through, diminishing and modifying of anxiety become possible. However,

obsessional mechanisms are only one of the defences at this stage. If they are

excessive and become the main defence, this can be taken as an indication

that the ego cannot effectively deal with anxiety of a psychotic nature and

that a severe obsessional neurosis is developing in the child.

  Another fundamental change in defences characterizes the stage at which

the genital libido gains in strength. When this happens, as we have seen, the

ego is more integrated; the adaptation to external reality has improved; the

function  of  consciousness  has  expanded;  the  super-ego  is  also  more

integrated; a fuller synthesis of unconscious processes, that is to say within

the  unconscious  parts  of  the  ego  and  super-ego,  has  come  about;  the

demarcation  between  conscious  and  unconscious  is  more  distinct.  These

developments make it possible for repression to take a leading part among the
          35
defences.  An  essential  factor  in  repression  is  the  reprimanding  and

prohibiting aspect of the super-ego, an aspect which as a result of progress in

the super-ego organization gains in strength. The demands of the super-ego to

keep  out  of  consciousness  certain  impulses  and  phantasies,  both  of  an

aggressive and libidinal nature, are more easily met by the ego because it has

progressed both in integration and in assimilation of the super-ego.I have described in a former section that even during the first months of

life the ego inhibits instinctual desires, initially under pressure of persecutory

and,  somewhat  later,  of  depressive  anxieties.  A  further  step  in  the

development of instinctual inhibitions comes about when the ego can make

use of repression.

We have seen the ways in which the ego uses splitting during the paranoid-
                36
schizoid  phase.  The  mechanism  of  splitting  underlies  repression  (as  is

implied in Freud’s concept); but in contrast to the earliest forms of splitting

which lead to states of disintegration, repression does not normally result in a

disintegration  of  the  self.  Since  at  this  stage  there  is  greater  integration,

within both the conscious and the unconscious parts of the mind, and since in

repression the splitting predominantly effects a division between conscious

and  unconscious,  neither  part  of  the  self  is  exposed  to  the  degree  of

disintegration which may arise in previous stages. However, the extent to

which splitting processes are resorted to in the first few months of life vitally

influences  the  use  of  repression  at  a  later  stage.  For  if  early  schizoid

mechanisms and anxieties have not been sufficiently overcome, the result

may  be  that  instead  of  a  fluid  boundary  between  the  conscious  and

unconscious, a rigid barrier between them arises; this indicates that repression

is  excessive  and  that,  in  consequence,  development  is  disturbed.  With

moderate repression, on the other hand, the unconscious and conscious are

more likely to remain ‘porous’ to one another and therefore impulses and

their derivatives are, in some measure, allowed to come up again and again

from the unconscious and are subjected by the ego to a procedure of selection

and rejection. The choice of the impulses, phantasies and thoughts which are

to be repressed depends on the increased capacity of the ego to accept the

standards  of  the  external  objects.  This  capacity  is  linked  with  the  greater

synthesis within the super-ego and the growing assimilation of the super-ego

by the ego.

The changes in the structure of the super-ego, which come about gradually,

and are throughout linked with the oedipal development, contribute to the

decline of the Oedipus complex at the onset of the latency period. In other

words, the progress in the libidinal organization and the various adjustments

of  which  the  ego  becomes  capable  at  this  stage  are  bound  up  with  the

modification  of  persecutory  and  depressive  anxieties  relating  to  the

internalized parents, which implies greater security in the inner world.

  Viewed in the light of the vicissitudes of anxiety, the changes characteristicof  the  onset  of  the  latency  period  could  be  summarized  as  follows:  the

relation with the parents is more secure; the introjected parents approximate

more  closely  to  the  picture  of  the  real  parents;  their  standards,  their

admonitions and prohibitions are accepted and internalized and therefore the

repression  of  the  Oedipus  desires  is  more  effective.  All  this  represents  a

climax  of  the  super-ego  development  which  is  the  result  of  a  process

extending over the first years of life.



                                      CONCLUSION

 


I  have  discussed  in  detail  the  first  steps  in  overcoming  the  depressive

position which characterize the latter half of the first year of life. We have

seen that in the earliest stages, when persecutory anxiety predominates, the

infant’s objects are of a primitive and persecutory nature; they devour, tear

up, poison, flood, etc., that is to say, the variety of oral, urethral and anal

desires and phantasies are projected on to the external as well as on to the

internalized objects. The picture of these objects alters step by step in the

infant’s mind as the libidinal organization progresses and anxiety becomes

modified.

His  relations  to  both  his  internal  and  his  external  world  improve

simultaneously; the interdependence between these relations implies changes

in the processes of introjection and projection which are an essential factor in

diminishing persecutory and depressive anxieties. All this results in a greater

capacity of the ego to assimilate the super-ego, and in this way the strength of

the ego increases.

  When stabilization is achieved, some fundamental factors have undergone

alteration. I am not concerned at this point with the progress of the ego—

which, as I have tried to show, is at every step bound up with the emotional

development  and  the  modification  of  anxiety—it  is  the changes  in

unconscious processes which I wish to underline. These changes become, I

think, more understandable if we link them with the origin of anxiety. Here I

refer back to my contention that destructive impulses (the death instinct) are
                                                          37
the  primary  factor  in  the  causation  of  anxiety.  Greed  is  increased  by

grievances and hatred, that is to say, by manifestations of the destructive

instinct;  but  these  manifestations  are  in  turn  reinforced  by  persecutory

anxiety. When, in the course of development, anxiety both diminishes and ismore securely kept at bay, grievances and hatred as well as greed diminish,

and this ultimately leads to a lessening of ambivalence. To express this in

terms of instincts: when the infantile neurosis has run its course, that is to

say, when persecutory and depressive anxieties have been diminished and

modified, the balance in the fusion of the life and death instincts (and thus

between  libido  and  aggression)  has  in  some  ways  altered.  This  implies

important changes in unconscious processes, that is to say, in the structure of

the super-ego and in the structure and domain of the unconscious (as well as

conscious) parts of the ego.

We have seen that the fluctuations between libidinal positions and between

progression and regression which characterize the first years of childhood are

inextricably linked with the vicissitudes of the persecutory and depressive

anxieties  arising  in  early  infancy.  These  anxieties  are  thus  not  only  an

essential factor in fixation and regression but also perpetually influence the

course of development.

It is a precondition for normal development that in the interplay between

regression  and  progression  fundamental  aspects  of  the  progress  already

achieved are maintained. In other words, that the process of integration and

synthesis  is  not  fundamentally  and  permanently  disturbed.  If  anxiety  is

gradually modified, progression is bound to dominate over regression and, in

the  course  of  the  infantile  neurosis,  the  basis  for  mental  stability  is

established.


                                        NOTES


1 (p. 64)

  Margaret A. Ribble has reported observations on 500 infants (‘Infantile

Experience in Relation to Personality Development’, 1944), and expressed

views, some of which are complementary to conclusions I reached through

the analysis of young children.

  Thus, regarding the relation to the mother from the beginning of life, she

stresses  the  infant’s  need  to  be  ‘mothered’  which  goes  beyond  the

gratification by sucking; e.g. on p. 631, she says:

  ‘Much of the quality and the cohesiveness of a child’s personality depends

upon an emotional attachment to the mother. This attachment or, to use the

psycho-analytic  term,  cathexis  for  the  mother  grows  gradually  out  of  the

satisfaction it derives from her. We have studied the nature of this developingattachment which is so elusive yet so essential in considerable detail. Three

types  of  sensory  experience,  namely,  tactile,  kinaesthetic,  or  the  sense  of

body  position,  and  sound,  contribute  primarily  to  its  formation.  The

development of these sensory capacities has been mentioned by nearly all

observers of infantile behaviour . . . but their particular importance for the

personal relation between mother and child has not been emphasized.’

The importance of this personal relation for the physical development of

the child is stressed by her in various places; e.g. on p. 630 she says:

‘. . . the most trivial irregularities in the personal care and handling of any

baby, such as too little contact with the mother, too little handling, or changes

of  nurses  or  in  general  routine,  frequently  result  in  such  disturbances  as

pallor,  irregular  breathing,  and  feeding  disturbances.  In  infants  who  are

constitutionally sensitive or poorly organized, these disturbances, if they are

too frequent, may permanently alter the organic and psychic development,

and not infrequently they threaten life itself.’

In another passage the author summarizes these disturbances as follows (p.

630):

  ‘The infant is, by its very incompleteness of brain and nervous system,

continuously in potential danger of functional disorganization. Outwardly the

danger is that of sudden separation from the mother who either intuitively or

knowingly must sustain this functional balance. Actual neglect or lack of love

may be equally disastrous. Inwardly the danger appears to be the mounting of

tension from biological needs and the inability of the organism to maintain its

inner energy or metabolic equilibrium and reflex excitability. The need for

oxygen may become acute because the young infant’s breathing mechanisms

are not well enough developed to work adequately with the increasing inner

demand caused by rapid forebrain development.’

  These  functional  disturbances  which,  according  to  M.  Ribble’s

observation,  may  amount  to  a  danger  to  life,  could  be  interpreted  as  an

expression  of  the  death  instinct  which,  according  to  Freud,  is  primarily

directed against the organism itself (Beyond the Pleasure Principle). I have

contended that this danger which stirs up the fear of annihilation, of death, is

the primary cause of anxiety. The fact that the biological, physiological and

psychological factors are bound up from the beginning of post-natal life is

illustrated by M. Ribble’s observations. I would draw the further conclusion

that the mother’s consistent and loving care of the baby, which strengthens

his libidinal relation to her (and which, with infants who are ‘constitutionallysensitive  or  poorly  organized’,  is  even  essential  for  keeping  them  alive),

supports  the  life  instinct  in  its  struggle  against  the  death  instinct.  In  the

present  paper  and  in  ‘The  Theory  of  Anxiety  and  Guilt’  (this  volume)  I

discuss this point more fully.

  Another issue on which Dr Ribble’s conclusions coincide with mine relates

to the changes which she describes as occurring approximately by the third

month. These changes can be regarded as the physiological counterpart to the

features of emotional life which I describe as the onset of the depressive

position. She says (p. 643):

  ‘By  this  time,  the  organic  activities  of  breathing,  of  digesting,  and  of

circulating blood have begun to show considerable stability, indicating that

the autonomic nervous system has taken over its specific functions. We know

from  anatomical  studies  that  the  foetal  system  of  circulation  is  usually

obliterated by this time. . . . At about this time, typical adult patterns of brain

waves begin to appear in the electro-encephalogram . . . and they probably

indicate  a  more  mature  form  of  cerebral  activity.  Outbursts  of  emotional

reaction, not always well differentiated but obviously expressing positive or

negative direction, are seen to involve the entire motor system. . . . The eyes

focus well and can follow the mother about, the ears function well and can

differentiate  the  sounds  she  makes.  Sound  or  sight  of  her  produces  the

positive  emotional  responses  formerly  obtained  only  from  contact,  and

consist of appropriate smiling and even genuine outbursts of joy.’

  These  changes  are,  I  think,  bound  up  with  the  diminution  of  splitting

processes  and  with  progress  in  ego-integration  and  object-relations,

particularly with the capacity of the infant to perceive and to introject the

mother as a whole person—all of which I have described as happening in the

second quarter of the first year with the onset of the depressive position.


2 (p. 74)

If these fundamental adjustments in the relation between the ego and the

super-ego have not sufficiently come about in early development, it is one of

the essential tasks of the psycho-analytic procedure to enable the patient to

make  them  retrospectively.  This  is  only  possible  by  the  analysis  of  the

earliest stages of development (as well as of later ones), and by a thorough

analysis  of  the  negative  as  well  as  of  the  positive  transference.  In  the

fluctuating transference situation, the external and internal figures—good and

bad—which primarily shape the super-ego development and object-relations,are transferred on to the psycho-analyst. Therefore at times he is bound to

stand  for  frightening  figures,  and  only  in  this  way  can  the  infantile

persecutory anxieties be fully experienced, worked through and diminished.

If  the  psycho-analyst  is  inclined  to  reinforce  the  positive  transference,  he

avoids  playing  in  the  patient’s  mind  the  part  of  bad  figures  and  is

predominantly introjected as a good object. Then, in some cases, belief in

good objects may be strengthened; but such a gain may be far from stable, for

the  patient  has  not  been  enabled  to  experience  the  hatred,  anxiety  and

suspicion which in the early stages of life were related to the frightening and

dangerous aspects of the parents. It is only by analysing the negative as well

as the positive transference that the psycho-analyst appears alternately in the

rôle of good and bad objects, is alternately loved and hated, admired and

dreaded.  The  patient  is  thus  enabled  to  work  through,  and  therefore  to

modify,  early  anxiety-situations;  the  splitting  between  the  good  and  bad

figures decreases; they become more synthesized, that is to say, aggression

becomes  mitigated  by  libido.  In  other  words,  persecutory  and  depressive

anxieties are diminished, as one might say, at the root.


3 (p. 91)

  Abraham referred to the fixation of libido at the oral level as one of the

fundamental etiological factors in melancholia. He described this fixation in a

particular case as follows: ‘In his depressive states he would be overcome by

longing for his mother’s breast, a longing that was indescribably powerful

and different from anything else. If the libido still remains fixated on this

point  when  the  individual  is  grown  up,  then  one  of  the  most  important

conditions  for  the  appearance  of  a  melancholic  depression  is  fulfilled.’

(Selected Papers, p. 458.)

  Abraham  substantiated  his  conclusions,  which  threw  new  light  on  the

connection between melancholia and normal mourning, by extracts from two

case-histories. These were actually the first two cases of manic-depression to

undergo a thorough analysis—a new venture in the development of psycho-

analysis. Up to that time not much clinical material had been published in

support of Freud’s discovery regarding melancholia. As Abraham said (loc.

cit.,  pp.  433–4):  ‘Freud  described  in  general  outlines  the  psycho-sexual

processes  that  take  place  in  the  melancholic.  He  was  able  to  obtain  an

intuitive idea of them from the occasional treatment of depressive patients;

but not very much clinical material has been published up till now in theliterature of psycho-analysis in support of this theory.’

But  even  from  these  few  cases  Abraham  had  come  to  understand  that

already in childhood (at the age of five) there had been an actual state of

melancholia. He said he would be inclined to speak of ‘a “primal parathymia”

ensuing from the boy’s Oedipus complex’ and concluded this description as

follows: ‘It is this state of mind that we call melancholia’ (p. 469).

  Sandor  Radó,  in  his  paper  ‘The  Problem  of  Melancholia’  (1928)  went

further  and  considered  that  the  root  of  melancholia  can  be  found  in  the

hunger situation of the suckling baby. He said: ‘The deepest fixation-point in

the depressive disposition is to be found in the situation of threatened loss of

love (Freud), more especially in the hunger situation of the suckling baby.’

Referring to Freud’s statement that in mania the ego is once more merged

with the super-ego in unity, Radó inferred that ‘this process is the faithful

intra-psychic repetition of the experience of that fusing with the mother that

takes place during drinking at her breast’. Nevertheless, Radó did not apply

this conclusion to the emotional life of the infant; he referred only to the

etiology of melancholia.


4 (p. 80)

The picture of the first six months of life which I have outlined in these

two  sections  implies  a  modification  of  some  concepts  presented  in  my

Psycho-Analysis of Children. I there described the confluence of aggressive

impulses from all sources as the ‘phase of maximal sadism’. I still believe

that  aggressive  impulses  are  at  their  height  during  the  stage  in  which

persecutory  anxiety  predominates;  or,  in  other  words,  that  persecutory

anxiety is stirred up by the destructive instinct and is constantly fed by the

projection  of  destructive  impulses  on  to  objects.  For  it  is  inherent  in  the

nature of persecutory anxiety that it increases hatred and attacks against the

object who is felt to be persecutory, and this in turn reinforces the feeling of

persecution.

  Some time after The Psycho-Analysis of Children was published I worked

out my concept of the depressive position. As I now see it, with the advance

in  object-relations  between  three  to  six  months  of  age,  both  destructive

impulses and persecutory anxiety diminish and the depressive position arises.

While, therefore, my views have not altered regarding the close connection

between persecutory anxiety and the predominance of sadism, I have to make

an  alteration  as  far  as  dating  is  concerned.  Formerly  I  suggested  that  thephase when sadism is at its height is about the middle of the first year; now I

would  say  that  this  phase  extends  over  the  first  three  months  of  life  and

corresponds to the paranoid-schizoid position described in the first section of

this chapter. If we were to assume a certain individually varying sum-total of

aggression in the young infant, this amount, I think, would be no less at the

beginning of postnatal life than at the stage when cannibalistic, urethral and

anal impulses and phantasies operate in full strength. Considered in terms of

quantity only (a point of view which, however, does not take into account the

various other factors determining the operation of the two instincts) it could

be  said  that,  as  more  sources  of  aggression  are  tapped  and  more

manifestations of aggression become possible, a process of distribution takes

place. It is inherent in development that an increasing number of aptitudes,

both  physical  and  mental,  gradually  come  into  play;  and  the  fact  that

impulses and phantasies from various sources overlap, interact and reinforce

one another can also be considered as expressing progress in integration and

synthesis.  Furthermore,  to  the  confluence  of  aggressive  impulses  and

phantasies corresponds the confluence of oral, urethral and anal phantasies of

a libidinal nature. This means that the struggle between libido and aggression

is carried out over a wider field. As I said in my Psycho-Analysis of Children,

p. 150:

  ‘The  emergence  of  the  stages  of  organization  with  which  we  are

acquainted  corresponds,  I  would  say,  not  only  to  the  positions  which  the

libido has won and established in its struggle with the destructive instinct,

but, since these two components are for ever united as well as opposed, to a

growing adjustment between them.’

The infant’s capacity to enter into the depressive position and to establish

the complete object within himself implies that he is not as strongly ruled by

destructive impulses and persecutory anxiety as at an earlier stage. Increasing

integration brings about changes in the nature of his anxiety, for when love

and hatred become more synthesized in relation to the object this gives rise,

as  we  have  seen,  to  great  mental  pain—to  depressive  feelings  and  guilt.

Hatred becomes to some extent mitigated by love, whereas feelings of love

are  to  some  extent  affected  by  hatred,  the  result  being  that  the  infant’s

emotions towards his objects change in quality. At the same time the progress

in  integration  and  in  object-relations  enables  the  ego  to  develop  more

effective ways of dealing with the destructive impulses and the anxiety to

which they give rise. However, we must not lose sight of the fact that sadisticimpulses, particularly since they are operative at various zones, are a most

potent factor in the infant’s conflicts arising at this stage; for the essence of

the depressive position consists of the infant’s anxiety lest his loved object be

harmed or destroyed by his sadism.

The  emotional  and  mental  processes  during  the  first  year  of  life  (and

recurring throughout the first five or six years) could be defined in terms of

success  or  failure  in  the  struggle  between  aggression  and  libido;  and  the

working  through  of  the  depressive  position  implies  that  in  this  struggle

(which  is  renewed  at  every  mental  or  physical  crisis)  the  ego  is  able  to

develop adequate methods of dealing with and modifying persecutory and

depressive  anxieties—ultimately  of  diminishing  and  keeping  at  bay

aggression directed against loved objects.

I chose the term ‘position’ in regard to the paranoid and depressive phases

because  these  groupings  of  anxieties  and  defences,  although  arising  first

during  the  earliest  stages,  are  not  restricted  to  them  but  occur  and  recur

during the first years of childhood and under certain circumstances in later

life.                                            7

 

ON OBSERVING THE BEHAVIOUR OF YOUNG INFANTS

 

                                        (1952)

 

                                            I

 


THE  theoretical  conclusions  presented  in  the  previous  chapter  are  derived
                                                          1
from  psycho-analytic  work  with  young  children.  We  should  expect  such

conclusions to be substantiated by observations of infants’ behaviour during

the first year of life. This corroborative evidence, however, has its limitations,

for, as we know unconscious processes are only partly revealed in behaviour,

whether of infants or adults. Keeping this reservation in mind, we are able to

gain some confirmation of psycho-analytic findings in our study of babies.

  Many details of infants’ behaviour which formerly escaped attention or

remained  enigmatic,  have  become  more  understandable  and  significant

through our increased knowledge of early unconscious processes; in other

words, our faculty for observation in this particular field has been sharpened.

We are, no doubt, hampered in our study of young infants by their inability to

talk, but there are many details of early emotional development which we can

gather  by  means  other  than  language.  If  we  are  to  understand  the  young

infant, though, we need not only greater knowledge but also a full sympathy

with  him,  based  on  our  unconscious  being  in  close  touch  with  his

unconscious.

I now propose to consider a few details of infant behaviour in the light of

the theoretical conclusions put forward in various recent papers. Since I shall

take little account here of the many variations which exist within the range of

fundamental attitudes, my description is bound to be rather over-simplified.

Also, all inferences which I shall draw as to further development must be

qualified by the following consideration. From the beginning of postnatal life

and at every stage of development, external factors affect the outcome. Even

with  adults,  as  we  know,  attitudes  and  character  may  be  favourably  or

unfavourably influenced by environment and circumstances, and this applies

to a far greater extent to children. Therefore, in relating conclusions drawnfrom my psycho-analytic experience to the study of young infants, I am only

suggesting possible, or, one might say, probable lines of development.

The  new-born  infant  suffers  from  persecutory  anxiety  aroused  by  the

process of birth and by the loss of the intra-uterine situation. A prolonged or

difficult delivery is bound to intensify this anxiety. Another aspect of this

anxiety-situation  is  the  necessity  forced  on  the  infant  to  adapt  himself  to

entirely new conditions.

  These feelings are in some degree relieved by the various measures taken

to give him warmth, support and comfort, and particularly by the gratification

he  feels  in  receiving  food  and  in  sucking  the  breast.  These  experiences,

culminating in the first experience of sucking, initiate, as we may assume, the

relation to the ‘good’ mother. It appears that these gratifications in some way

also go towards making up for the loss of the intra-uterine state. From the

first feeding experience onwards, losing and regaining the loved object (the

good breast) become an essential part of infantile emotional life.

The infant’s relations to his first object, the mother, and towards food are

bound  up  with  each  other  from  the  beginning.  Therefore  the  study  of

fundamental patterns of attitudes towards food seems the best approach to the
                                    2
understanding of young infants.

The initial attitude towards food ranges from an apparent absence of greed

to great avidity. At this point I shall, therefore, briefly recapitulate some of

my conclusions regarding greed: I suggested in the previous paper that greed

arises when, in the interaction between libidinal and aggressive impulses, the

latter are reinforced; greed may be increased from the outset by persecutory

anxiety.  On  the  other  hand,  as  I  pointed  out,  the  infant’s  earliest  feeding

inhibitions  can  also  be  attributed  to  persecutory  anxiety;  this  means  that

persecutory anxiety in some cases increases greed and in others inhibits it.

Since  greed  is  inherent  in  the  first  desires  directed  towards  the  breast,  it

vitally influences the relation to the mother and object-relations in general.


                                            II

 


  Considerable differences in the attitude towards sucking are noticeable in
                                                    3
babies even during the first few days of life, and become more pronounced

as time goes on. We have, of course, to take into full consideration every

detail  in  the  way  the  infant  is  fed  and  handled  by  his  mother.  It  can  beobserved that an initially promising attitude towards food may be disrupted

by adverse feeding conditions; whereas difficulties in sucking can sometimes
                                                              4
be  mitigated  by  the  mother’s  love  and  patience.  Some  children  who,

although good feeders, are not markedly greedy, show unmistakable signs of

love and of a developing interest in the mother at a very early stage—an

attitude which contains some of the essential elements of an object-relation. I

have seen babies as young as three weeks interrupt their sucking for a short

time to play with the mother’s breast or to look towards her face. I have also

observed that young infants—even as early as in the second month—would

in wakeful periods after feeding lie on the mother’s lap, look up at her, listen

to her voice and respond to it by their facial expression; it was like a loving

conversation  between  mother  and  baby.  Such  behaviour  implies  that

gratification is as much related to the object which gives the food as to the

food itself. Marked indications of an object-relation at an early stage, together

with  pleasure  in  food,  augur  well,  I  think,  both  for  future  relations  with

people and for emotional development as a whole. We might conclude that in

these children anxiety is not excessive in proportion to the strength of the

ego, i.e. that the ego is already in some measure able to sustain frustration

and anxiety and to deal with them. At the same time we are bound to assume

that the innate capacity for love which shows itself in an early object-relation

can only develop freely because anxiety is not excessive.

It is interesting to consider from this angle the behaviour of some infants in

their first few days of life, as described by Middlemore under the heading of
                                  5
‘sleepy  satisfied  sucklings’.  She  accounts  for  their  behaviour  in  the

following terms: ‘Because their sucking reflex was not immediately elicited,

they were free to approach the breast in various ways.’ These infants by the

fourth day fed steadily and were very gentle in the approach to the breast.

‘. . . they seemed to like licking and mouthing the nipple as much as they

liked sucking. An interesting outcome of the forward distribution of pleasant

feeling was the habit of play. One sleepy child began each feed by playing

with the nipple in preference to sucking. During the third week, the mother

contrived  to  shift  the  accustomed  play  to  the  end  of  the  feed,  and  this

persisted throughout ten months of breast-feeding, to the delight of mother

and child’ (loc. cit.). Since the ‘sleepy satisfied suckings’ both developed into

good feeders and continued the play at the breast, I would assume that with

them the relation to the first object (the breast) was from the beginning as

important as the gratification derived from sucking and from food. One couldgo still further. It may be due to somatic factors that in some babies the

sucking reflex is not immediately elicited, but there is good reason to believe

that  mental  processes  are  also  involved.  I  would  suggest  that  the  gentle

approach to the breast preceding the pleasure in sucking may also in some

measure result from anxiety.

I have referred in the previous paper to my hypothesis that difficulties in

sucking occurring at the beginning of life are bound up with persecutory

anxiety. The infant’s aggressive impulses towards the breast tend to turn it in

his  mind  into  a  vampire-like  or  devouring  object,  and  this  anxiety  could

inhibit greed and in consequence the desire to suck. I would therefore suggest

that the ‘sleepy satisfied suckling’ might deal with this anxiety by restraining

the desire to suck until he has established a safe libidinal relation to the breast

by licking and mouthing it. This would imply that from the beginning of

post-natal  life  some  infants  attempt  to  counteract  the  persecutory  anxiety

about the ‘bad’ breast by establishing a ‘good’ relation to the breast. Those

infants who are already able at such an early stage to turn markedly to the

object appear to have, as suggested above, a strong capacity for love.

Let us consider from this angle another group Middlemore describes. She

observed that four out of seven ‘active satisfied sucklings’ were biting the

nipple and that these babies did not ‘bite the nipple in trying to get a better

hold on it; the two babies who bit most frequently had easy access to the

breast’. Furthermore, ‘the active babies who bit the nipple most often seemed

somewhat  to  enjoy  biting;  their  biting  was  leisurely  and  quite  unlike  the
                                                                          6
uneasy  chewing  and  gnawing  of  unsatisfied  babies.  .  .  .’  This  early

expression of pleasure in biting might lead us to conclude that destructive

impulses were unrestrained in these children and therefore that greed and the

libidinal desire to suck were unimpaired. However, even these babies were

not as unrestrained as might appear, for three out of seven ‘refused a few of

their  earlier  feeds  with  struggles  and  screaming  protests.  Sometimes  they

screamed  at  the  gentlest  handling  and  contact  with  the  nipple  while

evacuation  occurred  at  the  same  time;  but  at  the  next  feed  they  were
                                      7
sometimes intent upon sucking’. This, I think, indicates that greed may be

reinforced by anxiety in contrast to the ‘sleepy satisfied sucklings’ in whom

anxiety causes greed to be restrained.

  Middlemore  mentioned  that  of  the  seven  ‘sleepy  satisfied’  infants  she

observed, six were handled very gently by their mothers, whereas with some

‘unsatisfied  sucklings’  the  mothers’  anxiety  was  aroused  and  she  becameimpatient. Such an attitude is bound to increase anxiety in the child and thus a

vicious circle is established.

As regards the ‘sleepy satisfied sucklings’, if, as I suggested, the relation to

the first object is used as a fundamental method of counteracting anxiety, any

disturbance in the relation to the mother is bound to stir up anxiety and may

lead  to  severe  difficulties  in  taking  food.  The  mother’s  attitude  seems  to

matter less in the case of the ‘active satisfied sucklings’, but this may be

misleading. As I see it, with these infants the danger does not lie so much in

the disturbance in feeding (although even with very greedy children, feeding

inhibitions occur) as in the impairment of the object-relation.

The  conclusion  is  that  with  all  children  the  mother’s  patient  and

understanding  handling  from  the  earliest  days  onwards  is  of  the  greatest

moment. This is seen more clearly as a result of our increased knowledge of

early emotional life. As I have pointed out, ‘The fact that a good relation to

its mother and to the external world helps the baby to overcome its early

paranoid  anxieties  throws  a  new  light  on  the  importance  of  the  earliest

experiences.  From  its  inception  analysis  has  always  laid  stress  on  the

importance of the child’s early experiences, but it seems to me that only since

we know more about the nature and contents of its early anxieties, and the

continuous interplay between its actual experiences and its phantasy-life, are
                                                                              8
we able fully to understand why the external factor is so important.’

At every step, persecutory and depressive anxieties may be reduced, or, for

that  matter,  increased,  by  the  mother’s  attitude;  and  the  extent  to  which

helpful  or  persecutory  figures  will  prevail  in  the  infant’s  unconscious  is

strongly influenced by his actual experiences, primarily with his mother, but

also soon with the father and other members of the family.


                                            III

 


The  close  bond  between  a  young  infant  and  his  mother  centres  on  the

relation to her breast. Although, from the earliest days onwards, the infant

also responds to other features of the mother—her voice, her face, her hands

—the  fundamental  experiences  of  happiness  and  love,  of  frustration  and

hatred, are inextricably linked with the mother’s breast. This early bond with

the mother, which is strengthened as the breast is being securely established

in the inner world, basically influences all other relationships, in the first

place with the father; it underlies the capacity to form any deep and strongattachment to one person.

  With bottle-fed babies the bottle can take the place of the breast if it is

given  in  a  situation  approximating  to  breast-feeding, i.e.  if  there  is  close

physical nearness to the mother and the infant is handled and fed in a loving

way. Under such conditions the infant may be able to establish within himself

an object felt to be the primary source of goodness. In this sense he takes into

himself the good breast, a process which underlies a secure relation to the

mother. It would appear, however, that the introjection of the good breast (the

good mother) differs in some ways between children who are breast-fed and

those who are not. It is beyond the frame of the present chapter to elaborate

on these differences and their effect on mental life. (See note I, p. 117.)

In my description of very early object-relations I have referred to children

who are good feeders but do not show excessive greed. Some very greedy

infants  also  give  early  signs  of  a  developing  interest  in  people  in  which,

however, a similarity to their greedy attitude towards food can be detected.

For instance, an impetuous need for the presence of people often seems to

relate  less  to  the  person  than  to  the  attention  desired.  Such  children  can

hardly  bear  to  be  left  alone  and  appear  to  require  constantly  either

gratification  by  food  or  by  attention.  This  would  indicate  that  greed  is

reinforced by anxiety and that there is a failure both in establishing securely

the good object in the inner world and in building up trust in the mother as a

good  external  object.  This  failure  may  foreshadow  future  difficulties:  for

instance, a greedy and anxious need for company, which often goes with the

fear of being alone, and may result in unstable and transitory object-relations

which could be described as ‘promiscuous’.


                                            IV

 


To turn now to the bad feeders. A very slow taking of food often implies

lack of enjoyment, i.e. of libidinal gratification; this, if coupled with an early

and marked interest in the mother and in other people, suggests that object-

relations are partly used as an escape from persecutory anxiety attaching to

food. Although good relations to people may develop in such children, the

excessive anxiety which manifests itself in this attitude to food remains a

danger to emotional stability. One of the various difficulties which may arise

later  is  an  inhibition  in  taking  in  sublimated  food, i.e.  a  disturbance  in

intellectual development.A marked refusal of food (as compared with slow feeding) is clearly an

indication of a severe disturbance, although with some children this difficulty

diminishes when new foods are introduced, e.g. bottle instead of breast, or

solid food instead of liquid.

A lack of enjoyment of food or complete refusal of it, if combined with a

deficiency  in  developing  object-relations,  indicates  that  the  paranoid  and

schizoid mechanisms, which are at their height during the first three to four

months of life, are excessive or not being adequately dealt with by the ego.

This in turn suggests that destructive impulses and persecutory anxiety are

prevalent, ego-defences inadequate and modification of anxiety insufficient.

  Another type of deficient object-relation is characteristic of some over-

greedy children. With them food becomes almost the exclusive source of

gratification and little interest in people develops. I would conclude that they

too, do not successfully work through the paranoid-schizoid position.


                                            V

 


The young infant’s attitude towards frustration is revealing. Some infants

—among them good feeders—may refuse food when a meal is delayed, or

give other signs of a disturbance in the relation to the mother. Infants who

show both pleasure in food and love for the mother bear frustration over food

more  easily,  the  ensuing  disturbance  in  the  relation  to  the  mother  is  less

severe and its effects do not last so long. This is an indication that trust in the

mother and love for her are relatively well established.

  These  fundamental  attitudes  also  influence  the  way  bottle-feeding

(supplementing breast-feeding or as a substitute for it) is accepted even by

very young infants. Some babies experience a strong sense of grievance when

the bottle is introduced; they feel it to be a loss of the primary good object

and  a  deprivation  imposed  by  the  ‘bad’  mother.  Such  feelings  do  not

necessarily manifest themselves in the repudiation of the new food; but the

persecutory anxiety and distrust stirred up by this experience may disturb the

relation to the mother and therefore increase phobic anxieties, such as fear of

strangers (at this early stage new food is in a sense a stranger); or difficulties

over food may appear later on, or the acceptance of food in sublimated forms,

e.g. knowledge, may be impeded.

  Other  babies  accept  the  new  food  with  less  resentment.  This  implies  a

greater actual tolerance of deprivation, which is different from an apparentsubmission to it and derives from a relatively secure relation to the mother,

enabling the infant to turn to a new food (and object) while maintaining love

for her.

The following instance illustrates the way in which a baby came to accept

bottles supplementing breast-feeding. The infant girl A was a good feeder

(but not excessively greedy) and soon gave those indications of a developing

object-relation which I have described above. These good relations to food

and to the mother were shown in the leisurely way in which she took her

food, coupled with evident enjoyment of it; in her occasional interruption of

her feed, when only a few weeks old, to look up at the mother’s face or at her

breast; a little later on, in even taking friendly notice of the family during her

feed. In the sixth week a bottle had to be introduced following the evening

feed,  because  the  breast  milk  was  insufficient. A  took  the  bottle  without

difficulty. In the tenth week, however, she showed on two evenings signs of

reluctance  while  drinking  from  the  bottle,  but  finished  it.  On  the  third

evening  she  refused  it  altogether.  There  seemed  no  physical  nor  mental

disturbance  at  the  time;  sleep  and  appetite  were  normal.  The  mother,  not

wishing to force her, put her into the cot after the breast feed, thinking she

might  go  to  sleep.  The  child  cried  with  hunger,  so  the  mother,  without

picking her up, gave her the bottle which she now emptied eagerly. The same

thing happened on the subsequent evenings: when on the mother’s lap, the

infant refused the bottle, but took it at once when she was put into her cot.

After  a  few  days  the  baby  accepted  the  bottle  while  she  was  still  in  her

mother’s arms and sucked readily this time; there was no more difficulty

when other bottles were introduced.

I would assume that depressive anxiety had been increasing and had, at this

point, led to the baby’s revulsion against the bottle given immediately after

breast-feeding.  This  would  suggest  a  relatively  early  onset  of  depressive
      9
anxiety which, however, is in keeping with the fact that in this baby the

relation to her mother developed very early and markedly; changes in this

relation had been quite noticeable during the few weeks preceding the refusal

of the bottle. I would conclude that because of the increase in depressive

anxiety the nearness to the mother’s breast and its smell heightened both the

infant’s desire to be fed by it and the frustration caused by the breast being

empty. When she was lying in her cot A accepted the bottle because, as I

would suggest, in this situation the new food was kept apart from the desired

breast  which,  at  that  moment,  had  turned  into  the  frustrating  and  injuredbreast. In this way she may have found it easier to keep the relation to the

mother unimpaired by the hatred stirred up by frustration, that is to say, to

keep the good mother (the good breast) intact.

We have still to explain why after a few days the baby accepted the bottle

on her mother’s lap and subsequently had no more difficulties over bottles. I

think that during these days she had succeeded in dealing with her anxiety

sufficiently to accept with less resentment the substitute object together with

the primary one; this would imply an early step towards a distinction between

food and the mother, a distinction which in general proves of fundamental

importance for development.

I shall now quote an instance in which a disturbance in the relation with

the mother arose without being immediately connected with frustration over

food. A mother told me that when her infant B was five months old she had

been left crying longer than usual. When at last the mother came to pick up

the child, she found her in a ‘hysterical’ state; the baby looked terrified, was

evidently frightened of her, and did not seem to recognize her. Only after

some time did she fully re-establish contact with her mother. It is significant

that this happened in day-time, when the child was awake and not long after a

meal. This child usually slept well, but from time to time woke up crying for

no apparent reason. There are good grounds for the assumption that the same

anxiety which was underlying the day-time crying was also the cause for the

disturbed sleep. I would suggest that because the mother did not come when

she was longed for, she turned in the child’s mind into the bad (persecuting)

mother, and that for this reason the child did not seem to recognize her and

was frightened of her.

The following instance is also revealing. A twelve-week-old infant girl C

was left sleeping in the garden. She woke and cried for her mother, but her

crying was not heard because a strong wind was blowing. When the mother

at last came to pick her up, the baby had obviously been crying for a long

time, her face was bathed in tears, and her ordinarily plaintive cry had turned

into uncontrollable screaming. She was carried indoors, still screaming, and

her mother’s attempts to soothe her came to nothing. Eventually, though it

was nearly an hour before her next feed was due, the mother resorted to

offering her the breast—a remedy which had never failed when the child had

been  upset  on  previous  occasions  (though  she  had  never  screamed  so

persistently  and  violently  before).  The  baby  took  the  breast  and  began

sucking lustily, but after a few sucks she rejected the breast and resumed herscreaming. This continued until she put her fingers into her mouth and began

sucking them. She often sucked her fingers, and on many occasions put them

into her mouth when offered the breast. As a rule, the mother had only gently

to remove the fingers and substitute the nipple and the baby would begin

feeding.  This  time,  however,  she  refused  the  breast  and  again  screamed

loudly.  It  took  a  few  moments  before  she  sucked  her  fingers  again;  her

mother allowed her to suck them for some minutes, rocking and soothing her

at the same time, till the baby was sufficiently calm to take the breast and

sucked herself to sleep. It would appear that with this baby, for the same

reasons as in the previous instance, the mother (and her breast) had turned

bad and persecuting, and therefore the breast could not be accepted. After an

attempt to suck, she found that she could not re-establish the relation to the

good breast. She resorted to sucking her fingers, that is to say to an auto-

erotic  pleasure  (Freud).  I  would,  however,  add  that  in  this  instance  the

narcissistic withdrawal was caused by the disturbance in the relation to the

mother, and that the infant refused to give up sucking her fingers because

they  were  more  trustworthy  than  the  breast.  By  sucking  them  she  re-

established  the  relation  to  the  internal  breast  and  thus  regained  enough
                                                                                  10
security to renew the good relation to the external breast and mother. Both

these instances also add, I think, to our understanding of the mechanism of
                                                                              11
early phobias, e.g. the fear stirred by the mother’s absence (Freud). I would

suggest that the phobias which arise during the first months of life are caused

by persecutory anxiety which disturbs the relation to the internalized and the
                  12
external mother.

The division between the good and bad mother and the strong (phobic)

anxiety relating to the bad one are also illustrated by the following instance.

A ten-month-old boy D was held up to the window by his grandmother and

watched the street with great interest. When he looked round, he suddenly

saw very close to him the unfamiliar face of a visitor, an elderly woman, who

had  just  come  in  and  was  standing  beside  the  grandmother.  He  had  an

anxiety-attack which only subsided when the grandmother took him out of

the room. My conclusion is that at this moment the child felt that the ‘good’

grandmother  had  disappeared  and  that  the  stranger  represented  the  ‘bad’

grandmother (a division based on the splitting of the mother into a good and

bad object). I shall return to this instance later on.

This explanation of early anxieties also throws a new light on the phobia of

strangers (Freud). In my view the persecutory aspect of the mother (or thefather),  which  largely  derives  from  destructive  impulses  towards  them,  is

transferred on to strangers.


                                            VI

 


  Disturbances of the kind I have described in the young infant’s relation to

his mother are already observable during the first three or four months of life.

If these disturbances are very frequent and last long they can be taken as an

indication  that  the  paranoid-schizoid  position  is  not  being  dealt  with

effectively.

A persistent lack of interest in the mother even at this early stage, to which

a  little  later  on  is  added  an  indifference  towards  people  in  general  and

towards toys, suggests a more severe disturbance of the same order. This

attitude can also be observed in young infants who are not bad feeders. To the

superficial observer these children, who do not cry much, may appear as

contented and ‘good’. From the analysis of adults and children, whose severe

difficulties  I  could  trace  back  to  babyhood,  I  concluded  that  many  such

infants are in fact mentally ill and withdrawn from the external world owing

to strong persecutory anxiety and excessive use of schizoid mechanisms. In

consequence  depressive  anxiety  cannot  be  successfully  overcome;  the

capacity for love and object-relations, as well as phantasy-life, is inhibited;

the  process  of  symbol-formation  is  impeded,  resulting  in  an  inhibition  of

interests and sublimations.

  Such an attitude which could be described as apathetic is distinct from the

behaviour of a really contented infant who at times demands attention, cries

when he feels frustrated, gives various signs of his interest in people and

pleasure in their company, and is yet at other times quite happy by himself.

This indicates a feeling of security about his internal and external objects; he

can bear the temporary absence of the mother without anxiety because the

good mother is relatively secure in his mind.


                                          VII

 


In other sections I have described the depressive position from various

angles.  To  consider  here  the  effect  of  depressive  anxiety  first  of  all  in

connection with phobias: so far I have related them to persecutory anxietyonly and illustrated this point of view by some instances. Thus I assumed that

the five-month-old baby girl B was frightened of her mother who in her mind

had changed from the good into the bad mother, and that this persecutory

anxiety also disturbed her sleep. I would now suggest that the disturbance in

the relation to the mother was caused by depressive anxiety as well. When

the mother did not return, the anxiety lest the good mother was lost because

greed  and  aggressive  impulses  had  destroyed  her  came  to  the  fore;  this

depressive  anxiety  was  bound  up  with  the  persecutory  fear  that  the  good

mother had changed into the bad one.

In the following instance depressive anxiety was also stirred up by the

infant missing the mother. From the age of six or seven weeks, the infant girl

C had been accustomed to play on her mother’s lap during the hour preceding

her evening feed. One day, when the baby was five months and one week old,

the  mother  had  visitors  and  was  too  busy  to  play  with  the  baby  who,

however, received a good deal of attention from the family and the visitors.

Her mother gave her the evening feed, put her to bed as usual, and the infant

soon dropped off to sleep. Two hours later she woke and cried persistently;

she  refused  milk  (which  at  this  stage  was  already  occasionally  given  by

spoon as a supplement and was usually accepted) and went on crying. Her

mother  gave  up  the  attempt  to  feed  her,  and  the  baby  settled  down

contentedly on her lap for an hour, playing with the mother’s fingers, was

then  given  her  night  feed  at  the  usual  time  and  quickly  fell  asleep.  This

disturbance was most unusual; she may have woken up on other occasions

after the evening feed, but it was only once when she was ill (about two

months previously) that she had woken up and cried. Except for the omission

of the play with the mother there had been no break in the normal routine to

account for the baby waking up and crying. There was no sign of hunger or

physical discomfort; she had been happy all day and slept well during the

night following the incident.

I would suggest that the baby’s crying was caused by her having missed

the playtime with her mother. C had a very strong personal relation with her

and always thoroughly enjoyed this particular hour. While at other waking

periods she was quite content by herself, at this time of the day she would get

restless and obviously expected her mother to play with her until the evening

feed. If having missed this gratification caused the disturbance in her sleep,

we are led to further conclusions. We should have to assume that the baby

had a memory of the experience of this particular enjoyment at this particulartime  of  the  day;  that  the  playtime  was  for  the  baby  not  only  a  strong

satisfaction of libidinal desires but was also felt to be a proof of the loving

relationship with the mother—ultimately of the secure possession of the good

mother; and that this gave her a feeling of security before falling asleep,

bound up with the memory of the playtime. Her sleep was disturbed not only

because she missed this libidinal gratification but also because this frustration

stirred up in the infant both forms of anxiety: depressive anxiety lest she

should  have  lost  the  good  mother  through  her  aggressive  impulses  and,
                                    13
consequently, feelings of guilt;  also  persecutory  anxiety  lest  the  mother

should have turned bad and destructive. My general conclusion is that from

about three or four months onwards both forms of anxiety underlie phobias.

The depressive position is bound up with some of the important changes

which can be observed in young infants towards the middle of the first year

(although they begin somewhat earlier and develop gradually). Persecutory

and depressive anxieties at this stage express themselves in various ways, e.g.

an increased fretfulness, a greater need for attention, or temporary turning

away  from  the  mother,  sudden  attacks  of  temper,  and  a  greater  fear  of

strangers; also children who normally sleep well sometimes sob in their sleep

or suddenly wake up crying with distinct signs of fear or sadness. At this

stage  the  facial  expression  changes  considerably;  the  greater  capacity  for

perception, the greater interest in people and things and the ready response to

human contacts are all reflected in the child’s appearance. On the other hand,

there are signs of sadness and suffering which, although transient, contribute

to the face becoming more expressive of emotions, both of a deeper nature

and a wider range.


                                          VIII

 


The depressive position comes to a head at the time of weaning. While, as

described in earlier passages, progress in integration and the corresponding

synthetic processes in relation to the object give rise to depressive feelings,
                                                                                14
these feelings are further intensified by the experience of weaning. At this

stage the infant has already undergone earlier experiences of loss, e.g. when

the intensely desired breast (or bottle) does not immediately reappear and the

infant feels that it will never come back. The loss of the breast (or bottle),

however, occurring at weaning is of a different order. This loss of the firstloved object is felt to confirm all the infant’s anxieties of a persecutory and

depressive nature. See note 2, p. 118.)

The following instance will serve as an illustration. The infant E, weaned

from his last breast feed at nine months, showed no particular disturbance in

his attitude to food. He had by that time already accepted other foods and

throve on them. But he showed an increased need for the mother’s presence

and in general for attention and company. One week after the last breast feed,

he sobbed in his sleep, woke up with signs of anxiety and unhappiness and

could not be comforted. The mother resorted to letting him suck the breast

once more. He sucked both breaths for about the usual time, and although

there was obviously little milk he seemed completely satisfied, went happily

to sleep and the symptoms described above were much reduced after this

experience. This would go to show that depressive anxiety relating to the loss

of  the  good  object,  the  breast,  had  been  allayed  by  the  very  fact  that  it

reappeared.

At the time of weaning some infants show less appetite, some an increased

greed,  while  others  oscillate  between  these  two  responses.  Such  changes

occur at every step in weaning. There are babies who enjoy the bottle much

more than being suckled even though some of them have been satisfactorily

breast-fed;  with  others  appetite  much  improves  when  solid  foods  are

introduced, and again there are infants who at this point develop difficulties

over eating which persist in some form or other throughout the early years of
          15
childhood. Many infants find only certain tastes, certain textures of solid

food acceptable and repudiate others. When we analyse children we learn a

good deal about the motives of such ‘fads’ and come to recognize as their

deepest root the earliest anxieties in relation to the mother. I shall illustrate

this conclusion by an instance of the behaviour of a five-month-old baby girl

F who had been breast-fed but who had also had bottles from the beginning.

She refused with violent anger solid food such as vegetables when given

them by her mother, and accepted them quite calmly when her father fed her.

After a fortnight she accepted the new foods from her mother. According to a

reliable report, the child, who is now six years old, has a good relation with

both parents as well as with her brother, but shows consistently little appetite.

We  are  reminded  here  of  the  baby  girl A  and  the  way  she  accepted

supplementary bottles. With baby F, too, some time elapsed before she could

adapt herself sufficiently to the new food to take it from her mother.

  Throughout this paper I have attempted to show that the attitude towardsfood is fundamentally bound up with the relation to the mother and involves

the whole of the infant’s emotional life. The experience of weaning stirs up

the  infant’s  deepest  emotions  and  anxieties,  and  the  more  integrated  ego

develops strong defences against them; both anxieties and defences enter into

the  infant’s  attitudes  towards  food.  Here  I  must  confine  myself  to  a  few

generalizations  about  changes  in  attitudes  towards  food  at  the  time  of

weaning. At the root of many difficulties over new food is the persecutory

fear of being devoured and poisoned by the mother’s bad breast, a fear which
                                                                                          16
derives from the infant’s phantasies of devouring and poisoning the breast.

To  persecutory  anxiety,  at  a  somewhat  later  stage,  is  added  (though  in

varying degrees) the depressive anxiety lest greed and aggressive impulses

should destroy the loved object. During and after the process of being weaned

this anxiety may have the effect of increasing or inhibiting the desire for new
    17
food. As we have seen earlier, anxiety may have varying effects on greed: it

may reinforce it or may lead to strong inhibitions of greed and of the pleasure

in taking nourishment.

An increase in appetite at the time of weaning would in some cases suggest

that during the period of being suckled the bad (persecutory) aspect of the

breast had predominated over the good one; furthermore, depressive anxiety

about  the  apprehended  danger  to  the  loved  breast  would  contribute  to

inhibiting  the  desire  for  food  (that  is  to  say,  that  both  persecutory  and

depressive  anxieties  are  operative  in  varying  proportions).  Therefore  the

bottle, which is in some measure removed in the infant’s mind from the first

object, the breast—while also symbolizing it—can be taken with less anxiety

and more pleasure than the mother’s breast. Some infants, however, do not

succeed in the symbolic substitution of the bottle for the breast, and if they

enjoy their meals at all it is when they are given solid foods.

A decrease in appetite when breast- or bottle-feeding is first withdrawn is a

frequent occurrence and clearly indicates depressive anxiety relating to the

loss of the primary loved object. But persecutory anxiety, I think, always

contributes to the dislike of the new food. The bad (devouring and poisonous)

aspect  of  the  breast  which,  while  the  infant  was  being  suckled,  was

counteracted  by  the  relation  to  the  good  breast,  is  reinforced  by  the

deprivation of being weaned, and is transferred on to the new food.

As I indicated above, during the process of being weaned both persecutory

and depressive anxieties strongly affect the relation to the mother and food. It

is,  however,  the  intricate  interaction  of  a  variety  of  factors  (internal  andexternal) which at this stage determines the issue; by which I mean, not only

the individual variations in the attitudes towards objects and food, but over

and  above  this,  the  success  or  failure  in  working  through  and  in  some

measure overcoming the depressive position. Much depends on how far in

the  earlier  stage  the  breast  has  been  securely  established  within,  and

consequently  how  far  love  for  the  mother  can  be  maintained  in  spite  of

deprivations-all of which partly depends on the relation between mother and

child. As I suggested, even very young infants can accept a new food (the

bottle)  with  comparatively  little  grievance  (instance A).  This  better  inner

adaptation  towards  frustration,  which  develops  from  the  first  days  of  life

onwards, is bound up with steps towards the distinction between mother and

food. These fundamental attitudes largely determine, particularly during the

process of being weaned, the infant’s capacity to accept, in the full sense of

the  word,  substitutes  for  the  primary  object.  Here  again  the  mother’s

behaviour and feelings towards the child are of major importance; the loving

attention  and  the  time  she  devotes  to  him  help  him  with  his  depressive

feelings.  The  good  relationship  with  the  mother  may  in  some  measure

counteract  the  loss  of  his  primary  loved  object,  the  breast,  and  thus

favourably influence the working through of the depressive position.

The anxiety about the loss of the good object, coming to a head at weaning

time, is also stirred up by other experiences such as physical discomfort,

illnesses and in particular teething. These experiences are bound to reinforce

persecutory  and  depressive  anxieties  in  the  infant.  In  other  words,  the

physical  factor  can  never  solely  account  for  the  emotional  disturbance  to

which illnesses or teething give rise at this stage.


                                            IX

 


  Among the important developments we find towards the middle of the first

year is the widening of the range of object-relations and in particular the

increasing importance of the father for the young infant. I have shown in

other contexts that depressive feelings and the fear of losing the mother, in

addition to other developmental factors, add impetus to the infant’s turning to

the  father.  The  early  stages  of  the  Oedipus  complex  and  the  depressive

position are closely linked and develop simultaneously. I shall mention only

one instance, the little girl B already referred to.

  From the age of about four months onwards, the relation with her brother,several years her senior, played a prominent and noticeable part in her life; it

differed, as could easily be seen, in various ways from her relation with the

mother. She admired everything her brother said and did, and persistently

wooed  him.  She  used  all  her  little  tricks  to  ingratiate  herself,  to  win  his

attention and displayed a conspicuously feminine attitude towards him. At

that time the father was absent, except for very short periods, and it was not

until she was ten months old that she saw him more often, and from that time

onwards developed a very close and loving relation with him, which in some

essentials paralleled the relation with her brother. At the beginning of her

second year she often called her brother ‘Daddy’; by then father had become

the favourite. The delight in seeing him, the rapture when she heard his steps

or his voice, the ways in which she mentioned him again and again in his

absence, and many other expressions of her feelings towards him can only be

described as being in love. The mother clearly recognized that at this stage

the little girl was in some ways more fond of the father than of her. Here we

have  an  instance  of  the  early  Oedipus  situation  which,  in  this  case,  was

experienced first with the brother and then transferred to the father.


                                            X

 


The depressive position, as I have argued in various connections, is an

important part of normal emotional development, but the ways in which the

child deals with these emotions and anxieties, and the defences he uses, are

an indication of whether or not development is proceeding satisfactorily. (See

note 3, p. 119.)

The  fear  of  losing  the  mother  makes  parting  from  her,  even  for  short

periods,  painful;  and  various  forms  of  play  both  give  expression  to  this

anxiety  and  are  a  means  of  overcoming  it.  Freud’s  observation  of  the
                                                                                  18
eighteen-month-old boy with his cotton-reel pointed in this direction. As I

see it, by means of this play the child was overcoming not only his feelings of
                                        19
loss but also his depressive anxiety. There are various typical forms of play

similar to that with the cotton-reel. Susan Isaacs (1952) has mentioned a few

instances and I shall now add some observations of this nature. Children,

sometimes even before the second half of the first year, enjoy throwing things

out of the pram again and again, and expect them back. I observed a further

development of such play in G, an infant of ten months, who had recentlybegun to crawl. He never tired of throwing a toy away from himself and then

getting hold of it by crawling towards it. I was told that he started his play

about two months earlier when he made his first attempts to move himself

forward. The infant E between six and seven months once noticed, while

lying in his pram, that when he lifted his legs a toy which he had thrown

aside rolled back to him, and he developed this into a game.

  Already in the fifth or sixth month many infants respond with pleasure to

‘peep-bo’ (see note 4, p. 120); and I have seen babies playing this actively by

pulling the blanket over the head and off again as early as seven months. The

mother of the infant B made a bed-time habit of this game, thus leaving the

child to go to sleep in a happy mood. It seems that the repetition of such

experiences  is  an  important  factor  in  helping  the  infant  to  overcome  his

feelings of loss and grief. Another typical game which I found to be of great

help and comfort to young children is to part from the child at bed-time

saying  ‘bye-bye’  and  waving,  leaving  the  room  slowly,  as  it  were

disappearing gradually. The use of ‘bye-bye’ and waving, and later on saying

‘back again’, ‘back soon’ or similar words when the mother leaves the room,

proves generally helpful or comforting. I know of some infants among whose

first words were ‘back’ or ‘again’.

To return to the infant girl B, with whom ‘bye-bye’ was one of the first

words, I often noticed that when her mother was about to leave the room, a

fleeting expression of sadness came into the child’s eyes, or she seemed near

crying. But when the mother waved to her and said ‘bye-bye’, she appeared

comforted and went on with her play activities. I saw her when she was

between ten and eleven months practise the gesture of waving and I gained

the  impression  that  this  had  become  a  source  not  only  of  interest  but  of

comfort.

The  infant’s  growing  capacity  to  perceive  and  understand  the  things

around him increases his confidence in his own ability to deal with and even

to  control  them,  as  well  as  his  trust  in  the  external  world.  His  repeated

experiences  of  the  external  reality  become  the  most  important  means  of

overcoming his persecutory and depressive anxieties. This, in my view, is

reality-testing and underlies the process in adults which Freud has described
                                    20
as part of the work of mourning.

  When an infant is able to sit up or to stand in his cot, he can look at people,

and in some sense comes nearer to them; this happens to an even greater

extent when he can crawl and walk. Such achievements imply not only agreater ability to come close to his object of his own will but also a greater

independence from the object. For instance, the infant girl B (at about eleven

months) thoroughly enjoyed crawling up and down a passage for hours on

end and was quite contented by herself; but from time to time she crawled

into the room where her mother was (the door had been left open), had a look

at her or attempted to talk to her and returned to the passage.

The great psychological importance of standing, crawling and walking has

been described by some psycho-analytic writers. My point here is that all

these achievements are used by the infant as a means of regaining his lost

objects as well as of finding new objects in their stead; all this helps the

infant to overcome his depressive position. Speech development, beginning

with the imitation of sounds, is another of those great achievements which

bring the child nearer to the people he loves and also enables him to find new

objects. In gaining gratifications of a new kind, the frustration and grievance

relating to the earlier situations are lessened, which again makes for greater

security. Another element in the progress achieved derives from the infant’s

attempts to control his objects, his external as well as his internal world.

Every  step  in  development  is  also  used  by  the  ego  as  a  defence  against

anxiety, at this stage predominantly against depressive anxiety. This would

contribute  to  the  fact,  which  can  often  be  observed,  that,  together  with

advances  in  development,  such  as  walking  or  talking,  children  become

happier and more lively. To put it from another angle, the ego’s striving to

overcome the depressive position furthers interests and activities, not only
                                                                                  21
during the first year of life but throughout the early years of childhood.

The following instance illustrates some of my conclusions regarding early

emotional life. The infant boy D showed at the age of three months a very

strong and personal relation to his toys, i.e. beads, wooden rings and rattle.

He looked at them intently, touched them again and again, took them into his

mouth and listened to the noise they made; he was angry with these toys and

screamed when they were not in the position he wanted; he was pleased and

liked them once more when they were fixed for him in the right position. His

mother remarked, when he was four months old, that he worked off a good

deal of anger on his toys; on the other hand, they were also a consolation to

him in feelings of distress. At times he stopped crying when they were shown

to him, and they also comforted him before going to sleep.

In the fifth month he clearly distinguished between father, mother and the

maid;  he  showed  this  unmistakably  in  his  look  of  recognition  and  in  hisexpecting certain types of play from each of them. His personal relations

were already very marked at that stage; he had also developed a particular

attitude towards his bottle. For instance, when it was standing empty beside

him on a table, he turned to it, making sounds, caressing it and from time to

time sucking the teat. From his facial expression it could be gathered that he

was behaving towards the bottle in the same way as towards a loved person.

At the age of nine months he was observed looking at the bottle lovingly and

talking to it, and apparently waiting for a reply. This relation to the bottle is

all the more interesting since the little boy was never a good feeder, and

showed no greed, in fact no particular pleasure in taking food. There had

been  difficulties  in  breast-feeding  almost  from  the  beginning,  since  the

mother’s milk gave out, and when a few weeks old he was entirely changed

over to bottle-feeding. His appetite only began to develop in the second year,

and even then largely depended on the pleasure of sharing his meal with his

parents.  We  are  reminded  here  of  the  fact  that  at  nine  months  his  main

interest in the bottle seemed to be of an almost personal nature and did not

relate only to the food it contained.

At ten months he became very fond of a humming top, being first attracted

by its red knob, which he immediately sucked; this led to a great interest in

the way it could be set to spin and the noise it made. He soon gave up his

attempts to suck it, but his absorption in the top remained. When he was

fifteen months old it happened that another humming top, of which he was

also very fond, dropped on the floor while he was playing with it and the two

halves came apart. The child’s reaction to this incident was striking. He cried,

was inconsolable and would not go back into the room where the incident had

happened. When at last his mother succeeded in taking him there to show

him that the top had been put together again, he refused to look at it and ran

out of the room (even on the next day he did not want to go near the toy

cupboard where the humming top was kept). Moreover, several hours after

the incident, he refused to eat his tea. A little later on, however, it happened

that his mother took up his toy dog and said: ‘What a nice little doggie.’ The

boy brightened up, picked up the dog and kept on walking with it from one

person to another expecting them to say, ‘Nice little doggie’. It was clear that

he identified himself with the toy dog, and therefore that the affection shown

to  it  reassured  him  about  the  harm  which  he  felt  he  had  inflicted  on  the

humming top.

It  is  significant  that  already  at  an  earlier  stage  the  child  had  shownoutspoken anxiety about broken things. At about eight months, for instance,

he cried when he dropped a glass—and another time a cup—and it broke.

Soon he was so disturbed by the sight of broken things, irrespective of who

had caused the damage, that his mother at once put them out of his sight.

His distress on such occasions was an indication of both persecutory and

depressive anxiety. This becomes clear if we link his behaviour at about eight

months with the later incident of the humming top. My conclusion is that

both bottle and humming top symbolically represented the mother’s breast

(we shall remember that at ten months he behaved towards the humming top

as he did at nine months towards his bottle), and that when the humming top

came apart this meant to him the destruction of the mother’s breast and body.

This would explain his emotions of anxiety, guilt and grief with regard to the

broken humming top.

I have already linked the broken top with the broken cup and the bottle, but

there is an earlier connection to be made. As we have seen, the child showed

at times great anger towards his toys, which he treated in a very personal

way. I would suggest that his anxiety and guilt observed at a later stage could

be  traced  back  to  the  aggression  expressed  towards  the  toys,  particularly

when they were not accessible. There is a still earlier link with the relation to

his mother’s breast which had not satisfied him and had been withdrawn.

Accordingly, the anxiety over the broken cup or glass would be an expression

of guilt about his anger and destructive impulses, primarily directed against

his mother’s breast. By symbol-formation, therefore, the child had displaced
                                            22
his interest on to a series of objects, from the breast to the toys: bottle—

glass—cup—humming top, and transferred personal relations and emotions

such as anger, hatred, persecutory and depressive anxieties and guilt on to

these objects.

Earlier in this paper I described this child’s anxiety relating to a stranger,

and illustrated by the instance the splitting of the mother figure (here the

grandmother figure) into a good and bad mother. The fear of the bad mother

as  well  as  love  for  the  good  one,  which  showed  strongly  in  his  personal

relations, were marked. I suggest that both these aspects of personal relations

entered into his attitude towards broken things.

The mixture of persecutory and depressive anxieties which he manifested

in the incident of the broken humming top, refusing to go into the room, and

later even near the toy-cupboard, shows the fear of the object having turned

into a dangerous object (persecutory anxiety) because it has been injured.There was no doubt, however, about the strong depressive feelings which

were also operative on this occasion. All these anxieties were relieved when

he became reassured by the fact that the little dog (standing for himself) was

‘nice’, i.e. good, and was still loved by his parents.


                                      CONCLUSION

 


Our  knowledge  of  constitutional  factors  and  their  interaction  is  still

incomplete.  In  the  chapters  which  I  have  contributed  to  this  book  I  have

touched  upon  some  factors,  which  I  shall  now  summarize.  The  innate

capacity of the ego to tolerate anxiety may depend on a greater or lesser

cohesiveness of the ego at birth; this in turn makes for a greater or lesser

activity of schizoid mechanisms, and correspondingly for a greater or lesser

capacity for integration. Other factors present from the beginning of post-

natal life are the capacity for love, the strength of greed and the defences

against greed.

I suggest that these interrelated factors are the expression of certain states

of fusion between the life and death instincts. These states basically influence

the dynamic processes by which destructive impulses are counteracted and

mitigated by the libido, processes of great moment in moulding the infant’s

unconscious life. From the beginning of post-natal life constitutional factors

are bound up with external ones, starting with the experience of birth and the
                                                    23
earliest situations of being handled and fed. Furthermore, as we have good

grounds  to  assume,  from  early  days  onwards  the  mother’s  unconscious

attitude strongly affects the infant’s unconscious processes.

We are, therefore, bound to conclude that constitutional factors cannot be

considered apart from environmental ones and vice versa. They all go to form

the  earliest  phantasies,  anxieties  and  defences  which,  while  falling  into

certain typical patterns, are infinitely variable. This is the soil from which

springs the individual mind and personality.

I have endeavoured to show that by carefully observing young infants, we

can gain some insight into their emotional life as well as indications for their

future mental development. Such observations, within the limits mentioned

above,  to  some  extent  support  my  findings  about  the  earliest  stages  of

development.  These  findings  were  arrived  at  in  the  psycho-analysis  of

children and adults, as I was able to trace their anxieties and defences back to

babyhood. We may recall that Freud’s discovery of the Oedipus complex inthe unconscious of his adult patients led to a more enlightened observation of

children, which in turn fully confirmed his theoretical conclusions. During

the last few decades the conflicts inherent in the Oeidpus complex have been

more  widely  recognized  and  as  a  result  the  understanding  of  the  child’s

emotional difficulties has increased; but this applies mainly to children in a

more advanced stage of development. The very young infant’s mental life is

still a mystery to most adults. I venture to suggest that a closer observation of

babies,  stimulated  by  the  increased  knowledge  of  early  mental  processes

which was derived from the psycho-analysis of young children, should in

time to come lead to a better insight into the baby’s emotional life.

It is my contention—put forward in some chapters of this book and in

previous  writings—that  excessive  persecutory  and  depressive  anxieties  in

young  infants  are  of  crucial  significance  in  the  psychogenesis  of  mental

disorders.  In  the  present  paper  I  have  repeatedly  pointed  out  that  an

understanding mother may by her attitude diminish her baby’s conflicts and

thus in some measure help him to cope more effectively with his anxieties. A

fuller  and  more  general  realization  of  the  young  infant’s  anxieties  and

emotional needs will therefore lessen suffering in infancy and so prepare the

ground for greater happiness and stability in later life.


                                        NOTES


1 (p. 99)

  There is one fundamental aspect of this problem which I wish to mention.

My psycho-analytic work has led me to conclude that the new-born infant

unconsciously feels that an object of unique goodness exists, from which a

maximal gratification could be obtained, and that this object is the mother’s

breast. I furthermore believe that this unconscious knowledge implies that the

relation to the mother’s breast and a feeling of possessing the breast develop

even in children who are not being breast-fed. This would explain the fact

referred to above that bottle-fed children, too, introject the mother’s breast in

both its good and bad aspects. How strong the capacity of a bottle-fed infant

is  to  establish  securely  the  good  breast  in  his  inner  world  depends  on  a

variety of internal and external factors, among which the inherent capacity for

love plays a vital part.

The fact that at the beginning of post-natal life an unconscious knowledge

of the breast exists and that feelings towards the breast are experienced canonly be conceived of as a phylogenetic inheritance.

To consider now the part ontogenetic factors play in these processes. We

have good reason to assume that the infant’s impulses bound up with the

sensations of the mouth direct him towards the mother’s breast, for the object

of his first instinctual desires is the nipple and their aim is to suck the nipple.

This would imply that the teat of the bottle cannot fully replace the desired

nipple, nor the bottle the desired smell, warmth and softness of the mother’s

breast. Therefore, notwithstanding the fact that the infant may readily accept

and enjoy bottle-feeding (particularly if a situation approximating to breast-

feeding is established) he may still feel that he is not receiving the maximal

gratification,  and  consequently  experiences  a  deep  longing  for  the  unique

object which could provide it.

The desire for unobtainable, ideal objects is a general feature in mental life,

for it derives from the various frustrations the child undergoes in the course

of his development, culminating in the necessity to renounce the Oedipus

object. Feelings of frustration and grievance lead to phantasying backwards

and  often  focus  in  retrospect  on  the  privations  suffered  in  relation  to  the

mother’s breast, even in people who have been satisfactorily breast-fed. I

found, however, in a number of analyses that, in people who have not been

breast-fed,  the  nature  of  the  longing  for  an  unobtainable  object  shows  a

particular intensity and quality, something so deep-rooted that its origin in the

first  feeding  experience  and  first  object-relation  of  the  infant  becomes

apparent. Such emotions vary in strength between one individual and another,

and  have  different  effects  on  mental  development.  For  instance,  in  some

people the feeling of having been deprived of the breast may contribute to a

strong sense of grievance and insecurity, with various implications for object-

relations and the development of the personality. In other people the longing

for a unique object which, although it has eluded them, is yet felt to exist

somewhere may strongly stimulate certain lines of sublimations, such as the

search for an ideal, or high standards for one’s own attainments.

I  will  now  compare  these  observations  with  a  statement  by  Freud.

Speaking  of  the  fundamental  importance  of  the  infant’s  relation  to  the

mother’s breast and to the mother, Freud says:

  ‘The phylogenetic foundation has so much the upper hand in all this over

accidental personal experience that it makes no difference whether a child has

really sucked at the breast or has been brought up on the bottle and never

enjoyed the tenderness of a mother’s care. His development takes the samepath in both cases; it may be that in the latter event his later longing is all the

greater.’ (An Outline of Psycho-Analysis, p. 56.) (My italics.)

Here  Freud  attributes  to  the  phylogenetic  factor  such  over-riding

importance that the actual feeding experience of the infant becomes relatively

insignificant. This goes further than the conclusions to which my experience

has  led  me.  However,  in  the  passage  italicized  by  me,  Freud  seems  to

consider the possibility that having missed the experience of breast-feeding is

felt as a deprivation, for otherwise we could not account for the longing for

the mother’s breast being ‘all the greater’.


2 (p. 107)

I  have  made  it  clear  that  the  processes  of  integration,  which  express

themselves in the infant’s synthesizing his contrasting emotions towards the

mother—and consequently the bringing together of the good and bad aspects

of the object—underlie depressive anxiety and the depressive position. It is

implied that these processes are from the outset related to the object. In the

weaning experience it is the primary loved object which is felt to be lost and

therefore the persecutory and depressive anxieties relating to it are reinforced.

The beginning of weaning thus constitutes a major crisis in the infant’s life

and his conflicts come to another climax during the final stage of weaning

Every detail in the way weaning is carried out has a bearing on the intensity

of the infant’s depressive anxiety and may increase or diminish his capacity

to work through the depressive position. Thus a careful and slow weaning is

favourable  while  an  abrupt  weaning,  by  suddenly  reinforcing  his  anxiety,

may  impair  his  emotional  development.  A  number  of  pertinent  questions

arise here. For instance, what is the effect of a substitution of bottle-feeding

for breast-feeding in the first weeks, or even months, of life? We have reason

to assume that this situation differs from normal weaning, starting at about

five  months.  Would  this  imply  that,  since  in  the  first  three  months

persecutory anxiety predominates, this form of anxiety is increased by early

weaning,  or  does  this  experience  produce  an  earlier  onset  of  depressive

anxiety in the infant? Which of these two outcomes will prevail may depend

partly on external factors, such as the actual moment when weaning is begun

and the way the mother handles the situation; partly on internal factors which

could be broadly summarized as the strength of the inherent capacity for love

and integration—which in turn implies also an inherent strength of the ego at

the beginning of life. These factors, as I have repeatedly contended, underliethe infant’s capacity to establish his good object securely, to some degree

even when he has never had the experience of being fed by the breast.

  Another question applies to the effect of late weaning, as is customary with

primitive peoples and also in certain sections of civilized communities. I have

not enough data on which to base an answer to this problem. I can, however,

say  that  as  far  as  I  can  judge  from  observation  as  well  as  from  psycho-

analytic experience, there is an optimum period for starting weaning at about

the middle of the first year. For at this stage the infant is going through the

depressive position, and weaning in some ways helps him to work through

the inescapable depressive feelings. In this process he is supported by the

increasing  range  of  object-relations,  interests,  sublimations  and  defences

which he develops at this stage.

As regards the completion of weaning—that is, the final changeover from

sucking  to  drinking  from  a  cup—it  is  more  difficult  to  make  a  general

suggestion  as  regards  an  optimum  time.  Here  the  needs  of  the  individual

child, which at this stage can be more easily gauged by observation, should

be taken as the decisive criterion.

  With some infants there is even a further stage in the process of weaning to

be considered, and this is the giving up of thumb- or finger-sucking. Some

infants give it up under pressure from the mother or nurse, but, according to

my observation, even if infants seem to renounce finger-sucking of their own

accord (and here, too, external influences cannot altogether be discounted)

this entails conflict, anxiety and depressive feelings characteristic of weaning,

in some cases with loss of appetite.

The  question  of  weaning  links  up  with  the  more  general  problem  of

frustration. Frustration, if not excessive (and we shall remember here that up

to a point frustrations are inevitable), may even help the child to deal with his

depressive feelings. For the very experience that frustration can be overcome

tends  to  strengthen  the  ego  and  is  part  of  the  work  of  mourning  which

supports  the  infant  in  dealing  with  depression.  More  specifically,  the

mother’s  reappearance  proves  again  and  again  that  she  has  not  been

destroyed and has not been turned into the bad mother, which implies that the

infant’s aggression has not had the dreaded consequences. There is thus a

delicate and individually variable balance between the harmful and helpful

effects of frustration, a balance which is determined by a variety of internal

and external factors.3 (p. 111)

It  is  my  contention  that  both  the  paranoid-schizoid  and  the  depressive

position  are  part  of  normal  development.  My  experience  has  led  me  to

conclude  that  if  persecutory  and  depressive  anxieties  in  early  infancy  are

excessive in proportion to the capacity of the ego to deal step by step with

anxiety, this may result in the pathological development of the child. I have

described in the previous chapter the division in the relation to the mother

(the ‘good’ and the ‘bad’ mother), which is characteristic of an ego not yet

sufficiently integrated, as well as of the splitting mechanisms which are at

their  height  during  the  first  three  or  four  months  of  life.  Normally,  the

fluctuations in the relation to the mother, and temporary states of withdrawal

—influenced by splitting processes—cannot be easily gauged, since at that

stage they are closely linked with the immature state of the ego. However,

when  development  is  not  proceeding  satisfactorily,  we  can  get  certain

indications  of  this  failure.  In  the  present  chapter  I  have  referred  to  some

typical difficulties which indicate that the paranoid-schizoid position is not

being  satisfactorily  worked  through.  Though  the  picture  differed  in  some

points,  all  these  instances  had  one  important  feature  in  common:  a

disturbance  in  the  development  of  object-relations  which  can  already  be

observed during the first three or four months of life.

  Again, certain difficulties are part of the normal process of going through

the  depressive  position,  such  as  fretfulness,  irritability,  disturbed  sleep,

greater need for attention, and changes in the attitude towards the mother and

food. If such disturbances are excessive and persist unduly, they may indicate

a failure to work through the depressive position and may become the basis

for  manic-depressive  illness  in  later  life.  The  failure  to  work  through  the

depressive  position  may,  however,  lead  to  a  different  outcome:  certain

symptoms,  such  as  withdrawal  from  the  mother  and  other  people,  may

become stabilized instead of being transitory and partial. If together with this

the  infant  becomes  more  apathetic,  failing  to  develop  the  widening  of

interests  and  acceptance  of  substitutes  which  is  normally  present

simultaneously with depressive symptoms, and is partly a way of overcoming

them, we may surmise that the depressive position is not being successfully

worked  through;  that  a  regression  to  the  former  position,  the  paranoid-

schizoid position, has taken place—a regression to which we have to attribute

great importance.

To  repeat  my  conclusion  expressed  in  earlier  writings:  persecutory  anddepressive anxieties, if excessive, may lead to severe mental illnesses and

mental deficiency in childhood. These two forms of anxiety also provide the

fixation-points for paranoic, schizophrenic and manic-depressive illnesses in

adult life.


4 (p. 111)

  Freud mentions the infant’s pleasure in the game played with his mother

when she hides her face and then reappears. (Freud does not say what stage

of infancy he is referring to; but from the nature of the game one might

assume that he is referring to infants in the middle or later months of the first

year, as well as perhaps to older ones.) In this connection he states that the

infant ‘cannot as yet distinguish between temporary absence and permanent

loss. As soon as it loses sight of its mother it behaves as if it were never

going to see her again; and repeated consoling experiences to the contrary are

necessary before it learns that her disappearance is usually followed by her

reappearance.’ (S.E. 20, p. 169).

As regards further conclusions, the same difference of view exists on this

point  as  in  the  interpretation  of  the  cotton-reel  game  mentioned  earlier.

According to Freud, the anxiety which a young infant experiences when he

misses his mother produces ‘. . . a traumatic situation if the infant happens at

the time to be feeling a need which its mother should be the one to satisfy. It

turns into a danger-situation if this need is not present at the moment. Thus,

the first determinant of anxiety, which the ego itself introduces, is loss of

perception  of  the  object  (which  is  equated  with  loss  of  the  object  itself).

There is as yet no question of loss of love. Later on, experience teaches the

child that the object can be present but angry with it; and then the loss of love

from  the  object  becomes  a  new  and  much  more  enduring  danger  and

determinant  of  anxiety’.  In  my  view,  which  I  have  stated  in  various

connections and am briefly recapitulating here, the young infant experiences

love as well as hatred towards his mother, and when he misses her and his

needs are not satisfied her absence is felt to be the result of his destructive

impulses; hence persecutory anxiety results (lest the good mother may have

turned into the angry persecuting mother) and mourning, guilt and anxiety

(lest  the  loved  mother  be  destroyed  by  his  aggression).  These  anxieties,

constituting the depressive position, are again and again overcome, e.g. by

play of a consolatory nature.

  After  having  considered  some  differences  of  opinion  as  regards  theemotional life and anxieties of the young infant, I would draw attention to a

passage in the same context as the above quotation, where Freud seems to

qualify his conclusions about the subject of mourning. He says ‘. . . when

does  separation  from  an  object  produce  anxiety,  when  does  it  produce

mourning and when does it produce, it may be, only pain? Let me say at once

that  there  is  no  prospect  in  sight  of  answering  these  questions.  We  must

content ourselves with drawing certain distinctions and adumbrating certain

possibilities.’.                                            8

 

THE PSYCHO-ANALYTIC PLAY TECHNIQUE: ITS HISTORY

                            AND SIGNIFICANCE

 

                                        (1955)

 


IN offering a paper mainly concerned with play technique as an introduction
            1
to this book, I have been prompted by the consideration that my work with

both children and adults, and my contributions to psycho-analytic theory as a

whole,  derive  ultimately  from  the  play  technique  evolved  with  young

children. I do not mean by this that my later work was a direct application of

the  play  technique;  but  the  insight  I  gained  into  early  development,  into

unconscious processes, and into the nature of the interpretations by which the

unconscious can be approached, has been of far-reaching influence on the

work I have done with older children and adults.

I shall, therefore, briefly outline the steps by which my work developed out

of  the  psycho-analytic  play  technique,  but  I  shall  not  attempt  to  give  a

complete summary of my findings. In 1919, when I started my first case,

some psycho-analytic work with children had already been done, particularly

by Dr Hug-Hellmuth (1921). However, she did not undertake the psycho-

analysis  of  children  under  six  and,  although  she  used  drawings  and

occasionally  play  as  material,  she  did  not  develop  this  into  a  specific

technique.

At  the  time  I  began  to  work  it  was  an  established  principle  that

interpretations should be given very sparingly. With few exceptions psycho-

analysts had not explored the deeper layers of the unconscious—in children

such  exploration  being  considered  potentially  dangerous.  This  cautious

outlook was reflected in the fact that then, and for years to come, psycho-

analysis was held to be suitable only for children from the latency period
        2
onwards.

My first patient was a five-year-old boy. I referred to him under the name
                                            3
‘Fritz’ in my earliest published papers. To begin with I thought it would be

sufficient  to  influence  the  mother’s  attitude.  I  suggested  that  she  should

encourage the child to discuss freely with her the many unspoken questionswhich  were  obviously  at  the  back  of  his  mind  and  were  impeding  his

intellectual development. This had a good effect, but his neurotic difficulties

were not sufficiently alleviated and it was soon decided that I should psycho-

analyse him. In doing so, I deviated from some of the rules so far established,

for I interpreted what I thought to be most urgent in the material the child

presented  to  me  and  found  my  interest  focusing  on  his  anxieties  and  the

defences against them. This new approach soon confronted me with serious

problems. The anxieties I encountered when analysing this first case were

very acute, and although I was strengthened in the belief that I was working

on the right lines by observing the alleviation of anxiety again and again

produced by my interpretations, I was at times perturbed by the intensity of

the fresh anxieties which were being brought into the open. On one such

occasion I sought advice from Dr Karl Abraham. He replied that since my

interpretations  up  to  then  had  often  produced  relief  and  the  analysis  was

obviously  progressing,  he  saw  no  ground  for  changing  the  method  of

approach. I felt encouraged by his support and, as it happened, in the next

few days the child’s anxiety, which had come to a head, greatly diminished,

leading  to  further  improvement.  The  conviction  gained  in  this  analysis

strongly influenced the whole course of my analytic work.

The treatment was carried out in the child’s home with his own toys. This

analysis was the beginning of the psycho-analytic play technique, because

from the start the child expressed his phantasies and anxieties mainly in play,

and  I  consistently  interpreted  its  meaning  to  him,  with  the  result  that

additional material came up in his play. That is to say, I already used with

this  patient,  in  essence,  the  method  of  interpretation  which  became

characteristic of my technique. This approach corresponds to a fundamental

principle of psycho-analysis—free association. In interpreting not only the

child’s  words  but  also  his  activities  with  his  toys,  I  applied  this  basic

principle to the mind of the child, whose play and varied activities—in fact

his  whole  behaviour—are  means  of  expressing  what  the  adult  expresses

predominantly by words. I was also guided throughout by two other tenets of

psycho-analysis  established  by  Freud,  which  I  have  from  the  beginning

regarded as fundamental: that the exploration of the unconscious is the main

task of psycho-analytic procedure, and that the analysis of the transference is

the means of achieving this aim.

  Between 1920 and 1923 I gained further experience with other child cases,

but a definite step in the development of play technique was the treatment ofa child of two years and nine months whom I psycho-analysed in 1923. I

have given some details of this child’s case under the name ‘Rita’ in my
                                              4
book, The Psycho-Analysis of Children. Rita suffered from night terrors and

animal phobias, was very ambivalent towards her mother, at the same time

clinging to her to such an extent that she could hardly be left alone. She had a

marked obsessional neurosis and was at times very depressed. Her play was

inhibited  and  her  inability  to  tolerate  frustrations  made  her  upbringing

increasingly difficult. I was very doubtful about how to tackle this case since

the analysis of so young a child was an entirely new experiment. The first

session seemed to confirm my misgivings. Rita, when left alone with me in

her  nursery,  at  once  showed  signs  of  what  I  took  to  be  a  negative

transference: she was anxious and silent and very soon asked to go out into

the garden. I agreed and went with her—I may add, under the watchful eyes

of her mother and aunt, who took this as a sign of failure. They were very

surprised to see that Rita was quite friendly towards me when we returned to

the nursery some ten to fifteen minutes later. The explanation of this change

was  that  while  we  were  outside  I  had  been  interpreting  her  negative

transference (this again being against the usual practice). From a few things

she said, and the fact that she was less frightened when we were in the open, I

concluded that she was particularly afraid of something which I might do to

her when she was alone with me in the room. I interpreted this and, referring

to her night terrors, I linked her suspicion of me as a hostile stranger with her

fear that a bad woman would attack her when she was by herself at night.

When, a few minutes after this interpretation, I suggested that we should

return to the nursery, she readily agreed. As I mentioned, Rita’s inhibition in

playing  was  marked,  and  to  begin  with  she  did  hardly  anything  but

obsessionally dress and undress her doll. But soon I came to understand the

anxieties  underlying  her  obsessions,  and  interpreted  them.  This  case

strengthened  my  growing  conviction  that  a  precondition  for  the  psycho-

analysis of a child is to understand and to interpret the phantasies, feelings,

anxieties,  and  experiences  expressed  by  play  or,  if  play  activities  are

inhibited, the causes of the inhibition.

As with Fritz, I undertook this analysis in the child’s home and with her

own toys; but during this treatment, which lasted only a few months, I came

to the conclusion that psycho-analysis should not be carried out in the child’s

home.  For  I  found  that,  although  she  was  in  great  need  of  help  and  her

parents had decided that I should try psycho-analysis, her mother’s attitudetowards  me  was  very  ambivalent  and  the  atmosphere  was  on  the  whole

hostile to the treatment. More important still, I found that the transference

situation—the  backbone  of  the  psycho-analytic  procedure—can  only  be

established and maintained if the patient is able to feel that the consulting-

room or the play-room, indeed the whole analysis, is something separate from

his ordinary home life. For only under such conditions can he overcome his

resistances  against  experiencing  and  expressing  thoughts,  feelings,  and

desires, which are incompatible with convention, and in the case of children,

felt to be in contrast to much of what they have been taught.

I made further significant observations in the psycho-analysis of a girl of

seven, also in 1923. Her neurotic difficulties were apparently not serious, but

her  parents  had  for  some  time  been  concerned  about  her  intellectual

development. Although quite intelligent she did not keep up with her age

group, she disliked school, and sometimes played truant. Her relation to her

mother, which had been affectionate and trusting, had changed since she had

started school: she had become reserved and silent. I spent a few sessions

with  her  without  achieving  much  contact.  It  had  become  clear  that  she

disliked school, and from what she diffidently said about it, as well as from

other remarks, I had been able to make a few interpretations which produced

some material. But my impression was that I should not get much further in

that way. In a session in which I again found the child unresponsive and

withdrawn I left her, saying that I would return in a moment. I went into my

own children’s nursery, collected a few toys, cars, little figures, a few bricks,

and a train, put them into a box and returned to the patient. The child, who

had not taken to drawing or other activities, was interested in the small toys

and at once began to play. From this play I gathered that two of the toy

figures represented herself and a little boy, a school-mate about whom I had

heard before. It appeared that there was something secret about the behaviour

of these two figures and that other toy people were resented as interfering or

watching  and  were  put  aside.  The  activities  of  the  two  toys  led  to

catastrophies,  such  as  their  falling  down  or  colliding  with  cars.  This  was

repeated with signs of mounting anxiety. At this point I interpreted, with

reference to the details of her play, that some sexual activity seemed to have

occurred between herself and her friend, and that this had made her very

frightened  of  being  found  out  and  therefore  distrustful  of  other  people.  I

pointed out that while playing she had become anxious and seemed on the

point of stopping her play. I reminded her that she disliked school, and thatthis might be connected with the fear that the teacher would find out about

her  relation  with  her  school-mate  and  punish  her.  Above  all  she  was

frightened and therefore distrustful of her mother, and now she might feel the

same  way  about  me.  The  effect  of  this  interpretation  on  the  child  was

striking: her anxiety and distrust first increased, but very soon gave way to

obvious  relief.  Her  facial  expression  changed,  and  although  she  neither

admitted nor denied what I had interpreted, she subsequently showed her

agreement by producing new material and by becoming much freer in her

play and speech; also her attitude towards me became much more friendly

and less suspicious. Of course the negative transference, alternating with the

positive one, came up again and again; but, from this session onwards, the

analysis progressed well. Concurrently there were favourable changes, as I

was informed, in her relation to her family—in particular to her mother. Her

dislike of school diminished and she became more interested in her lessons,

but her inhibition in learning, which was rooted in deep anxieties, was only

gradually resolved in the course of her treatment.


                                            II

 


I have described how the use of the toys I kept especially for the child

patient  in  the  box  in  which  I  first  brought  them  proved  essential  for  her

analysis. This experience, as well as others, helped me to decide which toys
                                                                  5
are most suitable for the psycho-analytic play technique. I found it essential

to  have small  toys  because  their  number  and  variety  enable  the  child  to

express a wide range of phantasies and experiences. It is important for this

purpose that these toys should be non-mechanical and that the human figures,

varying only in colour and size, should not indicate any particular occupation.

Their  very  simplicity  enables  the  child  to  use  them  in  many  different

situations, according to the material coming up in his play. The fact that he

can thus present simultaneously a variety of experiences and phantasies or

actual situations also makes it possible for us to arrive at a more coherent

picture of the workings of his mind.

In keeping with the simplicity of the toys, the equipment of the play-room

is also simple. It does not contain anything except what is needed for the
                  6
psycho-analysis. Each child’s playthings are kept locked in one particular

drawer, and he therefore knows that his toys and his play with them, which isthe equivalent of the adult’s associations, are only known to the analyst and

to  himself.  The  box  in  which  I  first  introduced  the  toys  to  the  little  girl

mentioned above turned out to be the prototype of the individual drawer,

which is part of the private and intimate relation between analyst and patient,

characteristic of the psycho-analytic transference situation.

I do not suggest that the psycho-analytic play technique depends entirely

on  my  particular  selection  of  play-material.  In  any  case,  children  often

spontaneously  bring  their  own  things  and  the  play  with  them  enters  as  a

matter of course into the analytic work. But I believe that the toys provided

by the analyst should on the whole be of the type I have described, that is to

say, simple, small, and non-mechanical.

  Toys, however, are not the only requisites for a play analysis. Many of the

child’s activities are at times carried out round the wash-hand basin, which is

equipped with one or two small bowls, tumblers, and spoons. Often he draws,

writes, paints, cuts out, repairs toys, and so on. At times he plays games in

which he allots rôles to the analyst and himself such as playing shop, doctor

and patient, school, mother and child. In such games the child frequently

takes the part of the adult, thereby not only expressing his wish to reverse the

rôles but also demonstrating how he feels that his parents or other people in

authority behave towards him—or should behave. Sometimes he gives vent

to his aggressiveness and resentment by being, in the rôle of parent, sadistic

towards the child, represented by the analyst. The principle of interpretation

remains  the  same  whether  the  phantasies  are  presented  by  toys  or  by

dramatization. For, whatever material is used, it is essential that the analytic
                                                              7
principles underlying the technique should be applied.

  Aggressiveness  is  expressed  in  various  ways  in  the  child’s  play,  either

directly  or  indirectly.  Often  a  toy  is  broken  or,  when  the  child  is  more

aggressive, attacks are made with knife or scissors on the table or on pieces

of wood; water or paint is splashed about and the room generally becomes a

battlefield. It is essential to enable the child to bring out his aggressiveness;

but what counts most is to understand why at this particular moment in the

transference  situation  destructive  impulses  come  up  and  to  observe  their

consequences in the child’s mind. Feelings of guilt may very soon follow

after the child has broken, for instance, a little figure. Such guilt refers not

only to the actual damage done but to what the toy stands for in the child’s

unconscious, e.g. a little brother or sister, or a parent; the interpretation has

therefore to deal with these deeper levels as well. Sometimes we can gatherfrom the child’s behaviour towards the analyst that not only guilt but also

persecutory anxiety has been the sequel to his destructive impulses and that

he is afraid of retaliation.

I have usually been able to convey to the child that I would not tolerate

physical attacks on myself. This attitude not only protects the psycho-analyst

but is of importance for the analysis as well. For such assaults, if not kept

within bounds, are apt to stir up excessive guilt and persecutory anxiety in the

child and therefore add to the difficulties of the treatment. I have sometimes

been asked by what method I prevented physical attacks, and I think the

answer  is  that  I  was  very  careful  not  to  inhibit  the  child’s  aggressive

phantasies; in fact he was given opportunity to act them out in other ways,

including verbal attacks on myself. The more I was able to interpret in time

the motives of the child’s aggressiveness the more the situation could be kept

under  control.  But  with  some  psychotic  children  it  has  occasionally  been

difficult to protect myself against their aggressiveness.


                                            III

 


I have found that the child’s attitude towards a toy he has damaged is very

revealing. He often puts aside such a toy, representing for instance a sibling

or a parent, and ignores it for a time. This indicates dislike of the damaged

object, due to the persecutory fear that the attacked person (represented by

the toy) has become retaliatory and dangerous. The sense of persecution may

be so strong that it covers up feelings of guilt and depression which are also

aroused by the damage done. Or guilt and depression may be so strong that

they lead to a reinforcing of persecutory feelings. However, one day the child

may search in his drawer for the damaged toy. This suggests that by then we

have  been  able  to  analyse  some  important  defences,  thus  diminishing

persecutory feelings and making it possible for the sense of guilt and the urge

to make reparation to be experienced. When this happens we can also notice

that a change in the child’s relation to the particular sibling for whom the toy

stood, or in his relations in general, has occurred. This change confirms our

impression that persecutory anxiety has diminished and that, together with

the sense of guilt and the wish to make reparation, feelings of love which had

been  impaired  by  excessive  anxiety  have  come  to  the  fore.  With  another

child, or with the same child at a later stage of the analysis, guilt and the wish

to repair may follow very soon after the act of aggression, and tendernesstowards  the  brother  or  sister  who  may  have  been  damaged  in  phantasy

becomes apparent. The importance of such changes for character formation

and object relations, as well as for mental stability, cannot be overrated.

It is an essential part of the interpretative work that it should keep in step

with  fluctuations  between  love  and  hatred;  between  happiness  and

satisfaction on the one hand and persecutory anxiety and depression on the

other. This implies that the analyst should not show disapproval of the child

having broken a toy; he should not, however, encourage the child to express

his aggressiveness, or suggest to him that the toy could be mended. In other

words, he should enable the child to experience his emotions and phantasies

as they come up. It was always part of my technique not to use educative or

moral influence, but to keep to the psycho-analytic procedure only, which, to

put  it  in  a  nutshell,  consists  in  understanding  the  patient’s  mind  and  in

conveying to him what goes on in it.

The  variety  of  emotional  situations  which  can  be  expressed  by  play

activities  is  unlimited:  for  instance,  feelings  of  frustration  and  of  being

rejected;  jealousy  of  both  father  and  mother,  or  of  brothers  and  sisters;

aggressiveness accompanying such jealousy; pleasure in having a playmate

and ally against the parents; feelings of love and hatred towards a newborn

baby or one who is expected, as well as the ensuing anxiety, guilt, and urge to

make reparation. We also find in the child’s play the repetition of actual

experiences  and  details  of  everyday  life,  often  interwoven  with  his

phantasies. It is revealing that sometimes very important actual events in his

life fail to enter either into his play or into his associations, and that the whole

emphasis  at  times  lies  on  apparently  minor  happenings.  But  these  minor

happenings are of great importance to him because they have stirred up his

emotions and phantasies.


                                            IV

 


  There are many children who are inhibited in play. Such inhibition does

not always completely prevent them from playing, but may soon interrupt

their activities. For instance, a little boy was brought to me for one interview

only (there was a prospect of an analysis in the future; but at the time the

parents were going abroad with him). I had some toys on the table and he sat

down and began to play, which soon led to accidents, collisions, and toy

people falling down whom he tried to stand up again. In all this he showed agood deal of anxiety, but since no treatment was yet intended, I refrained

from interpreting. After a few minutes he quietly slipped out of his chair and

saying: ‘Enough of playing’, went out. I believe from my experience that if

this had been the beginning of a treatment and I had interpreted the anxiety

shown  in  his  actions  with  the  toys  and  the  corresponding  negative

transference  towards  me,  I  should  have  been  able  to  resolve  his  anxiety

sufficiently for him to continue playing.

The next instance may help me to show some of the causes of a play

inhibition. The boy, aged three years nine months, whom I described under
                                                                                      8
the name ‘Peter’ in The Psycho-Analysis of Children, was very neurotic. To

mention some of his difficulties: he was unable to play, could not tolerate any

frustration, was timid, plaintive, and unboyish, yet at times aggressive and

overbearing, very ambivalent towards his family, and strongly fixated on his

mother. She told me that Peter had greatly changed for the worse after a

summer holiday during which at the age of eighteen months he shared his

parents’ bedroom and had opportunity of observing their sexual intercourse.

On that holiday he became very difficult to manage, slept badly, and relapsed

into soiling his bed at night, which he had not done for some months. He had

been playing freely until then, but from that summer onwards he stopped

playing and became very destructive towards his toys; he would no nothing

with them but break them. Shortly afterwards his brother was born, and this

increased all his difficulties.

In the first session Peter started to play; he soon made two horses bump

into each other, and repeated the same action with different toys. He also

mentioned that he had a little brother. I interpreted to him that the horses and

the other things which had been bumping together represented people, an

interpretation which he first rejected and then accepted. He again bumped the

horses together, saying that they were going to sleep, covered them up with

bricks, and added: ‘Now they’re quite dead; I’ve buried them.’ He put the

motor-cars front to rear in a row which, as became clear later in the analysis,

symbolized his father’s penis, and made them run along, then suddenly lost

his temper and threw them about the room, saying: ‘We always smash our

Christmas presents straight away; we don’t want any.’ Smashing his toys thus

stood in his unconscious for smashing his father’s genital. During this first

hour he did in fact break several toys.

In the second session Peter repeated some of the material of the first hour,

in particular the bumping together of cars, horses, etc., and speaking again ofhis little brother, whereupon I interpreted that he was showing me how his

Mummy and Daddy bumped their genitals (of course using his own word for

genitals) and that he thought that their doing so caused his brother to be born.

This  interpretation  produced  more  material,  throwing  light  on  his  very

ambivalent relation towards his little brother and towards his father. He laid a

toy man on a brick which he called a ‘bed’, threw him down and said he was

‘dead and done for’. He next re-enacted the same thing with two toy men,

choosing figures he had already damaged. I interpreted that the first toy man

stood for his father whom he wanted to throw out of his mother’s bed and

kill, and that one of the two toy men was again the father and the other

represented himself to whom his father would do the same. The reason why

he had chosen two damaged figures was that he felt that both his father and

himself would be damaged if he attacked his father.

This material illustrates a number of points, of which I shall only mention

one or two. Because Peter’s experience of witnessing the sexual intercourse

of his parents had made a great impact on his mind, and had aroused strong

emotions such as jealousy, aggressiveness and anxiety, this was the first thing

which he expressed in his play. There is no doubt that he had no longer any

conscious knowledge of this experience, that it was repressed, and that only

the symbolical expression of it was possible for him. I have reason to believe

that if I had not interpreted that the toys bumping together were people, he

might not have produced the material which came up in the second hour.

Furthermore, had I not, in the second hour, been able to show him some of

the reasons for his inhibition in play, by interpreting the damage done to the

toys, he would very likely—as he did in ordinary life—have stopped playing

after breaking the toys.

  There are children who at the beginning of treatment may not even play in

the same way as Peter, or the little boy who came for one interview only. But

it is very rare for a child completely to ignore the toys laid out on the table.

Even if he turns away from them, he often gives the analyst some insight into

his motives for not wishing to play. In other ways, too, the child analyst can

gather  material  for  interpretation.  Any  activity,  such  as  using  paper  to

scribble on or to cut out, and every detail of behaviour, such as changes in

posture or in facial expression, can give a clue to what is going on in the

child’s mind, possibly in connection with what the analyst has heard from the

parents about his difficulties.

I have said much about the importance of interpretations for play techniqueand have given some instances to illustrate their content. This brings me to a

question which I have often been asked; ‘Are young children intellectually

able to understand such interpretations?’ My own experience and that of my

colleagues has been that if the interpretations relate to the salient points in the

material, they are fully understood. Of course the child analyst must give his

interpretations as succinctly and as clearly as possible, and should also use

the child’s expressions in doing so. But if he translates into simple words the

essential points of the material presented to him, he gets into touch with those

emotions and anxieties which are most operative at the moment; the child’s

conscious and intellectual understanding is often a subsequent process. One

of the many interesting and surprising experiences of the beginner in child

analysis is to find in even very young children a capacity for insight which is

often far greater than that of adults. To some extent this is explained by the

fact that the connections between conscious and unconscious are closer in

young children than in adults, and that infantile repressions are less powerful.

I also believe that the infant’s intellectual capacities are often underrated and

that in fact he understands more than he is credited with.

I  shall  now  illustrate  what  I  have  said  by  a  young  child’s  response  to

interpretations.  Peter,  of  whose  analysis  I  have  given  a  few  details,  had

strongly objected to my interpretation that the toy man he had thrown down

from the ‘bed’ and who was ‘dead and done for’ represented his father. (The

interpretation of death-wishes against a loved person usually arouses great

resistance  in  children  as  well  as  in  adults.)  In  the  third  hour  Peter  again

brought  similar  material,  but  now  accepted  my  interpretation  and  said

thoughtfully: ‘And if I were a Daddy and someone wanted to throw me down

behind the bed and make me dead and done for, what would I think of it?’

This shows that he had not only worked through, understood and accepted

my  interpretation,  but  that  he  had  also  recognized  a  good  deal  more.  He

understood that his own aggressive feelings towards his father contributed to

his fear of him, and also that he had projected his own impulses on to his

father.

One of the important points in play technique has always been the analysis

of the transference. As we know, in the transference on the analyst the patient

repeats earlier emotions and conflicts. It is my experience that we are able to

help the patient fundamentally by taking his phantasies and anxieties back in

our transference interpretations to where they originated—namely, in infancy

and in relation to his first objects. For by re-experiencing early emotions andphantasies and understanding them in relation to his primal objects, he can, as

it were, revise these relations at their root, and thus effectively diminish his

anxieties.


                                            V

 


In looking back over the first few years of my work, I would single out a

few facts. I mentioned at the beginning of this paper that in analysing my

earliest child case I found my interest focusing on his anxieties and defences

against them. My emphasis on anxiety led me deeper and deeper into the

unconscious and into the phantasy life of the child. This particular emphasis

ran counter to the psycho-analytical point of view that interpretations should

not  go  very  deep  and  should  not  be  given  frequently.  I  persisted  in  my

approach, in spite of the fact that it involved a radical change in technique.

This approach took me into new territory, for it opened up the understanding

of the early infantile phantasies, anxieties and defences, which were at that

time  still  largely  unexplored.  This  became  clear  to  me  when  I  began  the

theoretical formulation of my clinical findings.

One of the various phenomena which struck me in the analysis of Rita was

the harshness of her super-ego. I have described in The Psycho-Analysis of

Children how Rita used to play the rôle of a severe and punishing mother

who treated the child (represented by the doll or by myself) very cruelly.

Furthermore, her ambivalence towards her mother, her extreme need to be

punished, her feelings of guilt and her night terrors led me to recognize that

in this child aged two years and nine months—and quite clearly going back to

a much earlier age—a harsh and relentless super-ego operated. I found this

discovery confirmed in the analyses of other young children and came to the

conclusion  that  the  super-ego  arises  at  a  much  earlier  stage  than  Freud

assumed.  In  other  words,  it  became  clear  to  me  that  the  super-ego,  as

conceived by him, is the end-product of a development which extends over

years. As a result of further observations, I recognized that the super-ego is

something which is felt by the child to operate internally in a concrete way;

that  it  consists  of  a  variety  of  figures  built  up  from  his  experiences  and

phantasies and that it is derived from the stages in which he had internalized

(introjected) his parents.

  These observations in turn led, in the analyses of little girls, to discovery of

the  leading  female  anxiety  situation:  the  mother  is  felt  to  be  the  primalpersecutor who, as an external and internalized object, attacks the child’s

body and takes from it her imaginary children. These anxieties arise from the

girl’s phantasied attacks on the mother’s body, which aim at robbing her of

its contents, i.e. of faeces, of the father’s penis, and of children, and result in

the fear of retaliation by similar attacks. Such persecutory anxieties I found

combined or alternating with deep feelings of depression and guilt, and these

observations then led to my discovery of the vital part which the tendency to

make reparation  plays  in  mental  life.  Reparation  in  this  sense  is  a  wider

concept than Freud’s concepts of ‘undoing in the obsessional neurosis’ and of

‘reaction-formation’. For it includes the variety of processes by which the

ego feels it undoes harm done in phantasy, restores, preserves and revives

objects. The importance of this tendency, bound up as it is with feelings of

guilt, also lies in the major contribution it makes to all sublimations, and in

this way to mental health.

In studying the phantasied attacks on the mother’s body, I soon came upon

anal-  and  urethral-sadistic  impulses.  I  have  mentioned  above  that  I

recognized the harshness of the super-ego in Rita (1923) and that her analysis

greatly  helped  me  to  understand  the  way  in  which  destructive  impulses

towards the mother become the cause of feelings of guilt and persecution.

One of the cases through which the anal- and urethral-sadistic nature of these

destructive impulses became clear to me was that of ‘Trude’, aged three years
                                                      9
and three months, whom I analysed in 1924. When she came to me for

treatment,  she  suffered  from  various  symptoms,  such  as  night  terrors  and

incontinence of urine and faeces. Early on in her analysis she asked me to

pretend that I was in bed and asleep. She would then say that she was going

to  attack  me  and  look  into  my  buttocks  for  faeces  (which  I  found  also

represented children) and that she was going to take them out. Such attacks

were followed by her crouching in a corner, playing that she was in bed,

covering herself with cushions (which were to protect her body and which

also stood for children); at the same time she actually wetted herself and

showed clearly that she was very much afraid of being attacked by me. Her

anxieties about the dangerous internalized mother confirmed the conclusions

I  first  formed  in  Rita’s  analysis.  Both  these  analyses  had  been  of  short

duration, partly because the parents thought that enough improvement had
                10
been achieved.

  Soon afterwards I became convinced that such destructive impulses and

phantasies could always be traced back to oral-sadistic ones. In fact Rita hadalready shown this quite clearly. On one occasion she blackened a piece of

paper, tore it up, threw the scraps into a glass of water which she put to her
                                                                                  11
mouth as if to drink from it, and said under her breath ‘dead woman’. This

tearing  up  and  soiling  of  paper  I  had  at  the  time  understood  to  express

phantasies of attacking and killing her mother which gave rise to fears of

retaliation. I have already mentioned that it was with Trude that I became

aware of the specific anal- and urethral-sadistic nature of such attacks. But in

other analyses, carried out in 1924 and 1925 (Ruth and Peter, both described

in The Psycho-Analysis of Children), I also became aware of the fundamental

part  which  oral-sadistic  impulses  play  in  destructive  phantasies  and

corresponding anxieties, thus finding in the analysis of young children full
                                                12
confirmation of Abraham’s discoveries.  These  analyses,  which  gave  me

further  scope  for  observation,  since  they  lasted  longer  than  Rita’s  and
        13
Trude’s, led me towards a fuller insight into the fundamental rôle of oral
                                                                              14
desires and anxieties in mental development, normal and abnormal.

As  I  have  mentioned,  I  had  already  recognized  in  Rita  and  Trude  the

internalization of an attacked and therefore frightening mother—the harsh

super-ego.  Between  1924  and  1926  I  analysed  a  child  who  was  very  ill
      15
indeed. Through her analysis I learned a good deal about the specific details

of  such  internalization  and  about  the  phantasies  and  impulses  underlying

paranoid and manic-depressive anxieties. For I came to understand the oral

and anal nature of her introjection processes and the situations of internal

persecution they engendered. I also became more aware of the ways in which

internal  persecutions  influence,  by  means  of  projection,  the  relation  to

external objects. The intensity of her envy and hatred unmistakably showed

its derivation from the oral-sadistic relation to her mother’s breast, and was

interwoven with the beginnings of her Oedipus complex. Erna’s case much

helped to prepare the ground for a number of conclusions which I presented
                                                                          16
to the Tenth International Psycho-Analytical Congress in 1927, in particular

the view that the early super-ego, built up when oral-sadistic impulses and

phantasies are at their height, underlies psychosis—a view which two years

later  I  developed  by  stressing  the  importance  of  oral-sadism  for
                17
schizophrenia.

  Concurrently with the analyses so far described I was able to make some

interesting observations regarding anxiety situations in boys. The analyses of

boys and men fully confirmed Freud’s view that castration fear is the leadinganxiety of the male, but I recognized that owing to the early identification

with the mother (the feminine position which ushers in the early stages of the

Oedipus complex) the anxiety about attacks on the inside of the body is of

great importance in men as well as women, and in various ways influences

and moulds their castration fears.

The anxieties derived from phantasied attacks on the mother’s body and on

the  father  she  is  supposed  to  contain,  proved  in  both  sexes  to  underlie

claustrophobia (which includes the fear of being imprisoned or entombed in

the mother’s body). The connection of these anxieties with castration fear can

be seen for instance in the phantasy of losing the penis or having it destroyed

inside the mother—phantasies which may result in impotence.

I came to see that the fears connected with attacks on the mother’s body

and of being attacked by external and internal objects had a particular quality

and intensity which suggested their psychotic nature. In exploring the child’s

relation to internalized objects, various situations of internal persecution and

their psychotic contents became clear. Furthermore, the recognition that fear

of  retaliation  derives  from  the  individual’s  own  aggressiveness  led  me  to

suggest that the initial defences of the ego are directed against the anxiety

aroused by destructive impulses and phantasies. Again and again, when these

psychotic anxieties were traced to their origin, they were found to stem from

oral-sadism. I recognized also that the oral-sadistic relation to the mother and

the internalization of a devoured, and therefore devouring, breast create the

prototype of all internal persecutors; and furthermore that the internalization

of an injured and therefore dreaded breast on the one hand, and of a satisfying

and  helpful  breast  on  the  other,  is  the  core  of  the  super-ego.  Another

conclusion was that, although oral anxieties come first, sadistic phantasies

and  desires  from  all  sources  are  operative  at  a  very  early  stage  of
                                                  18
development and overlap the oral anxieties.

The importance of the infantile anxieties I have described above was also

shown  in  the  analysis  of  very  ill  adults,  some  of  whom  were  border-line
                  19
psychotic cases.

  There  were  other  experiences  which  helped  me  to  reach  yet  a  further

conclusion. The comparison between the undoubtedly paranoic Erna and the

phantasies and anxieties that I had found in less ill children, who could only

be called neurotic, convinced me that psychotic (paranoid and depressive)

anxieties underlie infantile neurosis. I also made similar observations in the

analyses of adult neurotics. All these different lines of exploration resulted inthe hypothesis that anxieties of a psychotic nature are in some measure part

of normal infantile development and are expressed and worked through in the
                                      20
course of the infantile neurosis. To uncover these infantile anxieties the

analysis has, however, to be carried into deep layers of the unconscious, and
                                                21
this applies both to adults and to children.

It has already been pointed out in the introduction to this paper that my

attention from the beginning focused on the child’s anxieties and that it was

by means of interpreting their contents that I found myself able to diminish

anxiety. In order to do this, full use had to be made of the symbolic language

of play which I recognized to be an essential part of the child’s mode of

expression. As we have seen, the brick, the little figure, the car, not only

represent things which interest the child in themselves, but in his play with

them they always have a variety of symbolical meanings as well which are

bound up with his phantasies, wishes, and experiences. This archaic mode of

expression is also the language with which we are familiar in dreams, and it

was  by  approaching  the  play  of  the  child  in  a  way  similar  to  Freud’s

interpretation  of  dreams  that  I  found  I  could  get  access  to  the  child’s

unconscious.  But  we  have  to  consider  each  child’s  use  of  symbols  in

connection with his particular emotions and anxieties and in relation to the

whole  situation  which  is  presented  in  the  analysis;  mere  generalized

translations of symbols are meaningless.

The importance I attributed to symbolism led me—as time went on—to

theoretical conclusions about the process of symbol formation. Play analysis

had shown that symbolism enabled the child to transfer not only interests, but
                                                                                22
also phantasies, anxieties, and guilt to objects other than people. Thus a

great deal of relief is experienced in play and this is one of the factors which

make it so essential for the child. For instance, Peter to whom I have referred

earlier, pointed out to me, when I interpreted his damaging a toy figure as

representing  attacks  on  his  brother,  that  he  would  not  do  this  to  his real

brother, he would only do it to the toy brother. My interpretation of course

made it clear to him that it was really his brother whom he wished to attack;

but the instance shows that only by symbolic means was he able to express

his destructive tendencies in the analysis.

I have also arrived at the view that, in children, a severe inhibition of the

capacity to form and use symbols, and so to develop phantasy life, is a sign of
                      23
serious disturbance.  I  suggested  that  such  inhibitions,  and  the  resulting

disturbance  in  the  relation  to  the  external  world  and  to  reality,  are                                    24
characteristic of schizophrenia.

In passing I may say that I found it of great value from the clinical and

theoretical point of view that I was analysing both adults and children. I was

thereby able to observe the infant’s phantasies and anxieties still operative in

the adult and to assess in the young child what his future development might

be. It was by comparing the severely ill, the neurotic, and the normal child,

and by recognizing infantile anxieties of a psychotic nature as the cause of

illness  in  adult  neurotics,  that  I  had  arrived  at  the  conclusions  I  have
                  25
described above.


                                            VI

 


In  tracing,  in  the  analyses  of  adults  and  children,  the  development  of

impulses, phantasies, and anxieties back to their origin, i.e. to the feelings

towards the mother’s breast (even with children who have not been breast-

fed), I, found that object relations start almost at birth and arise with the first

feeding experience; furthermore, that all aspects of mental life are bound up

with  object  relations.  It  also  emerged  that  the  child’s  experience  of  the

external world, which very soon includes his ambivalent relation to his father

and to other members of his family, is constantly influenced by—and in turn

influences—the  internal  world  he  is  building  up,  and  that  external  and

internal  situations  are  always  interdependent,  since  introjection  and

projection operate side by side from the beginning of life.

The observations that in the infant’s mind the mother primarily appears as

good and bad breast split off from each other, and that within a few months,

with  growing  ego  integration  the  contrasting  aspects  are  beginning  to  be

synthesized,  helped  me  to  understand  the  importance  of  the  processes  of
                                                            26
splitting and keeping apart good and bad figures, as well as the effect of

such processes on ego development. The conclusion to be drawn from the

experience that depressive anxiety arises as a result of the ego synthesizing

the good and bad (loved and hated) aspects of the object led me in turn to the

concept  of  the  depressive  position  which  reaches  its  climax  towards  the

middle  of  the  first  year.  It  is  preceded  by  the  paranoid  position,  which

extends over the first three or four months of life and is characterized by
                                                    2728
persecutory anxiety and splitting processes. Later on, in 1946, when I

reformulated my views on the first three or four months of life, I called this                                                              29
stage  (making  use  of  a  suggestion  of  Fairbairn’s) the paranoid-schizoid

position,  and,  in  working  out  its  significance,  sought  to  co-ordinate  my

findings about splitting, projection, persecution and idealization.

My  work  with  children  and  the  theoretical  conclusions  I  drew  from  it

increasingly influenced my technique with adults. It has always been a tenet

of  psycho-analysis  that  the  unconscious,  which  originates  in  the  infantile

mind, has to be explored in the adult. My experience with children had taken

me much deeper in that direction than was formerly the case, and this led to a

technique which made access to those layers possible. In particular, my play

technique  had  helped  me  to  see  which  material  was  most  in  need  of

interpretation at the moment and the way in which it would be most easily

conveyed to the patient; and some of this knowledge I could apply to the
                    30
analysis of adults. As has been pointed out earlier, this does not mean that

the  technique  used  with  children  is  identical  with  the  approach  to  adults.

Though we find our way back to the earliest stages, it is of great importance

in analysing adults to take account of the adult ego, just as with children we

keep in mind the infantile ego according to the stage of its development.

The fuller understanding of the earliest stages of development, of the rôle

of phantasies, anxieties, and defences in the emotional life of the infant has

also thrown light on the fixation points of adult psychosis. As a result there

has opened up a new way of treating psychotic patients by psycho-analysis.

This field, in particular the psycho-analysis of schizophrenic patients, needs

much  further  exploration;  but  the  work  done  in  this  direction  by  some

psycho-analysts, who are represented in this book, seems to justify hopes for

the future.                                            9

 

                            ON IDENTIFICATION

 

                                        (1955)


                                      INTRODUCTION

 


                                        1
IN  ‘Mourning  and  Melancholia’  Freud  (1917)  showed  the  intrinsic

connection between identification and introjection. His later discovery of the
          2
super-ego,  which  he  ascribed  to  the  introjection  of  the  father  and

identification  with  him,  has  led  to  the  recognition  that  identification  as  a

sequel to introjection is part of normal development. Since this discovery,

introjection and identification have played a central rôle in psycho-analytic

thought and research.

Before starting on the actual topic of this paper, I think it would be helpful

to recapitulate my main conclusions on this theme. Super-ego development

can be traced back to introjection in the earliest stages of infancy; the primal

internalized objects form the basis of complex processes of identification;

persecutory anxiety, arising from the experience of birth, is the first form of

anxiety,  very  soon  followed  by  depressive  anxiety;  introjection  and

projection  operate  from  the  beginning  of  post-natal  life  and  constantly

interact. This interaction both builds up the internal world and shapes the

picture of external reality. The inner world consists of objects, first of all the

mother,  internalized  in  various  aspects  and  emotional  situations.  The

relationships between these internalized figures, and between them and the

ego,  tend  to  be  experienced—when  persecutory  anxiety  is  dominant—as

mainly hostile and dangerous; they are felt to be loving and good when the

infant is gratified and happy feelings prevail. This inner world, which can be

described in terms of internal relations and happenings, is the product of the

infant’s own impulses, emotions, and phantasies. It is of course profoundly
                                                                              3
influenced by his good and bad experiences from external sources. But at the

same time the inner world influences his perception of the external world in a

way that is no less decisive for his development. The mother, first of all her

breast, is the primal object for both the infant’s introjective and projective

processes. Love and hatred are from the beginning projected on to her, andconcurrently  she  is  internalized  with  both  these  contrasting  primordial

emotions, which underlie the infant’s feeling that a good and a bad mother

(breast) exist. The more the mother and her breast are cathected—and the

extent  of  the  cathexis  depends  on  a  combination  of  internal  and  external

factors, among which the inherent capacity for love is of utmost importance

—the more securely will the internalized good breast, the prototype of good

internal objects, be established in the infant’s mind. This in turn influences

both the strength and the nature of projections; in particular it determines
                                                                                  4
whether feelings of love or destructive impulses predominate in them.

I  have  in  various  connections  described  the  infant’s  sadistic  phantasies

directed against the mother. I found that aggressive impulses and phantasies

arising in the earliest relation to the mother’s breast, such as sucking the

breast dry and scooping it out, soon lead to further phantasies of entering the

mother and robbing her of the contents of her body. Concurrently, the infant

experiences  impulses  and  phantasies  of  attacking  the  mother  by  putting

excrements into her. In such phantasies, products of the body and parts of the

self  are  felt  to  have  been  split  off,  projected  into  the  mother,  and  to  be

continuing their existence within her. These phantasies soon extend to the

father and to other people. I also contended that the persecutory anxiety and

the  fear  of  retaliation,  which  result  from  oral-,  urethal-  and  anal-sadistic

impulses, underlie the development of paranoia and schizophrenia.

It is not only what are felt to be destructive and ‘bad’ parts of the self

which are split off and projected into another person, but also parts which are

felt  to  be  good  and  valuable.  I  have  pointed  out  earlier  that  from  the

beginning  of  life  the  infant’s  first  object,  the  mother’s  breast  (and  the

mother), is invested with libido and that this vitally influences the way in

which the mother is internalized. This in turn is of great importance for the

relation with her as an external and internal object. The process by which the

mother is invested with libido is bound up with the mechanism of projecting

good feelings and good parts of the self into her.

In  the  course  of  further  work,  I  also  came  to  recognize  the  major

importance  for  identification  of  certain  projective  mechanisms  which  are

complementary  to  the  introjective  ones.  The  process  which  underlies  the

feeling  of  identification  with  other  people,  because  one  has  attributed

qualities or attitudes of one’s own to them, was generally taken for granted

even before the corresponding concept was incorporated in psycho-analytic

theory.  For  instance,  the  projective  mechanism  underlying  empathy  isfamiliar in everday life. Phenomena well known in psychiatry, e.g. a patient’s

feeling that he actually is Christ, God, a king, a famous person, are bound up

with projection. The mechanisms underlying such phenomena, however, had

not been investigated in much detail when, in my ‘Notes on Some Schizoid
                                                                                    5
Mechanisms’  (1946),  I  suggested  the  term  ‘projective  identification’  for

those  processes  that  form  part  of  the  paranoid-schizoid  position.  The

conclusions I arrived at in that paper were, however, based on some of my
                6
earlier findings, in particular on that of the infantile oral-, urethral- and anal-

sadistic phantasies and impulses to attack the mother’s body in many ways,

including the projection of excrements and parts of the self into her.

  Projective identification is bound up with developmental processes arising

during the first three or four months of life (the paranoid-schizoid position)

when splitting is at its height and persecutory anxiety predominates. The ego

is still largely unintegrated and is therefore liable to split itself, its emotions

and  its  internal  and  external  objects,  but  splitting  is  also  one  of  the

fundamental defences against persecutory anxiety. Other defences arising at

this  stage  are  idealization,  denial,  and  omnipotent  control  of  internal  and

external  objects.  Identification  by  projection  implies  a  combination  of

splitting off parts of the self and projecting them on to (or rather into) another

person.  These  processes  have  many  ramifications  and  fundamentally

influence object relations.

In normal development, in the second quarter of the first year, persecutory

anxiety diminishes and depressive anxiety comes to the fore, as a result of the

ego’s greater capacity to integrate itself and to synthesize its objects. This

entails sorrow and guilt about the harm done (in omnipotent phantasies) to an

object which is now felt to be both loved and hated; these anxieties and the

defences against them represent the depressive position. At this juncture a

regression  to  the  paranoid-schizoid  position  may  occur  in  the  attempt  to

escape from depression.

I also suggested that internalization is of great importance for projective

processes, in particular that the good internalized breast acts as a focal point

in the ego, from which good feelings can be projected on to external objects.

It strengthens the ego, counteracts the processes of splitting and dispersal and

enhances the capacity for integration and synthesis. The good internalized

object is thus one of the preconditions for an integrated and stable ego and for

good object relations. The tendency towards integration, which is concurrent

with splitting, I assume to be, from earliest infancy, a dominant feature ofmental life. One of the main factors underlying the need for integration is the

individual’s feeling that integration implies being alive, loving, and being

loved by the internal and external good object; that is to say, there exists a

close link between integration and object relations. Conversely, the feeling of

chaos, of disintegration, of lacking emotions as a result of splitting, I take to

be  closely  related  to  the  fear  of  death.  I  have  maintained  (in  ‘Schizoid

Mechanisms’) that the fear of annihilation by the destructive forces within is

the  deepest  fear  of  all.  Splitting  as  a  primal  defence  against  this  fear  is

effective to the extent that it brings about a dispersal of anxiety and a cutting

off of emotions. But it fails in another sense because it results in a feeling

akin to death—that is what the accompanying disintegration and feeling of

chaos amount to. The sufferings of the schizophrenic are, I think, not fully

appreciated, because he appears to be devoid of emotions.

Here I wish to go somewhat beyond my paper on ‘Schizoid Mechanisms’.

I would suggest that a securely established good object, implying a securely

established love for it, gives the ego a feeling of riches and abundance which

allows for an outpouring of libido and projection of good parts of the self into

the external world without a sense of depletion arising. The ego can then also

feel that it is able to re-introject the love it has given out, as well as take in

goodness from other sources, and thus be enriched by the whole process. In

other words, in such cases there is a balance between giving out and taking

in, between projection and introjection.

  Furthermore,  whenever  an  unharmed  breast  is  taken  in,  in  states  of

gratification  and  love,  this  affects  the  ways  in  which  the  ego  splits  and

projects.  As  I  suggested,  there  are  a  variety  of  splitting  processes  (about

which we have still a good deal to discover) and their nature is of great

importance  for  the  development  of  the  ego.  The  feeling  of  containing  an

unharmed nipple and breast—although co-existing with phantasies of a breast

devoured and therefore in bits—has the effect that splitting and projection are

not predominantly related to fragmented parts of the personality but to more

coherent parts of the self. This implies that the ego is not exposed to a fatal

weakening by dispersal and for this reason is more capable of repeatedly

undoing splitting and achieving integration and synthesis in its relation to

objects.

  Conversely,  the  breast  taken  in  with  hatred,  and  therefore  felt  to  be

destructive, becomes the prototype of all bad internal objects, drives the ego

to  further  splitting  and  becomes  the  representative  of  the  death-instinctwithin.

I have already mentioned that concurrently with the internalization of the

good  breast,  the  external  mother  too  is  cathected  with  libido.  In  various

connections Freud has described this process and some of its implications: for
                                                                      7
instance, referring to idealization in a love relation, he states that ‘the object

is being treated in the same way as our own ego, so that when we are in love,

a considerable amount of narcissistic libido overflows on to the object. . . .

We love it on account of the perfections which we have striven to reach for
                  8
our own ego. . . .’

In my view, the process which Freud describes imply that this loved object

is felt to contain the split-off, loved, and valued part of the self, which in this

way continues its existence inside the object. It thereby becomes an extension
          9
of the self.

The above is a brief summary of my findings presented in ‘Notes on some
                          10
Schizoid Mechanisms’. I have not confined myself, however, to the points

discussed there but have added a few further suggestions and amplified some

which were implied but not explicitly stated in that paper. I now propose to

exemplify some of these findings by an analysis of a story by the French
                        11
novelist Julian Green.


              A NOVEL ILLUSTRATING PROJECTIVE IDENTIFICATION

 


The hero, a young clerk called Fabian Especel, is unhappy and dissatisfied

with  himself,  in  particular  with  his  appearance,  his  lack  of  success  with

women, his poverty, and the inferior work to which he feels condemned. He

finds his religious beliefs, which he attributes to his mother’s demands, very

burdensome, yet cannot free himself from them. His father, who died when

Fabian was still at school, had squandered all his money on gambling, had led

a ‘gay’ life with women, and died of heart failure, thought to be a result of his

dissolute life. Fabian’s pronounced grievance and rebellion against fate are

bound up with his resentment against his father, whose irresponsibility had

deprived  him  of  his  further  education  and  prospects.  These  feelings,  it

appears, contribute to Fabian’s insatiable desire for wealth and success, and

to his intense envy and hatred of those who possess more.

The essence of the story is the magic power to change himself into other

people  which  is  conferred  on  Fabian  by  a  compact  with  the  Devil,  whoseduces him by false promises of happiness into accepting this sinister gift;

he teaches Fabian a secret formula by which the change into another person

can be effected. This formula includes his own name, Fabian, and it is of

great importance that he should—whatever happens—remember the formula

and his name.

  Fabian’s first choice is the waiter who brings him a cup of coffee which is

all that he can afford for his breakfast. This attempt at projection comes to

nothing because at this point he still considers the feelings of his prospective

victims, and the waiter, on being asked by Fabian whether he would like to

change  places  with  him,  refuses.  Fabian’s  next  choice  is  his  employer

Poujars. He greatly envies this man who is wealthy, can—as Fabian thinks—

enjoy life to the full, and has power over other people, in particular over

Fabian. The author describes Fabian’s envy of Poujars in these words: ‘Ah!

the sun. It often seemed to him that M. Poujars kept it hidden in his pocket.’

Fabian is also very resentful of his employer because he feels humiliated by

him and imprisoned in his office.

Before he whispers the formula into Poujars’ ear, Fabian speaks to Poujars

in the same contemptuous and humiliating way as Poujars used to speak to

him. The transformation has the effect of making his victim enter Fabian’s

body and collapse; Fabian (now in the body of Poujars) writes out a large

cheque in Fabian’s favour. He finds in Fabian’s pocket his address which he

carefully writes down. (This slip of paper with Fabian’s name and address he

carries with him into his next two transformations.) He also arranges that

Fabian, into whose pocket he has put the cheque, should be taken home,

where he would be looked after by his mother. The fate of Fabian’s body is

very much in Fabian-Poujars’ mind, for he feels that he might one day wish

to return to his old self; he therefore does not want to see Fabian recover

consciousness because he dreads the frightened eyes of Poujars (with whom

he has changed places) looking out of his own former face. He wonders,

looking at Fabian who is still unconscious, whether anybody ever loved him,

and  is  glad  that  he  got  rid  of  that  unprepossessing  appearance  and  those

miserable clothes.

  Fabian-Poujars very soon finds out some drawbacks to this transformation.

He  feels  oppressed  by  his  new  corpulence;  he  has  lost  his  appetite  and

becomes  aware  of  the  kidney  trouble  from  which  Poujars  suffers.  He

discovers with dislike that he has not only taken on Poujars’ looks but also

his  personality.  He  has  already  become  estranged  from  his  old  self  andremembers little about Fabian’s life and circumstances. He decides that he is

not going to stay a minute longer than necessary in Poujars’ skin.

On  leaving  the  office  with  Poujars’  pocket-book  in  his  possession  he

gradually realizes that he has put himself into an extremely serious situation.

For  not  only  does  he  dislike  the  personality,  outlook,  and  unpleasant

memories which he has acquired, but he is also very worried about the lack of

will-power and initiative which are in keeping with Poujars’ age. The thought

that he might not be able to muster the energy to transform himself into

somebody else fill him with horror. He decides that for his next object he

must choose somebody who is young and healthy. When he sees in a café an

athletic young man with an ugly face, looking arrogant and quarrelsome but

whose  whole  bearing  shows  self-assurance,  vigour,  and  health,  Fabian-

Poujars—feeling increasingly worried that he might never get rid of Poujars

—decides to approach the young man although he is very afraid of him. He

offers him a packet of banknotes which Fabian-Poujars wants to have after

the transformation, and while thus distracting the man’s attention he manages

to whisper the formula into his ear and to put the slip with Fabian’s name and

address into his pocket. Within a few moments Poujars, whose person Fabian

has just left, has collapsed and Fabian has turned into the young man, Paul

Esménard.  He  is  filled  with  the  great  joy  of  feeling  young,  healthy,  and

strong. He has much more than in the first transformation lost his original self

and  turned  into  the  new  personality;  he  is  amazed  to  find  a  packet  of

banknotes in his hand and in his pocket a slip of paper, with Fabian’s name

and address. Soon he thinks of Berthe, the girl whose favour Paul Esménard

has  been  trying  to  win,  so  far  without  success.  Among  other  unpleasant

things Berthe told him that he has the face of a murderer and that she is afraid

of him. The money in his pocket gives him confidence and he goes straight to

her house, determined to make her comply with his desires.

  Although  Fabian  has  become  submerged  in  Paul  Esménard,  he  feels

increasingly bewildered about the name Fabian which he has read on the slip

of paper. ‘That name remained in some way at the very core of his being.’ A

feeling of being imprisoned in an unknown body and burdened with huge

hands and a slow-working brain takes possession of him. He cannot puzzle it

out,  struggling  unavailingly  with  his  own  stupidity;  he  wonders  what  he

could mean by wishing to be free. All this goes through his mind as he goes

to Berthe. He forces his way into her room although she tries to lock the door

against him. Berthe screams, he silences her by clapping his hand over hermouth, and in the ensuing struggle strangles her. Only gradually does he

realize what he has done; he is terrified and does not dare to leave Berthe’s

flat since he hears people moving about in the house. Suddenly he hears a

knock at the door, opens it and finds the Devil whom he does not recognize.

The Devil leads him away, teaches him again the formula which Fabian-

Esménard has forgotten, and helps him to remember something about his

original self. He also warns him that in future he must not enter a person too

stupid  to  use  the  formula  and  therefore  incapable  of  effecting  further

transformations.

The Devil takes him into a reading-room in search of a person into whom

Fabian-Esménard  could  change  himself  and  picks  out  Emmanuel  Fruges;

Fruges and the Devil recognize each other immediately, for Fruges; has all

the time been struggling against the Devil, who has ‘so often and so patiently

hung about that unquiet soul’. The Devil directs Fabian-Esménard to whisper

the formula into Fruges’ ear and the transformation is effected. As soon as

Fabian  has  entered  into  Fruges’  body  and  personality,  he  recovers  his

capacity  to  think.  He  wonders  about  the  fate  of  his  last  victim  and  is

somewhat concerned about Fruges (now in the body of Esménard) who will

be condemned for Fabian-Esménard’s crime. He feels partly responsible for

the crime because, as the Devil points out to him, the hands which committed

the murder belonged to him only a few minutes ago. Before parting from the

Devil  he  also  inquires  after  the  original  Fabian  and  after  Poujars.  While

recovering some memories of his former selves, he notices that he is more

and more turning into Fruges and acquiring his personality. At the same time

he becomes aware that his experiences have increased his comprehension of

other people, for he can now understand better what went on in the minds of

Poujars, Paul Esménard, and Fruges. He also feels sympathy, an emotion he

has never known before, and goes back once more to see what Fruges—in the

body of Paul Esménard—is doing. Yet he relishes the thought not only of his

own escape but also of what his victim will suffer in his place.

The author tells us that some elements of Fabian’s original nature enter

more  into  this  transformation  than  into  either  of  the  previous  ones.  In

particular the inquiring side of Fabian’s character influences Fabian-Fruges to

discover more and more about Fruges’ personality. Among other things he

finds  that  he  is  drawn  to  obscene  postcards  which  he  buys  from  an  old

woman in a little stationer’s shop, where the cards are hidden behind other

articles. Fabian is disgusted with this side of his new nature; he hates thenoise made by the revolving stand on which the cards are arranged, and feels

that this noise will haunt him for ever. He decides to get rid of Fruges whom

he is now able to judge to some extent with the eyes of Fabian.

  Soon a little boy of about six comes into the shop. George is the picture of

‘apple-cheeked innocence’ and Fabian-Fruges is at once very much attracted

to him. George reminds him of himself at that age and he feels very tender

towards  the  child.  Fabian-Fruges  follows  George  out  of  the  shop  and

observes him with great interest. Suddenly he is tempted to transform himself

into the boy. He fights this temptation as he has never, he thinks, fought

temptation before, for he knows that it would be criminal to steal this child’s

personality and life. Nevertheless he decides to turn himself into George,

kneels down beside him and whispers the formula in his ear, in a state of

great emotion and remorse. But nothing happens, and Fabian-Fruges realizes

that the magic does not work with the child because the Devil has no power

over him.

  Fabian-Fruges is horrified at the thought that he might not be able to get

away  from  Fruges  whom  he  dislikes  more  and  more.  He  feels  he  is  the

prisoner of Fruges and struggles to keep the Fabian aspect of himself alive,

for  he  realizes  that  Fruges  lacks  the  initiative  which  would  help  him  to

escape. He makes several attempts to approach people but fails and is soon in

despair, being afraid that Fruges’ body will be his tomb, that he will have to

remain there until his death. ‘All the time he got the impression that he was

being slowly but surely shut in; that a door which had stood open was now

gradually closing on him.’ Eventually he succeeds in changing himself into a

handsome and healthy young man of twenty, called Camille. At this point the

author  introduces  us  for  the  first  time  to  a  family  circle,  consisting  of

Camille’s  wife  Stéphanie,  her  cousin  Elise,  Camille  himself,  his  young

brother, and the old uncle who had adopted them all when they were children.

  When  he  enters  the  house  Fabian-Camille  seems  to  be  searching  for

something. He goes upstairs looking into different rooms until he comes into

Elise’s room. When he sees there his reflection in a mirror he is overjoyed to

find that he is handsome and strong but a moment later he discovers that he

has actually turned himself into an unhappy, weak, and useless person, and

decides to get rid of Camille. At the same time he has become aware of

Elise’s passionate and unrequited love for Camille. Elise comes in, and he

tells her that he loves her and should have married her instead of her cousin

Stéphanie. Elise, amazed and frightened since Camille has never given her asign of returning her love, runs away. Left alone in Elise’s room Fabian-

Camille thinks with sympathy of the girl’s sufferings and that he could make

her happy by loving her. Then he suddenly thinks that if this were so he could

become  happy  by  turning  himself  into  Elise.  However,  he  dismisses  this

possibility because he cannot be sure that Camille, if Fabian were to turn

himself into Elise, would love her. He is not even sure whether he himself—

Fabian—loves Elise. While he wonders about this, it occurs to him that what

he loves in Elise are her eyes which are somehow familiar to him.

Before leaving the house, Fabian-Camille takes revenge on the uncle, who

is a hypocritical and tyrannical man, for all the harm he has done to the

family. He also particularly avenges Elise by punishing and humiliating her

rival Stéphanie. Fabian-Camille, having insulted the old man, leaves him in a

state of impotent rage and goes away knowing that he has made it impossible

for himself ever to return to this house in the shape of Camille. But before

leaving he insists that Elise, who is still frightened of him, should listen to

him once more. He tells her that he does not really love her and that she must

give up her unfortunate passion for Camille or she will always be unhappy.

As before, Fabian feels resentment against the person into whom he has

turned  himself,  because  he  has  found  him  to  be  worthless;  he  therefore

pictures with glee how Camille, when Fabian has left him, will be received at

home by his uncle and his wife. The one person he regets leaving is Elise;

and suddenly it occurs to him whom she resembles. Her eyes have ‘in them

all the tragedy of a longing which can never be satisfied’; and all at once he

knows that they are Fabian’s eyes. When this name, which he has completely

forgotten, comes back to him and he says it aloud, its sound reminds him

dimly of ‘a far country’ known only in the past from dreams. For his actual

memory of Fabian has completely disappeared, and in his hurry to escape

from Fruges and transform himself into Camille he has not taken with him

either Fabian’s name and address or the money. From this moment onwards

the longing for Fabian gets hold of him and he struggles to recover his old

memories. It is a child who helps him to recognize that he himself is Fabian,

for when the child asks what his name is, he straightway answers ‘Fabian’.

Now Fabian-Camille physically and mentally moves more and more in the

direction where Fabian can be found, for, as he puts it, ‘I want to be myself

again’. Walking through the streets he calls out this name, which embodies

his greatest longing, and waits to get a reply. The formula which he has

forgotten occurs to him and he hopes that he will also remember Fabian’ssurname.  On  his  way  home  every  building,  stone  and  tree  takes  on  a

particular meaning; he feels that they are ‘charged with some message for

him’ and walks on, driven by an impulse. This is how he comes to enter the

old woman’s shop which had been so familiar to Fruges. He feels that in

looking round in this dark shop he is also ‘exploring a secret corner of his

own memory, looking around his own mind, as it were’ and he is filled with

‘abysmal depression’. When he pushes the revolving stand with the postcards

on it the squeaking noise affects him strangely. He leaves the shop hurriedly.

The  next  landmark  is  the  reading-room  in  which,  with  the  Devil’s  help,

Fabian-Esménard was turned into Fruges. He calls out ‘Fabian’ but gets no

answer. Next he passes the house where Fabian-Esménard killed Berthe and

feels impelled to go in and find out what happened behind that window at

which some people are pointing; he wonders whether this is perhaps the room

in which Fabian lives, but he is filled with fear and slinks away when he

hears the people talking about the murder which was committed three days

before; the murderer has not yet been found. As he walks on, the houses and

shops become even more familiar to him, and he is deeply moved when he

reaches the place where the Devil first tried to win Fabian over. At last he

comes  to  the  house  in  which  Fabian  lives  and  the  concierge  lets  Fabian-

Camille in. When he begins to climb the stairs a sudden pain grips his heart.

  During the three days when all these events took place Fabian had been

lying unconscious in his bed, looked after by his mother. He begins to come

to and grows restless when Fabian-Camille approaches the house and comes

up the stairs. Fabian hears Fabian-Camille call out his name from behind the

door, gets out of bed and goes to the door, but is unable to open it. Through

the keyhole Fabian-Camille speaks the formula and then goes away. Fabian is

found by his mother lying unconscious by the door, but he soon comes to and

regains  some  strength.  He  desperately  wants  to  find  out  what  happened

during  the  days  when  he  was  unconscious  and  in  particular  about  the

encounter with Fabian-Camille, but is told that nobody has come and that he

has been lying in a coma for three days ever since he collapsed in the office.

With his mother sitting by his bedside he is overcome by the longing to be

loved by her and to be able to express his love to her. He wishes to touch her

hand, to throw himself into her arms, but feels that she would not respond. In

spite of this he realizes that if his love for her had been stronger she would

have loved him more. The intense affection which he experiences towards her

extends suddenly to the whole of humanity and he feels overflowing with anunaccountable happiness. His mother suggests that he should pray, but he can

only  recall  the  words  ‘Our  Father’.  Then  he  is  again  overcome  by  this

mysterious happiness, and dies.


                                      INTERPRETATIONS

 
                                            I

 


The author of this story has deep insight into the unconscious mind; this is

seen both in the way he depicts the events and characters and—what is of

particular  interest  here—in  his  choice  of  the  people  into  whom  Fabian

projects  himself.  My  interest  in  Fabian’s  personality  and  adventures,

illustrating, as they do, some of the complex and still obscure problems of

projective identification, led me to attempt an analysis of this rich material

almost as if he were a patient.

Before discussing projective identification, which to me is the main theme

of  this  book,  I  shall  consider  the  interaction  between  introjective  and

projective  processes  which  is,  I  think,  also  illustrated  in  the  novel.  For

instance, the author describes the unhappy Fabian’s urge to gaze at the stars.

‘Whenever he stared like this into the all-enveloping night he had a sensation

of being lifted gently above the world. . . . It was almost as if by the very

effort of gazing into space a sort of gulf in himself, corresponding to the

giddy depths into which his imagination peered, was being opened.’ This, I

think, means that Fabian is simultaneously looking into distance and into

himself; taking in the sky and the stars as well as projecting into the sky and

stars his loved internal objects and the good parts of himself. I would also

interpret his intent gazing at the stars as an attempt to regain his good objects

which he feels are lost or far away.

  Other  aspects  of  Fabian’s  introjective  identifications  throw  light  on  his

projective processes. On one occasion, when he is lonely in his room at night,

he feels, as so often, that he longs ‘to hear some signs of life coming from the

other inhabitants of the building around him’. Fabian lays his father’s gold

watch on the table; he has a great affection for it and particularly likes it

because of ‘its opulence and glossiness and the clearly marked figures on its

face’. In a vague way this watch also gives him a feeling of confidence. As it

lies on the table among his papers he feels that the whole room acquires an

air  of  greater  order  and  seriousness,  perhaps  owing  to  ‘the  fussy  and  yetsoothing  sound  of  its  ticking,  comforting  amid  the  pervading  stillness’.

Looking at the watch and listening to its ticking, he muses upon the hours of

joy and misery in his father’s life which it has ticked away, and it seems to

him alive and independent of its dead former owner. In an earlier passage the

author says that ever since childhood Fabian ‘had been haunted by a feeling

of  some  inner  presence  which,  in  some  way  which  he  could  not  have

described, was ever beyond the reach of his own consciousness. . . .’ I would

conclude that the watch has some qualities of a fatherly nature, such as order

and seriousness, which it imparts to his room and in a deeper sense to Fabian

himself; in other words, the watch stands for the good internalized father

whom he wishes to feel ever present. This aspect of the super-ego, which

links with the highly moral and orderly attitude of his mother, is in contrast to

his father’s passions and his ‘gay’ life, of which the ticking of the watch also

reminds Fabian. He identifies himself with this frivolous side too, as is shown

in  his  setting  so  much  store  on  his  conquests  of  women—although  such

successes do not afford him much satisfaction.

Yet another aspect of the internalized father appears in the shape of the

Devil. For we read that when the Devil is on his way to him, Fabian hears

footsteps resounding on the stairs: ‘He began to feel those thudding footsteps

as a pulse beating in his own temples.’ A little later, when face to face with

the Devil, it seems to him that ‘the figure in front of him would go on rising

and rising until it spread like a darkness through the whole room’. This, I

think, expresses the internalization of the Devil (the bad father), the darkness

indicating also the terror he feels at having taken in such a sinister object. At

a later point, when Fabian is travelling in a carriage with the Devil, he falls

asleep and dreams ‘that his companion edged along the seat towards him’ and

that his voice ‘seemed to wrap itself about him, tying his arms, choking him

with its oily flow’. I see in that Fabian’s fear of the bad object intruding into

him. In my ‘Notes on Some Schizoid Mechanisms’ I described these fears as

a consequence of the impulse to intrude into another person, i.e. of projective

identification. The external object intruding into the self and the bad object

which has been introjected have much in common; these two anxieties are

closely linked and apt to reinforce each other. This relation with the Devil

repeats, I think, Fabian’s early feelings about one aspect of his father—the

seductive father felt to be bad. On the other hand, the moral component of his

internalized objects can be seen in the Devil’s ascetic contempt of the ‘lusts
              12
of the flesh’. This aspect was influenced by Fabian’s identification with themoral and ascetic mother, the Devil thus representing simultaneously both

parents.

I have indicated some aspects of his father which Fabian had internalized.

Their incompatibility was a source of never-ending conflict in him, which

was  increased  by  the  actual  conflict  between  his  parents  and  had  been

perpetuated by his internalizing the parents in their unhappy relation with

each other. The various ways in which he identified himself with his mother

were no less complex, as I hope to show. The persecution and depression

arising from these inner relations contributed much to Fabian’s loneliness, his
                                                                  13
restless moods and his urge to escape from his hated self. The author quotes

in his preface Milton’s lines ‘Thou art become (O worst imprisonment) the

Dungeon of thyself.’

One  evening,  when  Fabian  has  been  wandering  aimlessly  through  the

streets, the idea of returning to his own lodgings fills him with horror. He

knows that all he will find there is himself; nor can he escape into a new love

affair, for he realizes that he would again, as usual, grow tired of it very

quickly. He wonders why he should be so hard to please and remembers that

somebody had told him that what he wanted was a ‘statue of ivory and gold’;

he thinks that this over-fastidiousness might be an inheritance from his father

(the Don Juan theme). He longs to escape from himself; if only for an hour,

to get away from the ‘never ending arguments’ which go on within him. It

would  appear  that  his  internalized  objects  were  making  incompatible

demands on him and that these were the ‘never ending arguments’ by which
                        14
he felt so persecuted. He not only hates his internal persecutors but also

feels worthless because he contains such bad objects. This is a corollary of

the sense of guilt; for he feels that his aggressive impulses and phantasies

have changed the parents into retaliatory persecutors or have destroyed them.

Thus  self-hatred,  although  directed  against  the  bad  internalized  objects,

ultimately focuses on the individual’s own impulses which are felt to have

been and to be destructive and dangerous to the ego and its good objects.

  Greed, envy and hatred, the prime movers of aggressive phantasies, are

dominant features in Fabian’s character, and the author shows us that these

emotions urge Fabian to get hold of other people’s possessions, both material

and  spiritual;  they  drive  him  irresistibly  towards  what  I  described  as

projective identifications. At one point, when Fabian has already made his

pact  with  the  Devil  and  is  about  to  try  out  his  new  power,  he  cries  out:

‘Humanity, the great cup from which I shall shortly drink!’ This suggests thegreedy wish to drink from an inexhaustible breast. We may assume that these

emotions and the greedy identifications by introjection and projection were

first  experienced  in  Fabian’s  relations  to  his  primal  objects,  mother  and

father. My analytic experience has shown me that processes of introjection

and projection in later life repeat in some measure the pattern of the earliest

introjections and projections; the external world is again and again taken in

and  put  out—re-introjected  and  re-projected.  Fabian’s  greed,  as  can  be

gathered  from  the  story,  is  reinforced  by  his  self-hatred  and  the  urge  to

escape from his own personality.


                                            II

 


My  interpretation  of  the  novel  implies  that  the  author  has  presented

fundamental aspects of emotional life on two planes: the experiences of the

infant and their influence on the life of the adult. In the last few pages I have

touched  on  some  of  the  infantile  emotions,  anxieties,  introjections  and

projections which I take to underlie Fabian’s adult character and experiences.

I shall substantiate these assumptions by discussing some further episodes

which I have not mentioned in the account of the novel. In assembling the

various  incidents  from  this  particular  angle,  I  shall  not  follow  the

chronological  order  either  of  the  book  or  of  Fabian’s  development.  I  am

rather  considering  them  as  the  expression  of  certain  aspects  of  infantile

development, and we have to remember that especially in infancy emotional

experiences are not only consecutive but to a large extent simultaneous.

  There  is  an  interlude  in  the  novel  which  seems  to  me  of  fundamental

importance for understanding Fabian’s early development. Fabian-Fruges has

gone to sleep very depressed about his poverty, his inadequacy, and full of

fear  that  he  might  not  be  able  to  change  himself  into  someone  else.  On

waking he sees that it is a bright, sunny morning. He dresses more carefully

than usual, goes out and, sitting in the sunshine, becomes elated. All faces

around him appear to be beautiful. He also thinks that in this admiration of

beauty there is not ‘any of that lustful covetousness which was so apt to

poison even his moments of really serious contemplation; on the contrary, he

simply admired and with a touch of almost religious respect’. However, he

soon feels hungry because he has had no breakfast, and to this he attributes a

slight giddiness which he experiences together with hopefulness and elation.

He realizes, though, that this state of happiness is also dangerous because hemust spur himself on to action so as to turn himself into somebody else; but
                                                            15
first of all he is driven by hunger to find some food. He goes into a baker’s

shop to buy a roll. The very smell of flour and warm bread always reminds

Fruges of childhood holidays in the country in a house full of children. I

believe that the whole shop turns in his mind into the feeding mother. He is

engrossed in looking at a large basket of fresh rolls and stretches his hand out

towards them when he hears a woman’s voice asking him what he wants. At

this he jumps ‘like a sleepwalker who has been suddenly woken up’. She too

smells good—‘like a wheat-field’—he longs to touch her and is surprised that

he is afraid to do so. He is entranced by her beauty and feels that for her sake

he could give up all his beliefs and hopes. In watching with delight all her

movements when she hands him a roll, he focuses on her breasts, whose

outlines he can see under her clothing. The whiteness of her skin intoxicates

him and he is filled with an irresistible desire to put his hands round her

waist. As soon as he has left the shop he is overwhelmed with misery. He

suddenly has a strong impulse to throw the roll on the ground and trample on

it with ‘his shiny black shoes . . . in order to insult the sacredness of bread

itself’. Then he remembers that the woman touched it and ‘in a passion of

thwarted desire he bit furiously into the thickest part of the roll’. He attacks

even its remains by crushing them in his pocket and at the same time it seems

to him as if a crumb were sticking like a stone in his throat. He is in agony.

‘Something  was  beating  and  fluttering  like  a  second  heart  just  above  his

stomach but something large and heavy.’ In thinking again of the woman, he

concludes with bitterness that he has never been loved. All his affairs with

girls had been sordid and he had never before encountered in a woman ‘that

fullness of breast the very thought of which was now torturing him with its

persistent image’. He decides to return to the shop to have at least another

look at her, for his desires seem to be ‘burning him up’. He finds her even

more desirable and feels that his looking at her almost amounts to touching

her. Then he sees a man talking to her, with his hand laid affectionately on

her ‘milk-white’ arm. The woman smiles at the man and they discuss plans

for the evening. Fabian-Fruges is sure that he will never forget this scene,

‘every detail being invested with tragic importance’. The words which the

man had spoken to her still ring in his ears. He cannot ‘stifle the sound of that

voice which from somewhere within went on speaking yet’. In despair he

covers his eyes with his hands. He cannot remember any occasion when he

has suffered so acutely from his desires.I see in the details of this episode Fabian’s powerfully revived desire for

his  mother’s  breast  with  the  ensuing  frustration  and  hatred;  his  wish  to

trample on the bread with his black shoes expresses his anal-sadistic attacks,

and his furiously biting into the roll his cannibalism and his oral-sadistic

impulses. The whole situation appears to be internalized and all his emotions,

with the ensuing disappointment and attacks, apply also to the internalized

mother. This is shown by Fabian-Fruges furiously crushing the remains of the

roll in his pocket, by his feeling that a crumb had stuck like a stone in his

throat and (immediately afterwards) that a second and bigger heart above his

stomach was fluttering inside him. In the very same episode the frustration

experienced at the breast and in the earliest relation to the mother appears to

be closely linked with the rivalry with the father. This represents a very early

situation when the infant, deprived of the mother’s breast, feels that someone

else, above all the father, has taken it away from him and is enjoying it—a

situation of envy and jealousy which appears to me part of the earliest stages

of the Oedipus complex. Fabian-Fruges’ passionate jealousy of the man who

he believes possesses the baker-woman at night refers also to an internal

situation, for he feels that he can hear inside him the man’s voice speaking to

the woman. I would conclude that the incident he has watched with such

strong emotions represents the primal scene which he has internalized in the

past. When, in this emotional state, he covers his eyes with his hand he is, I

think, reviving the young infant’s wish never to have seen and taken in the

primal scene.

The next part of this chapter deals with Fabian-Fruges’ sense of guilt about

his desires which he feels he must destroy ‘as rubbish is consumed by fire’.

He goes into a church only to find that there is no holy water in the stoup,

which is ‘bone-dry’, and is very indignant about such neglect of religious

duties. He kneels down in a state of depression and thinks that it would need

a miracle to relieve his guilt and sadness and solve his conflicts about religion

which have reappeared at this moment. Soon his complaints and accusations

turn against God. Why had He created him to be ‘as sick and bedraggled as a

poisoned rat’? Then he remembers an old book about the many souls who

might have come to life but had remained unborn. It was thus a question of

God’s  choice,  and  this  thought  comforts  him.  He  even  becomes  elated

because he is alive and ‘he clasped his side with both hands as if to assure

himself of the beating of his heart’. Then he reflects that these are childish

ideas,  but  concludes  that  ‘truth  itself’  is  ‘the  conception  of  a  child’.Immediately after that he places votive candles in all the vacant places in the

stand. An internal voice tempts him again, saying how beautiful it would be

to see the baker-woman in the light of all these little candles.

My  conclusion  is  that  his  guilt  and  despair  relate  to  the  phantasied

destruction of the external and internal mother and her breasts, and to the

murderous rivalry with his father, that is to say to the feeling that his good

internal  and  external  objects  had  been  destroyed  by  him.  This  depressive

anxiety was linked with a persecutory one. For God, who stood for the father,

was accused of having made him a bad and poisoned creature. He fluctuates

between this accusation and a feeling of satisfaction that he had been created

in preference to the unborn souls and is alive. I suggest that the souls which

have never come to life stand for Fabian’s unborn brothers and sisters. The

fact that he was an only child was both a cause for guilt and—since he had

been chosen to be born while they had not—for satisfaction and gratitude to

the father. The religious idea that truth is ‘the conception of a child’ thus

takes on another significance. The greatest act of creation is to create a child,

for this means perpetuating life. I think that when Fabian-Fruges put candles

in all the vacant places in the stand and lights them, this means making the

mother pregnant and bringing to life the unborn babies. The wish to see the

baker-woman in the light of the candles would thus express the desire to see

her pregnant with all the children he would give her. Here we find the ‘sinful’

incestuous desire for the mother as well as the tendency to repair by giving

her all the babies he had destroyed. In this connection his indignation about

the ‘bone-dry’ stoup has not only a religious basis. I see in it the child’s

anxiety  about  the  mother  who  is  frustrated  and  neglected  by  the  father,

instead of being loved and made pregnant by him. This anxiety is particularly

strong in youngest and only children because the reality that no other child

has been born seems to confirm the guilty feeling that they have prevented

the parents’ sexual intercourse, the mother’s pregnancy and the arrival of
                                                                                          16
other babies by hatred and jealousy and by attacks on the mother’s body.

Since  I  assume  that  Fabian-Fruges  had  expressed  his  destruction  of  the

mother’s  breast  in  attacking  the  roll  which  the  baker-woman  gave  him  I

conclude that the bone-dry’ stoup also stands for the breast sucked dry and

destroyed by his infantile greed.


                                            III

 It is significant that Fabian’s first meeting with the Devil happens when he

is feeling acutely frustrated because his mother, who insisted that he should

go to communion next day, had thereby prevented him from embarking that

evening on a new love affair; and when Fabian rebels and actually goes to

meet the girl, she does not appear. At that moment the Devil steps in; he

represents in this context, I think, the dangerous impulses which are stirred

up in the young infant when his mother frustrates him. In this sense the Devil

is the personification of the infant’s destructive impulses.

This touches, however, only upon one aspect of the complex relation to the

mother,  an  aspect  illustrated  by  Fabian  trying  to  project  himself  into  the

waiter who brings him his meagre breakfast (in the novel, his first attempt to

assume another man’s personality). Projective processes dominated by greed

are, as I have repeatedly remarked, part of the baby’s relation to the mother,
                                                                          17
but they are particularly strong where frustration is frequent. Frustration

reinforces both the greedy wish for unlimited gratification and the desires to

scoop out the breast and to enter the mother’s body in order to obtain by force

the gratification she withholds. We have seen in the relation to the baker-

woman Fabian-Fruges’ impetuous desires for the breast and the hatred which

frustration arouses in him. Fabian’s whole character and his strong feelings of

resentment  and  deprivation  support  the  assumption  that  he  had  felt  very

frustrated in the earliest feeding relation. Such feelings would be revived in

relation to the waiter if he stands for one aspect of the mother—the mother

who fed him but did not really satisfy him. Fabian’s attempt to turn himself

into the waiter would thus represent a revival of the desire to intrude into his

mother in order to rob her and thus get more food and satisfaction. It is also

significant that the waiter—the first object into whom Fabian intended to

transform  himself—is  the  only  person  whose  permission  he  asks  (a

permission which the waiter refuses). This would imply that the guilt which

is so clearly expressed in the relation to the baker-woman is even present in
                        18
relation to the waiter.

In  the  episode  with  the  baker-woman,  Fabian-Fruges  experiences  the

whole  gamut  of  emotions  in  relation  to  his  mother, i.e.  oral  desires,

frustration, anxieties, guilt, and the urge to make reparation; he also re-lives

the  development  of  his  Oedipus  complex.  The  combination  of  passionate

physical desires, affection, and admiration indicates that there was a time

when Fabian’s mother represented to him both the mother towards whom he

experiences oral and genital desires and the ideal mother, the woman whoshould be seen in the light of the votive candles, i.e. should be worshipped. It

is true that he does not succeed in this worship in church, for he feels he

cannot restrain his desires. Nevertheless, at times she represents the ideal

mother who should have no sexual life.

In contrast to the mother who ought to be worshipped like the Madonna

there is another aspect of her. I take the transformation into the murderer

Esménard to be an expression of the infantile impulses to murder the mother,

whose sexual relation with the father is not only felt to be a betrayal of the

infant’s  love  for  her,  but  is  altogether  felt  to  be  bad  and  unworthy.  This

feeling  underlies  the  unconscious  equation  between  the  mother  and  a

prostitute which is characteristic of adolescence. Berthe, who is obviously

thought  of  as  a  promiscuous  woman,  approximates  in  Fabian-Esménard’s

mind to the prostitute type. Another instance of the mother as a bad sexual

figure is the old woman in the dark shop, who sells obscene postcards which

are hidden behind other articles. Fabian-Fruges experiences both disgust and

pleasure in looking at obscene pictures, and also feels haunted by the noise of

the rotating stand. I believe that this expresses the infant’s desire to watch

and listen to the primal scene as well as his revulsion against these desires.

The guilt attached to such actual or phantasied observations, in which sounds

overheard frequently play a part, derives from sadistic impulses against the

parents in this situation and also relates to masturbation which frequently

accompanies such sadistic phantasies.

  Another figure representing the bad mother is the maid in Camille’s home,

who is a hypocritical old woman, plotting with the bad uncle against the

young  people.  Fabian’s  own  mother  appears  in  a  similar  light  when  she

insists on his going to confession. For Fabian is hostile towards the father-

confessor  and  hates  confessing  his  sins  to  him.  His  mother’s  demand  is,

therefore, bound to represent to him a conspiracy between the parents, allied

against  the  child’s  aggressive  and  sexual  desires.  Fabian’s  relation  to  his

mother, represented by these various figures, shows devaluation and hatred as

well as idealization.


                                            IV

 


  There are only a few hints about Fabian’s early relation to his father, but

they are significant. In speaking of Fabian’s introjective identifications I have

suggested that his strong attachment to his father’s watch, and the thoughts itaroused in him about his father’s life and premature end, showed love and

compassion  for  his  father  and  sadness  about  his  death.  Referring  to  the

author’s remarks that Fabian had ever since childhood ‘been haunted by a

feeling  of  some  inner  presence  .  .  .’  I  concluded  that  this  inner  presence

represented the internalized father.

I think that the urge to make up for his father’s early death and in a sense

to keep him alive contributed much to Fabian’s impetuous and greedy desire

to live life to the full. I would say he was also greedy on his father’s behalf.

On the other hand, in his restless search for women and disregard of health,

Fabian also re-enacted the fate of his father who was assumed to have died

prematurely as a result of his dissolute life. This identification was reinforced

by Fabian’s bad health, for he had the same heart disease from which his
                                                                                      19
father had suffered, and he had often been warned not to exert himself. It

would thus appear that in Fabian a drive towards bringing about his death

was  in  conflict  with  a  greedy  need  to  prolong  his  life,  and  thereby  his

internalized father’s life, by entering other people and actually stealing their

lives. This inner struggle between seeking and combating death was part of

his unstable and restless state of mind.

  Fabian’s relation to his internalized father focused, as we have just seen,

on the need to prolong his father’s life or to revive him. I wish to mention

another aspect of the dead internal father. The guilt relating to the father’s

death—owing  to  death  wishes  against  him—tends  to  turn  the  dead

internalized father into a persecutor. There is an episode in Green’s novel

which points to Fabian’s relation to death and the dead. Before Fabian has

entered into the pact the Devil takes him at night on a journey to a sinister

house where a strange company is assembled. Fabian finds himself the centre

of intense attention and envy. What they envy him for is indicated by their

murmuring ‘It’s for the gift . . .’ The ‘gift’, as we know, is the Devil’s magic

formula which will give Fabian the power to transform himself into other

people and, as it appears to him, to prolong his life indefinitely. Fabian is

welcomed by the Devil’s ‘underling’, a very seductive aspect of the Devil,

succumbs to his charm and allows himself to be persuaded to accept the

‘gift’. It seems that the assembled people are meant to represent the spirits of

the dead who either did not receive the ‘gift’ or failed to use it well. The

Devil’s ‘underling’ speaks contemptuously of them, giving the impression

that they have been incapable of living their lives to the full; perhaps he

despises  them  because  they  sold  themselves  to  the  Devil,  and  in  vain.  Alikely conclusion is that these dissatisfied and envious people also stand for

Fabian’s dead father, because Fabian would have attributed to his father—

who  in  fact  had  wasted  his  life—such  feelings  of  envy  and  greed.  His

corresponding  anxiety  lest  the  internalized  father  would  wish  to  suck  out

Fabian’s life both added to Fabian’s need to escape from his self and to his

greedy wish (in identification with the father) to rob other people of their

lives.

The loss of his father at an early age contributed much to his depression,

but the roots of these anxieties can again be found in his infancy. For if we

assume that Fabian’s powerful emotion towards the baker-woman’s lover are

a  repetition  of  his  early  Oedipus  feelings,  we  would  conclude  that  he

experienced  strong  death-wishes  against  his  father.  As  we  know,  death-

wishes and hatred towards the father as a rival lead not only to persecutory

anxiety but also—because they conflict with love and compassion—to severe

feelings  of  guilt  and  depression  in  the  young  child.  It  is  significant  that

Fabian, who possesses the power to transform himself into whomsoever he

wishes, never even thinks of changing himself into the envied lover of the

admired woman. It seems that were he to have effected such a transformation,

he would have felt that he was usurping his father’s place and giving free rein

to his murderous hatred towards him. Both fear of the father and the conflict

between love and hatred, i.e. both persecutory and depressive anxiety, would

cause  him  to  retreat  from  so  undisguised  an  expression  of  his  Oedipus

wishes. I have already described his conflicting attitudes towards his mother

—again a conflict between love and hatred—which contributed to his turning

away from her as a love object and to repressing his Oedipus feelings.

  Fabian’s  difficulties  in  relation  to  his  father  have  to  be  considered  in

connection  with  his  greed,  his  envy,  and  his  jealousy.  His  transforming

himself into Poujars is motivated by violent greed, envy, and hatred, such as

the infant experiences towards his father who is adult and potent and who, in

the child’s phantasy, possesses everything because he possesses the mother. I

have  referred  to  the  author’s  describing  Fabian’s  envy  of  Poujars  in  the

words: ‘Ah! the sun. It often seemed to him that M. Poujars kept it hidden in
            20
his pocket.’

  Envy and jealousy, reinforced by frustrations, contribute to the infant’s

feelings of grievance and resentment towards his parents and stimulate the

wish to reverse the rôles and deprive them. From Fabian’s attitude, when he

has changed places with Poujars and looks with a mixture of contempt andpity  at  his  former  unprepossessing  self,  we  gather  how  much  he  enjoys

having reversed the rôles. Another situation in which Fabian punishes a bad

father-figure  arises  when  he  is  Fabian-Camille:  he  insults  and  enrages

Camille’s old uncle before leaving the house.

In Fabian’s relation to his father, as in the relation to his mother, we can

detect the process of idealization and its corollary, the fear of persecutory

objects.  This  becomes  clear  when  Fabian  has  turned  himself  into  Fruges,

whose inner struggle between his love for God and his attraction to the Devil

is very acute; God and the Devil clearly represent the ideal and the wholly

bad  father.  The  ambivalent  attitude  towards  the  father  is  also  shown  in

Fabian-Fruges accusing God (father) of having created him as such a poor

creature: yet he acknowledges gratitude for His having given life to him.

From these indications I conclude that Fabian has always been searching for

his  ideal  father  and  that  this  is  a  strong  stimulus  towards  his  projective

identifications. But in his search for the ideal father he fails: he is bound to

fail  because  he  is  driven  by  greed  and  envy.  All  the  men  into  whom  he

transforms himself turn out to be contemptible and weak. Fabian hates them

for disappointing him and he feels glee over the fate of his victims.


                                            V

 


I have suggested that some of the emotional experiences which occurred

during Fabian’s transformations throw light on his earliest development. Of

his adult sexual life we gain a picture from the period preceding his encounter

with the Devil, that is to say when he is still the original Fabian. I have

already mentioned that Fabian’s sexual relations were short-lived and ended

in disappointment. He did not seem capable of genuine love for a woman. I

interpreted  the  interlude  with  the  baker-woman  as  a  revival  of  his  early

Oedipus feelings. His unsuccessful dealing with these feelings and anxieties

underlies his later sexual development. Without becoming impotent he had

developed  the  division  into  two  trends,  described  by  Freud  (1912)  as

‘heavenly and profane (or animal) love’.

  Even this splitting process failed to achieve its aims, for he never actually

found a woman whom he could idealize; but that such a person existed in his

mind is shown by his wondering whether the old woman who could fully

satisfy him would be ‘a statue of ivory and gold’. As we have seen, in the

rôle of Fabian-Fruges, he experienced a passionate admiration, amounting toidealization,  for  the  baker-woman.  He  was,  I  should  say,  unconsciously

searching all his life for the ideal mother whom he had lost.

The episodes in which Fabian turns himself into the rich Poujars or the

physically powerful Esménard, or lastly into a married man (Camille who has

a beautiful wife), suggest an identification with his father, based on his wish

to be like him and to take his place as a man. In the novel there is no hint that

Fabian  was  homosexual.  An  indication  of  homosexuality  is  to  be  found,

however, in his strong physical attraction to the Devil’s ‘underling’—a young

and  handsome  man  whose  persuasion  overcomes  Fabian’s  doubts  and

anxieties about entering into the pact with the Devil. I have already referred

to  Fabian’s  fear  of  what  he  imagines  to  be  the  Devil’s  sexual  advances

towards him. But the homosexual desire to be his father’s lover manifests

itself more directly in relation to Elise. His being attracted to Elise—to her

longing eyes—was, as the author indicates, due to an identification with her.

For one moment he is tempted to turn himself into her, if only he could be

sure  that  the  handsome  Camille  would  love  her.  But  he  realizes  that  this

could not happen and decides not to become Elise.

In this context Elise’s unrequited love seems to express Fabian’s inverted

Oedipus situation. To place himself in the rôle of a woman loved by the

father would mean displacing or destroying the mother and would arouse

intense guilt; in fact, in the story Elise has the unpleasant but beautiful wife

of Camille as her hated rival—another mother figure, I think. It is of interest

that  not  until  near  the  end  did  Fabian  experience  the  wish  to  become  a

woman. This might be connected with the emergence of repressed desires

and urges, and thereby with a lessening of the strong defences against his

early feminine and passive-homosexual impulses.

  From  this  material  some  conclusions  can  be  drawn  about  the  serious

disabilities  from  which  Fabian  suffers.  His  relation  to  his  mother  was

fundamentally disturbed. She is, as we know, described as a dutiful mother,

concerned  above  all  with  his  son’s  physical  and  moral  welfare,  but  not

capable of affection and tenderness. It seems likely that she had the same

attitude to him when he was an infant. I have already mentioned that Fabian’s

character, the nature of his greed, envy, and resentment, indicate that his oral

grievances had been very great and were never overcome. We may assume

that these feelings of frustration extended to his father; for, in the young

infant’s  phantasies,  the  father  is  the  second  object  from  whom  oral

gratifications  are  expected.  In  other  words,  the  positive  side  of  Fabian’shomosexuality was also disturbed at the root.

  Failure  to  modify  the  fundamental  oral  desires  and  anxieties  has  many

consequences. Ultimately it means that the paranoid-schizoid position has not

been  successfully  worked  through.  I  think  this  was  true  of  Fabian  and

therefore he had not dealt adequately with the depressive position either. For

those reasons his capacity to make reparation had been impaired and he could

not  cope  later  on  with  his  feelings  of  persecution  and  depression.  In

consequence his relations to his parents and to people in general were very

unsatisfactory. All this implies, as my experience has shown me, that he was

unable to establish securely the good breast, the good mother, in his inner
    21
world—an initial failure which in turn prevented him from developing a

strong identification with a good father. Fabian’s excessive greed, to some

extent derived from his insecurity about his good internal objects, influenced

both his introjective and and projective processes and—since we are also

discussing  the  adult  Fabian—the  processes  of  re-introjection  and  re-

projection. All these difficulties contributed to his incapacity to establish a

love relation with a woman, that is to say, to the disturbance in his sexual

development.  In  my  view  he  fluctuated  between  a  strongly  repressed

homosexuality and an unstable heterosexuality.

I have already mentioned a number of external factors which played an

important rôle in Fabian’s unhappy development, such as his father’s early

death, his mother’s lack of affection, his poverty, the unsatisfactory nature of

his work, his conflict with his mother about religion and—a very important

point—his  physical  illness.  From  these  facts  we  can  draw  some  further

conclusions. The marriage of Fabian’s parents was obviously an unhappy

one, as is indicated by his father finding his pleasures elsewhere. The mother

was not only unable to show warmth of feeling but was also, as we may

assume, an unhappy woman who sought consolation in religion. Fabian was

an only child and no doubt lonely. His father died when Fabian was still at

school and this deprived him of his further education and of prospects for a

successful  career;  it  also  had  the  effect  of  stirring  up  his  feelings  of

persecution and depression.

We know that all the events from his first transformation to his return

home are supposed to happen within three days. During these three days, as

we learn at the end when Fabian-Camille rejoins his former self, Fabian had

been lying in bed unconscious, looked after by his mother. As she tells him,

he had collapsed in his employer’s office after having misbehaved there, wasbrought home and had remained unconscious ever since. She thinks, when he

refers to Camille’s visit, that he has been delirious. Perhaps the author intends

us to take the whole story as representing Fabian’s phantasies during the

illness preceding his death? This would imply that all the characters were

figures of his inner world and again illustrate that introjection and projection

were operating in him in closest interaction.


                                            VI

 


The  processes  underlying  projective  identification  are  depicted  very

concretely  by  the  author.  One  part  of  Fabian  literally  leaves  his  self  and

enters  into  his  victim,  an  event  which  in  both  parties  is  accompanied  by

strong  physical  sensations.  We  are  told  that  the  split-off  part  of  Fabian

submerges  in  varying  degrees  in  his  objects  and  loses  the  memories  and

characteristics  appertaining  to  the  original  Fabian.  We  should  conclude

therefore  (in  keeping  with  the  author’s  very  concrete  conception  of  the

projective  process),  that  Fabian’s  memories  and  other  aspects  of  his

personality are left behind in the discarded Fabian who must have retained a

good  deal  of  his  ego  when  the  split  occurred.  This  part  of  Fabian,  lying

dormant until the split-off aspects of his personality return, represents, in my

view, that component of the ego which patients unconsciously feel they have

retained while other parts are projected into the external world and lost.

The spatial and temporal terms in which the author describes these events

are  actually  the  ones  in  which  our  patients  experience  such  processes.  A

patient’s feeling that parts of his self are no longer available, are far away, or

have  altogether  gone  is  of  course  a  phantasy  which  underlies  splitting

processes. But such phantasies have far-reaching consequences and vitally

influence the structure of the ego. They have the effect that those parts of his

self from which he feels estranged, often including his emotions, are not at
                                                                  22
the time accessible either to the analyst or to the patient. The feeling that he

does not know where the parts of himself which he has dispersed into the
                                                                                    23
external world have gone to, is a source of great anxiety and insecurity.

I shall next consider Fabian’s projective identifications from three angles:

(i) the relation of the split-off and projected parts of his personality to those

he  had  left  behind;  (ii)  the  motives  underlying  the  choice  of  objects  into

whom he projects himself; and (iii) how far in these processes the projectedpart of his self becomes submerged in the object or gains control over it.

(i) Fabian’s anxiety that he is going to deplete his ego by splitting off parts

of it and projecting them into other people is expressed, before he starts on

his transformations, by the way he looks at his clothes heaped untidily on a

chair: ‘He had a horrible sensation in looking at them that he was seeing

himself, but a self assassinated or in some way destroyed. The empty sleeves

of his coat had, as they drooped limply to the ground, a forlorn suggestion of

tragedy.’

We also learn that Fabian, when he turns himself into Poujars (that is to

say, when the processes of splitting and projection have just occurred), is

very concerned about his former person. He thinks he might wish to return to

his original self, and being, therefore, anxious that Fabian should be taken

home, writes out a cheque in his favour.

The importance attaching to Fabian’s name also denotes that his identity

was bound up with those parts of himself which were left behind and that

they represented the core of his personality; the name was an essential part of

the magic formula, and it is significant that the first thing which occurs to

him when, under the influence of Elise, he experiences the urge to regain his

former self, is the name ‘Fabian’. I think that feelings of guilt about having

neglected and deserted a precious component of his personality contributed to

Fabian’s longing to be himself again—a longing which irresistibly drove him

home at the end of the novel.

(ii)  The  choice  of  his  first  intended  victim,  the  waiter,  becomes  easily

understandable if we assume, as I suggested above, that he stood for Fabian’s

mother; for the mother is the first object for the infant’s identification both by

introjection and by projection.

  Some of the motives which impelled Fabian to project himself into Poujars

have already been discussed; I suggested that he wished to turn himself into

the wealthy and powerful father, thereby robbing him of all his possessions

and punishing him. In doing so he was also actuated by a motive which in

this connection I wish to emphasize. I think that Fabian’s sadistic impulses

and phantasies (expressed in the desire to control and punish his father) were

something he felt he had in common with Poujars. Poujars’ cruelty, as Fabian

thought of it, also represented Fabian’s own cruelty and lust for power.

The contrast between Poujars (who turned out to be ailing and miserable)

and the virile young Esménard was only a contributing factor in Fabian’s

choice of the latter as an object for identification. I believe that the maincause for Fabian’s decision to turn himself into Esménard, in spite of his

being unprepossessing and repellent, was that Esménard stood for one part of

Fabian’s self, and that the murderous hatred which impels Fabian-Esménard

to  kill  Berthe  is  a  revival  of  the  emotions  which  Fabian  experienced  in

infancy towards his mother when she frustrated him, as he felt, orally and

genitally. Esménard’s jealousy of any man whom Berthe favoured renews in

an  extreme  form  Fabian’s  Oedipus  complex  and  intense  rivalry  with  his

father. This part of himself which was potentially murderous was personified

by Esménard. Fabian, by becoming Esménard, thus projected into another

person  and  lived  out  some  of  his  own  destructive  tendencies.  Fabian’s

complicity in the murder is pointed out by the Devil who reminds him, after

his transformation into Fruges, that the hands which strangled Berthe were

only a few minutes ago his own.

Now we come to the choice of Fruges. Fabian has a good deal in common

with  Fruges,  in  whom,  however,  these  characteristics  are  much  more

pronounced. Fabian is inclined to deny the hold religion (and that also means

God—the father) has over him and attributes his conflicts about religion to

his mother’s influence. Fruges’ conflicts about religion are acute, and, as the

author describes, he is fully aware that the struggle between God and the

Devil dominates his life. Fruges is constantly fighting against his desires for

luxury and wealth; his conscience drives him to extreme austerity. In Fabian

the wish to be as rich as the people he envies is also very pronounced, but he

does not attempt to restrain it. The two also have in common their intellectual

pursuits and a very marked intellectual curiosity.

  These common characteristics would predispose Fabian to choose Fruges

for projective identification. I think, however, that another motive enters into

this  choice.  The  Devil,  playing  here  the  rôle  of  a  guiding  super-ego,  has

helped Fabian to leave Esménard and warned him to beware of entering a

person in whom he would submerge to such an extent that he could never

escape again. Fabian is terrified of having turned himself into a murderer,

which,  I  think,  means  having  succumbed  to  the  most  dangerous  part  of

himself—to his destructive impulses; he therefore escapes by changing rôles

with somebody completely different from his previous choice. My experience

has shown me that the struggle against an overwhelming identification—be it

by  introjection  or  projection—often  drives  people  to  identifications  with

objects  which  show  the  opposite  characteristics.  (Another  consequence  of

such  a  struggle  is  an  indiscriminate  flight  into  a  multitude  of  furtheridentifications and fluctuations between them. Such conflicts and anxieties

are often perpetuated, and further weaken the ego.)

  Fabian’s next choice, Camille, has hardly anything in common with him.

But through Camille, it appears, Fabian identifies himself with Elise, the girl

who is unhappily in love with Camille. As we have seen, Elise stood for the

feminine side of Fabian, and her feelings towards Camille for his unfulfilled

homosexual love for his father. At the same time Elise also represented the

good part of his self which was capable of longing and loving. In my view

Fabian’s infantile love for his father, bound up as it was with his homosexual

desires  and  his  feminine  position,  had  been  disturbed  at  the  root.  I  also

pointed out that he was unable to change himself into a woman because this

would have represented a realization of the deeply repressed feminine desires

in the inverted Oedipus relation to his father. (I am not dealing in this context

with  other  factors  which  impede  the  feminine  identification,  above  all

castration  fear.)  With  the  awakening  of  the  capacity  to  love,  Fabian  can

identify himself with Elise’s unhappy infatuation with Camille; in my view

he also becomes able to experience his love and desires towards his father. I

would conclude that Elise had come to represent a good part of his self.

I would furthermore suggest that Elise also stands for an imaginary sister.

It is well known that children have imaginary companions. They represent,

particularly in the phantasy life of only children, older or younger brothers or

sisters, or a twin, who have never been born. One may surmise that Fabian,

who was an only child, would have gained much from the companionship of

a sister. Such a relation would also have helped him to cope better with his

Oedipus  complex  and  to  gain  more  independence  from  his  mother.  In

Camille’s  family  such  a  relationship  actually  exists  between  Elise  and

Camille’s schoolboy brother.

We  shall  remember  here  that  Fabian-Fruges’  overwhelming  feelings  of

guilt in church appeared to relate also to his having been chosen, whereas

other souls never came to life. I interpreted his lighting votive candles and

picturing the baker-woman surrounded by them both as an idealization of her

(the mother as saint) and as an expression of his wish to make reparation by

bringing to life the unborn brothers and sisters. Particularly youngest and

only children often have a strong sense of guilt because they feel that their

jealous  and  aggressive  impulses  have  prevented  their  mother  from  giving

birth to any more children. Such feelings are also bound up with fears of

retaliation and persecution. I have repeatedly found that fear and suspicion ofschoolmates or of other children were linked with phantasies that the unborn

brothers and sisters had after all come to life and were represented by any

children who appeared to be hostile. The longing for friendly brothers and

sisters is strongly influenced by such anxieties.

So far I have not discussed why Fabian in the first place chose to identify

himself  with  the  Devil—a  fact  on  which  the  plot  is  based.  I  pointed  out

earlier that the Devil stood for the seducing and dangerous father; he also

represented parts of Fabian’s mind, super-ego as well as id. In the novel the

Devil is unconcerned about his victims; extremely greedy and ruthless, he

appears as the prototype of hostile and evil projective identifications which in

the novel are described as violent intrusions into people. I would say that he

shows in an extreme form that component of infantile emotional life which is

dominated  by  omnipotence,  greed,  and  sadism,  and  that  it  is  these

characteristics  which  Fabian  and  the  Devil  have  in  common.  Therefore

Fabian identifies himself with the Devil and carries out all his behests.

It is significant—and I think expresses an important aspect of identification

—that  when  changing  himself  into  a  new  person  Fabian  to  some  extent

retains his previous projective identifications. This is shown by the strong

interest—an interest mixed with contempt—which Fabian-Fruges takes in the

fate  of  his  former  victims,  and  also  in  his  feeling  that  after  all  he  is

responsible for the murder he committed as Esménard. It shows most clearly

at the end of the story, for his experiences in the characters into whom he had

turned himself are all present in his mind before he dies and he is concerned

about their fate. This would imply that he introjects his objects, as well as

projects himself into them—a conclusion which is in keeping with my view

restated  in  the  introduction  to  this  paper  that  projection  and  introjection

interact from the beginning of life.

In  singling  out  an  important  motive  for  the  choice  of  objects  for

identification  I  have,  for  the  purpose  of  presentation,  described  this  as

happening  in  two  stages:  (a)  there  is  some  common  ground,  (b)  the

identification takes place. But the process as we watch it in our analytic work

is not so divided. For the individual to feel that he has a good deal in common

with another person is concurrent with projecting himself into that person

(and the same applies to introjecting him). These processes vary in intensity

and duration and on these variations depend the strength and importance of

such identifications and their vicissitudes. In this connection I wish to draw

attention  to  the  fact  that  while  the  processes  I  described  often  appear  tooperate  simultaneously,  we  have  to  consider  carefully  in  each  state  or

situation whether, for instance, projective identification has the upper hand
                                              24
over introjective processes or vice versa.

I have suggested in my ‘Notes on Some Schizoid Mechanisms’ that the

process of re-introjecting a projected part of the self includes internalizing a

part of the object into whom the projection has taken place, a part which the

patient may feel to be hostile, dangerous, and most undesirable to reintroject.

In addition, since the projection of a part of the self includes the projection of

internal objects, these too are re-introjected. All this has a bearing on how far

in the individual’s mind the projected parts of the self are able to retain their

strength within the object into which they have intruded. I shall now make a

few suggestions about this aspect of the problem, which takes me to my third

point.

(iii) In the story, as I have pointed out earlier, Fabian succumbs to the

Devil and becomes identified with him. Although Fabian seemed deficient in

the capacity for love and concern even before that, as soon as he follows the

Devil’s  lead  he  is  completely  ruled  by  ruthlessness.  This  implies  that,  in

identifying  himself  with  the  Devil,  Fabian  fully  succumbs  to  the  greedy,

omnipotent, and destructive part of his self. When Fabian has turned himself

into Poujars, he retains some of his own attitudes, and particularly a critical

opinion  of  the  person  whom  he  has  entered.  He  dreads  losing  himself

completely inside Poujars, and it is only because he has retained some of

Fabian’s  initiative  that  he  is  able  to  bring  about  the  next  transformation.

However, he comes near to losing his former self entirely when he turns

himself into the murderer Esménard. Yet since the Devil, whom we assume

to be also part of Fabian—here his super-ego—warns him and helps him to

escape  from  the  murderer,  we  should  conclude  that  Fabian  has  not  been
                                      25
entirely submerged in Esménard.

The situation with Fruges is different: in this transformation the original

Fabian remains much more active. Fabian is very critical of Fruges, and it is

this greater capacity to keep something of his original self alive inside Fruges

that  makes  it  possible  for  him  gradually  to  rejoin  his  depleted  ego  and

become himself again. Generally speaking, I hold that the extent to which the

individual  feels  his  ego  to  be  submerged  in  the  objects  with  whom  it  is

identified  by  introjection  or  projection  is  of  greatest  importance  for  the

development of object relations and also determines the strength or weakness

of the ego.Fabian regains parts of his personality after his transformation into Fruges

and  at  the  same  time  something  very  important  happens.  Fabian-Fruges

notices that his experiences have given him a better understanding of Poujars,

Esménard, and even Fruges, and that he is now able to feel sympathy with his

victims. Also through Fruges, who is fond of children, Fabian’s affection for

little George awakens. George, as the author describes him, is an innocent

child, fond of his mother and longing to return to her. He awakens in Fabian-

Fruges the memory of Fruges’ childhood, and the impetuous desire arises to

turn himself into George. I believe he is longing to recover the capacity for

love, in other words an ideal childhood self.

This  resurgence  of  feelings  of  love  shows  itself  in  various  ways:  he

experiences  passionate  feelings  for  the  baker-woman  which,  in  my  view,

meant a revival of his early love life. Another step in this direction is his

transforming himself into a married man and thereby entering into a family

circle.  But  the  one  person  whom  Fabian  finds  likeable  and  of  whom  he

becomes fond is Elise. I have already described the various meanings Elise

has for him. In particular he has discovered in her that part of himself which

is capable of love, and he is deeply attracted towards this side of his own

personality;  that  is  to  say,  he  has  also  discovered  some  love  for  himself.

Physically  and  mentally,  by  retracing  the  steps  he  has  taken  in  his

transformations, he is driven back with increasing urgency closer and closer

to his home and to the ill Fabian whom he had forsaken and who by now has

come to represent the good part of his personality. We have seen that the

sympathy with his victims, the tenderness towards George, the concern for

Elise, and the identification with her unhappy passion for Camille, as well as

the wish for a sister—all these steps are an unfolding of his capacity to love. I

suggest  that  this  development  was  a  precondition  for  Fabian’s  passionate

need to find his old self again, that is to say for integration. Even before his

transformations  occurred,  the  longing  to  recover  the  best  part  of  his

personality—which because it had been lost, appeared to be ideal—had, as I

suggested, contributed to his loneliness and restlessness; had given impetus to
                                  26
his  projective  identifications  and  was  complementary  to  his  self-hatred,

another factor impelling him to force himself into other people. The search
                            27
for  the  lost  ideal  self,  which  is  an  important  feature  of  mental  life,

inevitably includes the search for lost ideal objects; for the good self is that

part of the personality which is felt to be in a loving relation to its good

objects. The prototype of such a relation is the bond between the baby and hismother. In fact, when Fabian rejoins his lost self, he also recovers his love for

his mother.

  With Fabian we note that he seemed incapable of an identification with a

good or admired object. A variety of reasons would have to be discussed in

this connection, but I wish to single out one as a possible explanation. I have

already pointed out that in order to identify strongly with another person, it is

essential to feel that there is within the self enough common ground with that

object. Since Fabian had lost—so it seemed—his good self, he did not feel

that there was enough goodness within him for identification with a very

good object. There might also have been the anxiety, characteristic of such

states of mind, lest an admired object should be taken into an inner world

which is too much deprived of goodness. The good object is then kept outside

(with Fabian, I think, the distant stars). But when he rediscovered his good

self, then he found his good objects as well and could identify with them.

In the story, as we have seen, the depleted part of Fabian also longs to be

re-united  with  the  projected  parts  of  his  self.  The  nearer  Fabian-Camille

comes  to  the  house,  the  more  restless  Fabian  grows  on  his  sickbed.  He

regains consciousness and walks to the door through which his other half,

Fabian-Camille,  utters  the  magic  formula.  According  to  the  author’s

description, the two halves of Fabian are longing to be re-united. This means

that Fabian was longing to integrate his self. As we have seen, this urge was

bound up with a growing capacity to love. This corresponds to Freud’s theory

of synthesis as a function of the libido—ultimately of the life instinct.

I have suggested earlier that although Fabian was searching for a good

father,  he  was  unable  to  find  him  because  envy  and  greed,  increased  by

grievance  and  hatred,  determined  his  choice  of  father-figures.  When  he

becomes less resentful and more tolerant, his objects appear to him in a better

light; but then he is also less demanding than he was in the past. It appears

that he no longer claims that his parents should be ideal and therefore he can

forgive  them  for  their  shortcomings.  To  his  greater  capacity  for  love

corresponds a diminution of hatred, and this in turn results in a lessening of

feelings of persecution—all of which has a bearing on the lessening of greed

and envy. Self-hatred was one of the outstanding features in his character;

together with the greater capacity for love and for tolerance towards others

arose the greater tolerance and love towards his own self.

In the end Fabian recovers his love for his mother and makes his peace

with her. It is significant that he recognizes her lack of tenderness but feelsthat  she  might  have  been  better  had he  been  a  better  son.  He  obeys  his

mother’s  injunction  to  pray  and  seems  to  have  recovered  after  all  his

struggles his belief and trust in God. Fabian’s last words are ‘Our Father’,

and it would appear that at that moment, when he is filled with love for

humanity, the love for his father returns. Those persecutory and depressive

anxieties which were bound to be stirred up by the approach of death would

to some extent be counteracted by idealization and elation.

As we have seen, Fabian-Camille is driven home by an irresistible impulse.

It seems probable that his sense of impending death gives impetus to his urge

to rejoin the deserted part of his self. For I believe that the fear of death

which he has denied, although he knew of his severe illness, has come out in

full force. Maybe he had denied this fear because its nature was so intensely

persecutory. We know how full of grievance he was against fate and against

his parents; how persecuted he felt by his own unsatisfactory personality. In

my experience, the fear of death is very much intensified if death is felt as an

attack  by  hostile  internal  and  external  objects  or  if  it  arouses  depressive

anxiety lest the good objects be destroyed by those hostile figures. (These

persecutory and depressive phantasies may of course co-exist.) Anxieties of a

psychotic nature are the cause for this excessive fear of death from which

many  individuals  suffer  throughout  their  lives;  and  the  intense  mental

sufferings  which,  as  a  few  observations  have  shown  me,  some  people

experience on their deathbed, are due in my view to the revival of infantile

psychotic anxieties.

  Considering that the author describes Fabian as a restless and unhappy

person, full of grievances, one would expect that his death should be painful

and  give  rise  to  the  persecutory  anxieties  which  I  have  just  mentioned.

However, this is not what happens in the story, for Fabian dies happily and at

peace. Any explanation for this sudden ending can only be tentative. From

the artistic point of view it was probably the author’s best solution. But, in

keeping  with  my  conception  of  Fabian’s  experiences  which  I  have  put

forward in this paper, I am inclined to explain the unexpected ending by the

story  presenting  to  us  two  sides  of  Fabian.  Up  to  the  point  where  the

transformations begin, it is the adult Fabian whom we meet. In the course of

his  transformations  we  encounter  the  emotions,  the  persecutory  and

depressive anxieties which characterized, as I believe, his early development.

But whereas in childhood he had not been able to overcome these anxieties

and  to  achieve  integration,  in  the  three  days  covered  by  the  novel,  hesuccessfully traverses a world of emotional experiences which in my view

entails  a  working  through  of  the  paranoid-schizoid  and  the  depressive

positions. As a result of overcoming the fundamental psychotic anxieties of

infancy, the intrinsic need for integration comes out in full force. He achieves

integration concurrently with good object relations and thereby repairs what

had gone wrong in his life.                                          10

 
                                                                1
                          ENVY AND GRATITUDE

 

                                        (1957)

 


I HAVE for many years been interested in the earliest sources of two attitudes

that  have  always  been  familiar—envy  and  gratitude.  I  arrived  at  the

conclusion that envy is a most potent factor in undermining feelings of love

and gratitude at their root, since it affects the earliest relation of all, that to the

mother.  The  fundamental  importance  of  this  relation  for  the  individual’s

whole emotional life has been substantiated in a number of psycho-analytic

writings, and I think that by exploring further a particular factor that can be

very disturbing at this early stage, I have added something of significance to

my findings concerning infantile development and personality formation.

I  consider  that  envy  is  an  oral-sadistic  and  anal-sadistic  expression  of

destructive impulses, operative from the beginning of life, and that it has a

constitutional basis, These conclusions have certain important elements in

common with Karl Abraham’s work, and yet imply some differences from it.

Abraham found that envy is an oral trait, but—and this is where my views

differ from his—he assumed that envy and hostility operate at a later period,

which, according to his hypothesis, constituted a second, the oral-sadistic,

stage. Abraham did not speak of gratitude, but he described generosity as an

oral feature. He considered the anal elements as an important component in

envy, and stressed their derivation from oral-sadistic impulses.

A further fundamental point of agreement is Abraham’s assumption of a

constitutional element in the strength of oral impulses, which he linked with

the aetiology of manic-depressive illness.

  Above all, both Abraham’s work and my own brought out more fully and

more deeply the significance of destructive impulses. In his ‘Short History of

the Development of the Libido, Viewed in the Light of Mental Disorders’,

written in 1924, Abraham did not mention Freud’s hypothesis of the life and

death instincts, although Beyond the Pleasure Principle had been published

four years previously. However, in his book Abraham explored the roots of

destructive  impulses  and  applied  this  understanding  to  the  aetiology  of

mental  disturbances  more  specifically  than  had  ever  been  done  before.  Itappears to me that although he had not made use of Freud’s concept of the

life and death instincts, his clinical work, particularly the analysis of the first

manic-depressive patients to be analysed, was based on insight which was

taking  him  in  that  direction.  I  would  assume  that  Abraham’s  early  death

prevented his realizing the full implications of his own findings and their

essential connection with Freud’s discovery of the two instincts.

As  I  am  about  to  publish Envy  and  Gratitude,  three  decades  after

Abraham’s death, it is a source of great satisfaction to me that my work has

contributed to the growing recognition of the full significance of Abraham’s

discoveries.


                                            I

 


Here I intend to make some further suggestions concerning the earliest

emotional  life  of  the  infant  and  also  to  draw  some  conclusions  about

adulthood and mental health. It is inherent in Freud’s discoveries that the

exploration of the patient’s past, of his childhood, and of his unconscious is a

precondition for understanding his adult personality. Freud discovered the

Oedipus complex in the adult and reconstructed from such material not only

details of the Oedipus complex but also its timing. Abraham’s findings have

added considerably to this approach, which has become characteristic of the

psycho-analytic method. We should also remember that, according to Freud,

the conscious part of the mind develops out of the unconscious. Therefore, in

tracing to early infancy material that I found first of all in the analysis of

young children, and subsequently in that of adults, I followed a procedure

now  familiar  in  psycho-analysis.  Observations  of  young  children  soon

confirmed  Freud’s  findings.  I  believe  that  some  of  the  conclusions  that  I

reached regarding a much earlier stage, the first years of life, can also be

confirmed up to a point by observation. The right—indeed the necessity—to

reconstruct from the material presented to us by our patients details and data

about earlier stages is most convincingly described by Freud in the following

passage:

‘What we are in search of is a picture of the patient’s forgotten years that

shall be alike trustworthy and in all essential respects complete. . . . His [the

psycho-analyst’s]  work  of  construction,  or,  if  it  is  preferred,  of

reconstruction, resembles to a great extent an archaeologist’s excavation of

some dwelling-place that has been destroyed and buried or of some ancientedifice. The two processes are in fact identical, except that the analyst works

under better conditions and has more material at his command to assist him,

since what he is dealing with is not something destroyed but something that is

still  alive—and  perhaps  for  another  reason  as  well.  But  just  as  the

archaeologist builds up the walls of the building from the foundations that

have remained standing, determines the number and position of the columns

from  depressions  in  the  floor  and  reconstructs  the  mural  decorations  and

paintings from the remains found in the debris, so does the analyst proceed

when  he  draws  his  inferences  from  the  fragments  of  memories,  from  the

associations and from the behaviour of the subject of the analysis. Both of

them have an undisputed right to reconstruct by means of supplementing and

combining  the  surviving  remains.  Both  of  them,  moreover,  are  subject  to

many of the same difficulties and sources of error. . . . The analyst, as we

have said, works under more favourable conditions than the archaeologist

since  he  has  at  his  disposal  material  which  can  have  no  counterpart  in

excavations, such as the repetition of reactions dating from infancy and all

that is indicated by the transference in connection with these repetitions. . . .

All  of  the  essentials  are  preserved;  even  things  that  seem  completely

forgotten are present somehow and somewhere, and have merely been buried

and made inaccessible to the subject. Indeed, it may, as we know, be doubted

whether any psychical structure can really be the victim of total destruction.

It depends only upon analytic technique whether we shall succeed in bringing
                                            2
what is concealed completely to light.’

  Experience  has  taught  me  that  the  complexity  of  the  fully  grown

personality can only be understood if we gain insight into the mind of the

baby and follow up its development into later life. That is to say, analysis

makes its way from adulthood to infancy, and through intermediate stages

back  to  adulthood,  in  a  recurrent  to-and-fro  movement  according  to  the

prevalent transference situation.

  Throughout  my  work  I  have  attributed  fundamental  importance  to  the

infant’s first object relation—the relation to the mother’s breast and to the

mother—and have drawn the conclusion that if this primal object, which is

introjected,  takes  root  in  the  ego  with  relative  security,  the  basis  for  a

satisfactory development is laid. Innate factors contribute to this bond. Under

the dominance of oral impulses, the breast is instinctively felt to be the source

of nourishment and therefore, in a deeper sense, of life itself. This mental and

physical closeness to the gratifying breast in some measure restores, if thingsgo well, the lost prenatal unity with the mother and the feeling of security that

goes  with  it.  This  largely  depends  on  the  infant’s  capacity  to  cathect

sufficiently the breast or its symbolic representative, the bottle; in this way

the  mother  is  turned  into  a  loved  object.  It  may  well  be  that  his  having

formed part of the mother in the pre-natal state contributes to the infant’s

innate feeling that there exists outside him something that will give him all he

needs and desires. The good breast is taken in and becomes part of the ego,

and the infant who was first inside the mother now has the mother inside

himself.

  While the pre-natal state no doubt implies a feeling of unity and security,

how  far  this  state  is  undisturbed  must  depend  on  the  psychological  and

physical  condition  of  the  mother,  and  possibly  even  on  certain  still

unexplored factors in the unborn infant. We might, therefore, consider the

universal longing for the pre-natal state also partly as an expression of the

urge for idealization. If we investigate this longing in the light of idealization,

we find that one of its sources is the strong persecutory anxiety stirred up by

birth. We might speculate that this first form of anxiety possibly extends to

the unborn infant’s unpleasant experiences which, together with the feeling of

security in the womb, foreshadow the double relation to the mother: the good

and the bad breast.

  External circumstances play a vital part in the initial relation to the breast.

If birth has been difficult, and in particular if it results in complications such

as lack of oxygen, a disturbance in the adaptation to the external world occurs

and the relation to the breast starts at a great disadvantage. In such cases the

baby’s ability to experience new sources of gratification is impaired and in

consequence he cannot sufficiently internalize a really good primal object.

Furthermore,  whether  or  not  the  child  is  adequately  fed  and  mothered,

whether the mother fully enjoys the care of the child or is anxious and has

psychological  difficulties  over  feeding—all  these  factors  influence  the

infant’s capacity to accept the milk with enjoyment and to internalize the

good breast.

An element of frustration by the breast is bound to enter into the infant’s

earliest  relation  to  it,  because  even  a  happy  feeding  situation  cannot

altogether  replace  the  pre-natal  unity  with  the  mother.  Also,  the  infant’s

longing for an inexhaustible and ever-present breast stems by no means only

from a craving for food and from libidinal desires. For the urge even in the

earliest stages to get constant evidence of the mother’s love is fundamentallyrooted  in  anxiety.  The  struggle  between  life  and  death  instincts  and  the

ensuing threat of annihilation of the self and of the object by destructive

impulses are fundamental factors in the infant’s initial relation to his mother.

For his desires imply that the breast, and soon the mother, should do away

with these destructive impulses and the pain of persecutory anxiety.

  Together  with  happy  experiences,  unavoidable  grievances  reinforce  the

innate  conflict  between  love  and  hate,  in  fact,  basically  between  life  and

death instincts, and result in the feeling that a good and a bad breast exist. As

a consequence, early emotional life is characterized by a sense of losing and

regaining the good object. In speaking of an innate conflict between love and

hate,  I  am  implying  that  the  capacity  both  for  love  and  for  destructive

impulses is, to some extent, constitutional, though varying individually in

strength and interacting from the beginning with external conditions.

I have repeatedly put forward the hypothesis that the primal good object,

the mother’s breast, forms the core of the ego and vitally contributes to its

growth,  and  have  often  described  how  the  infant  feels  that  he  concretely

internalizes the breast and the milk it gives. Also there is in his mind already

some indefinite connection between the breast and other parts and aspects of

the mother.

I would not assume that the breast is to him merely a physical object. The

whole of his instinctual desires and his unconscious phantasies imbue the
                                                                                    3
breast with qualities going far beyond the actual nourishment it affords.

We find in the analysis of our patients that the breast in its good aspect is

the prototype of maternal goodness, inexhaustible patience and generosity, as

well as of creativeness. It is these phantasies and instinctual needs that so

enrich the primal object that it remains the foundation for hope, trust, and

belief in goodness.

This book deals with a particular aspect of earliest object relations and

internalization processes that is rooted in orality. I am referring to the effects

of envy on the development of the capacity for gratitude and happiness. Envy

contributes to the infant’s difficulties in building up his good object, for he

feels that the gratification of which he was deprived has been kept for itself
                                    4
by the breast that frustrated him.

A distinction should be drawn between envy, jealousy, and greed. Envy is

the  angry  feeling  that  another  person  possesses  and  enjoys  something

desirable—the envious impulse being to take it away or to spoil it. Moreover,

envy implies the subject’s relation to one person only and goes back to theearliest exclusive relation with the mother. Jealousy is based on envy, but

involves a relation to at least two people; it is mainly concerned with love

that the subject feels is his due and has been taken away, or is in danger of

being  taken  away,  from  him  by  his  rival.  In  the  everyday  conception  of

jealousy, a man or a woman feels deprived of the loved person by somebody

else.

  Greed is an impetuous and insatiable craving, exceeding what the subject

needs and what the object is able and willing to give. At the unconscious

level,  greed  aims  primarily  at  completely  scooping  out,  sucking  dry,  and

devouring the breast: that is to say, its aim is destructive introjection; whereas

envy not only seeks to rob in this way, but also to put badness, primarily bad

excrements and bad parts of the self, into the mother, and first of all into her

breast, in order to spoil and destroy her. In the deepest sense this means

destroying her creativeness. This process, which derives from urethral- and
                                                          5
anal-sadistic impulses, I have elsewhere defined as a destructive aspect of
                                                                        6
projective identification starting from the beginning of life. One essential

difference between greed and envy, although no rigid dividing line can be

drawn since they are so closely associated, would accordingly be that greed is

mainly bound up with introjection and envy with projection.

  According  to  the Shorter  Oxford  Dictionary,  jealousy  means  that

somebody else has taken, or is given, ‘the good’ which by right belongs to

the individual. In this context I would interpret ‘the good’ basically as the

good  breast,  the  mother,  a  loved  person,  whom  somebody  else  has  taken

away. According to Crabb’s English Synonyms, ‘. . . Jealousy fears to lose

what it has; envy is pained at seeing another have that which it wants for

itself. . . . The envious man sickens at the sight of enjoyment. He is easy only

in the misery of others. All endeavours therefore to satisfy an envious man

are fruitless.’ Jealousy, according to Crabb, is ‘a noble or an ignoble passion

according to the object. In the former case it is emulation sharpened by fear.

In the latter case it is greediness stimulated by fear. Envy is always a base

passion, drawing the worst passions in its train.’

The general attitude to jealousy differs from that to envy. In fact, in some

countries (particularly in France) murder prompted by jealousy carries a less

severe sentence. The reason for this distinction is to be found in a universal

feeling that the murder of a rival may imply love for the unfaithful person.

This means, in the terms discussed above, that love for ‘the good’ exists and

that the loved object is not damaged and spoilt as it would be by envy.  Shakespeare’s Othello, in his jealousy, destroys the object he loves and

this, in my view, is characteristic of what Crabb described as an ‘ignoble

passion of jealousy’—greed stimulated by fear. A significant reference to

jealousy as an inherent quality of the mind occurs in the same play:


    But jealous souls will not be answer’d so;

    They are not ever jealous for the cause,

    But jealous for they are jealous; ’tis a monster

    Begot upon itself, born on itself.

 


It could be said that the very envious person is insatiable, he can never be

satisfied because his envy stems from within and therefore always finds an

object to focus on. This shows also the close connection between jealousy,

greed and envy.

  Shakespeare  does  not  always  seem  to  differentiate  between  envy  and

jealousy; the following lines from Othello fully show the significance of envy

in the sense I have defined it here:


    Oh beware my Lord of jealousy;

    It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock

    The meat it feeds on. . . .

 


One is reminded of the saying ‘to bite the hand which feeds one’, which is

almost synonymous with biting, destroying, and spoiling the breast.


                                            II

 


My work has taught me that the first object to be envied is the feeding
      7
breast, for the infant feels that it possesses everything he desires and that it

has an unlimited flow of milk, and love which the breast keeps for its own

gratification. This feeling adds to his sense of grievance and hate, and the

result is a disturbed relation to the mother. If envy is excessive, this, in my

view, indicates that paranoid and schizoid features are abnormally strong and

that such an infant can be regarded as ill.

  Throughout this section I am speaking of the primary envy of the mother’sbreast, and this should be differentiated from its later forms (inherent in the

girl’s desire to take her mother’s place and in the boy’s feminine position) in

which envy is no longer focused on the breast but on the mother receiving the

father’s penis, having babies inside her, giving birth to them, and being able

to feed them.

I  have  often  described  the  sadistic  attacks  on  the  mother’s  breast  as

determined  by  destructive  impulses.  Here  I  wish  to  add  that  envy  gives

particular impetus to these attacks. This means that when I wrote about the

greedy  scooping  out  of  the  breast  and  of  the  mother’s  body,  and  the
                                                                                          8
destruction of her babies, as well as putting bad excrements into the mother,

this adumbrated what I later came to recognize as the envious spoiling of the

object.

If we consider that deprivation increases greed and persecutory anxiety,

and that there is in the infant’s mind a phantasy of an inexhaustible breast

which is his greatest desire, it becomes understandable how envy arises even

if the baby is inadequately fed. The infant’s feelings seem to be that when the

breast deprives him, it becomes bad because it keeps the milk, love, and care

associated with the good breast all to itself. He hates and envies what he feels

to be the mean and grudging breast.

It is perhaps more understandable that the satisfactory breast is also envied.

The very ease with which the milk comes—though the infant feels gratified

by  it—also  gives  rise  to  envy  because  this  gift  seems  something  so

unattainable.

We  find  this  primitive  envy  revived  in  the  transference  situation.  For

instance: the analyst has just given an interpretation which brought the patient

relief and produced a change of mood from despair to hope and trust. With

some  patients,  or  with  the  same  patient  at  other  times,  this  helpful

interpretation may soon become the object of destructive criticism. It is then

no longer felt to be something good he has received and has experienced as

an  enrichment.  His  criticism  may  attach  itself  to  minor  points;  the

interpretation  should  have  been  given  earlier;  it  was  too  long,  and  has

disturbed the patient’s associations; or it was too short, and this implies that

he  has  not  been  sufficiently  understood.  The  envious  patient  grudges  the

analyst the success of his work; and if he feels that the analyst and the help he

is giving have become spoilt and devalued by his envious criticism, he cannot

introject him sufficiently as a good object nor accept his interpretations with

real conviction and assimilate them. Real conviction, as we often see in lessenvious patients, implies gratitude for a gift received. The envious patient

may also feel, because of guilt about devaluing the help given, that he is

unworthy to benefit by analysis.

  Needless  to  say,  our  patients  criticize  us  for  a  variety  of  reasons,

sometimes  with  justification.  But  a  patient’s  need  to  devalue  the  analytic

work which he has experienced as helpful is the expression of envy. In the

transference we discover the root of envy if we trace back the emotional

situations we encounter in earlier stages down to the primary one. Destructive

criticism  is  particularly  evident  in  paranoid  patients  who  indulge  in  the

sadistic pleasure of disparaging the analyst’s work, even though it has given

them some relief. In these patients envious criticism is quite open; in others it

may  play  an  equally  important  rôle  but  remains  unexpressed  and  even

unconscious. In my experience, the slow progress we make in such cases is

also connected with envy. We find that their doubts and uncertainties about

the value of the analysis persist. What happens is that the patient has split off

the envious and hostile part of his self and constantly presents to the analyst

other  aspects  that  he  feels  to  be  more  acceptable.  Yet  the  split-off  parts

essentially influence the course of the analysis, which ultimately can only be

effective if it achieves integration and deals with the whole of the personality.

Other patients try to avoid criticism by becoming confused. This confusion is

not only a defence but also expresses the uncertainty as to whether the analyst

is still a good figure, or whether he and the help he is giving have become

bad because of the patient’s hostile criticism. This uncertainty I would trace

back to the feelings of confusion that are one of the consequences of the

disturbed earliest relation to the mother’s breast. The infant who, owing to

the strength of paranoid and schizoid mechanisms and the impetus of envy,

cannot divide and keep apart successfully love and hate, and therefore the

good and bad object, is liable to feel confused between what is good and bad

in other connections.

In these ways envy, and the defences against it, play an important part in

the  negative  therapeutic  reaction,  in  addition  to  the  factors  discovered  by
                                                    9
Freud and further developed by Joan Riviere.

For  envy,  and  the  attitudes  it  gives  rise  to,  interfere  with  the  gradual

building up of a good object in the transference situation. If at the earliest

stage the good food and the primal good object could not be accepted and

assimilated, this is repeated in the transference and the course of the analysis

is impaired.In the context of the analytic material, it is possible by, working through

former situations, to reconstruct the patient’s feelings as a baby towards the

mother’s breast. For instance, the infant may have a grievance that the milk
                                      10
comes too quickly or too slowly; or that he was not given the breast when

he most craved for it, and therefore, when it is offered, he does not want it

any more. He turns away from it and sucks his fingers instead. When he

accepts the breast, he may not drink enough, or the feed is disturbed. Some

infants obviously have great difficulty in overcoming such grievances. With

others  these  feelings,  even  though  based  on  actual  frustrations,  are  soon

overcome;  the  breast  is  taken  and  the  feed  is  fully  enjoyed.  We  find  in

analysis that patients who, according to what they have been told, took their

food satisfactorily and showed no obvious signs of the attitudes I have just

described, had split off their grievance, envy, and hate, which nevertheless

form part of their character development. These processes become quite clear

in  the  transference  situation.  The  original  wish  to  please  the  mother,  the

longing to be loved, as well as the urgent need to be protected from the

consequences of their own destructive impulses, can be found in the analysis

to underlie the co-operation of those patients whose envy and hate are split

off but form part of the negative therapeutic reaction.

I  have  often  referred  to  the  infant’s  desire  for  the  inexhaustible,  ever-

present breast. But as has been suggested in the previous section, it is not

only food he desires; he also wants to be freed from destructive impulses and

persecutory anxiety. This feeling that the mother is omnipotent and that it is

up to her to prevent all pain and evils from internal and external sources is

also found in the analysis of adults. In passing, I would say that the very

favourable  changes  in  feeding  children  which  have  come  about  in  recent

years, in contrast to the rather rigid way of feeding according to timetable,

cannot altogether prevent the infant’s difficulties, because the mother cannot

eliminate his destructive impulses and persecutory anxiety. There is another

point to be considered. A too anxious attitude on the part of the mother who,

whenever the infant cries, at once presents him with food, is unhelpful to the

infant. He feels the mother’s anxiety and this increases his own. I have also

met in adults the grievance that they had not been allowed to cry enough, and

thereby  missed  the  possibility  of  expressing  anxiety  and  grief  (and  thus

getting relief) so that neither aggressive impulses nor depressive anxieties

could  sufficiently  find  an  outlet.  It  is  of  interest  that  Abraham  mentions,

among the factors which underlie manic-depressive illness, both excessive                                          11
frustration and too great indulgence. For frustration, if not excessive, is also

a stimulus for adaptation to the external world and for the development of the

sense  of  reality.  In  fact,  a  certain  amount  of  frustration  followed  by

gratification might give the infant the feeling that he has been able to cope

with  his  anxiety.  I  have  also  found  that  the  infant’s  unfulfilled  desires—

which  are  to  some  extent  incapable  of  fulfilment—are  an  important

contributory factor to his sublimations and creative activities. The absence of

conflict in the infant, if such a hypothetical state could be imagined, would

deprive him of enrichment of his personality and of an important factor in the

strengthening  of  his  ego.  For  conflict,  and  the  need  to  overcome  it,  is  a

fundamental element in creativeness.

  From the contention that envy spoils the primal good object, and gives

added impetus to sadistic attacks on the breast, further conclusions arise. The

breast attacked in this way has lost its value, it has become bad by being

bitten up and poisoned by urine and faeces. Excessive envy increases the

intensity of such attacks and their duration, and thus makes it more difficult

for the infant to regain the lost good object; whereas sadistic attacks on the

breast that are less determined by envy pass more quickly, and therefore do

not, in the infant’s mind, so strongly and lastingly destroy the goodness of the

object: the breast that returns and can be enjoyed is felt as an evidence that it
                                          12
is not injured and that it is still good.

The  fact  that  envy  spoils  the  capacity  for  enjoyment  explains  to  some
                                      13
extent why envy is so persistent. For it is enjoyment and the gratitude to

which it gives rise that mitigate destructive impulses, envy, and greed. To

look at it from another angle: greed, envy, and persecutory anxiety, which are

bound up with each other, inevitably increase each other. The feeling of the

harm done by envy, the great anxiety that stems from this, and the resulting

uncertainty about the goodness of the object, have the effect of increasing

greed and destructive impulses. Whenever the object is felt to be good after

all, it is all the more greedily desired and taken in. This applies to food as

well. In analysis we find that when a patient is in great doubt about his object,

and therefore also about the value of the analyst and the analysis, he may

cling to any interpretations that relieve his anxiety, and is inclined to prolong

the session because he wants to take in as much as possible of what at the

time he feels to be good. (Some people are so afraid of their greed that they

are particularly keen to leave on time.)

  Doubts  in  the  possession  of  the  good  object  and  the  correspondinguncertainty  about  one’s  own  good  feelings  also  contribute  to  greedy  and

indiscriminate identifications; such people are easily influenced because they

cannot trust their own judgement.

In contrast with the infant who, owing to his envy, has been unable to build

up securely a good internal object, a child with a strong capacity for love and

gratitude has a deep-rooted relation with a good object and can, without being

fundamentally  damaged,  withstand  temporary  states  of  envy,  hatred,  and

grievance, which arise even in children who are loved and well mothered.

Thus, when these negative states are transient, the good object is regained

time and time again. This is an essential factor in establishing it and in laying

the foundations of stability and a strong ego. In the course of development,

the relation to the mother’s breast becomes the foundation for devotion to

people, values, and causes, and thus some of the love which was originally

experienced for the primal object is absorbed.

One major derivative of the capacity for love is the feeling of gratitude.

Gratitude  is  essential  in  building  up  the  relation  to  the  good  object  and

underlies also the appreciation of goodness in others and in oneself. Gratitude

is  rooted  in  the  emotions  and  attitudes  that  arise  in  the  earliest  stage  of

infancy, when for the baby the mother is the one and only object. I have
                              14
referred to this early bond as the basis for all later relations with one loved

person.  While  the  exclusive  relation  to  the  mother  varies  individually  in

duration and intensity, I believe that, up to a point, it exists in most people.

How far it remains undisturbed depends partly on external circumstances. But

the internal factors underlying it—above all the capacity for love—appear to

be innate. Destructive impulses, especially strong envy, may at an early stage

disturb this particular bond with the mother. If envy of the feeding breast is

strong,  the  full  gratification  is  interfered  with  because,  as  I  have  already

described, it is characteristic of envy that it implies robbing the object of what

it possesses, and spoiling it.

The infant can only experience complete enjoyment if the capacity for love

is  sufficiently  developed;  and  it  is  enjoyment  that  forms  the  basis  for

gratitude. Freud described the infant’s bliss in being suckled as the prototype
                        15
of sexual gratification. In my view these experiences constitute not only the

basis of sexual gratification but of all later happiness, and make possible the

feeling  of  unity  with  another  person;  such  unity  means  being  fully

understood, which is essential for every happy love relation or friendship. At

best, such an understanding needs no words to express it, which demonstratesits derivation from the earliest closeness with the mother in the preverbal

stage. The capacity to enjoy fully the first relation to the breast forms the

foundation for experiencing pleasure from various sources.

If the undisturbed enjoyment in being fed is frequently experienced, the

introjection  of  the  good  breast  comes  about  with  relative  security.  A  full

gratification at the breast means that the infant feels he has received from his

loved  object  a  unique  gift  which  he  wants  to  keep.  This  is  the  basis  of

gratitude.  Gratitude  is  closely  linked  with  the  trust  in  good  figures.  This

includes first of all the ability to accept and assimilate the loved primal object

(not only as a source of food) without greed and envy interfering too much;

for greedy internalization disturbs the relation to the object. The individual

feels that he is controlling and exhausting, and therefore injuring it, whereas

in a good relation to the internal and external object, the wish to preserve and
                                                                          16
spare it predominates. I have described in another connection the process

underlying the belief in the good breast as derived from the infant’s capacity

to invest the first external object with libido. In this way a good object is
            17
established, which loves and protects the self and is loved and protected by

the self. This is the basis for trust in one’s own goodness.

The more often gratification at the breast is experienced and fully accepted,

the more often enjoyment and gratitude, and accordingly the wish to return

pleasure, are felt. This recurrent experience makes possible gratitude on the

deepest level and plays an important rôle in the capacity to make reparation,

and  in  all  sublimations.  Through  processes  of  projection  and  introjection,

through  inner  wealth  given  out  and  re-introjected,  an  enrichment  and

deepening of the ego comes about. In this way the possession of the helpful

inner object is again and again re-established and gratitude can fully come

into play.

  Gratitude is closely bound up with generosity. Inner wealth derives from

having assimilated the good object so that the individual becomes able to

share its gifts with others. This makes it possible to introject a more friendly

outer world, and a feeling of enrichment ensues. Even the fact that generosity

is often insufficiently appreciated does not necessarily undermine the ability

to give. By contrast, with people in whom this feeling of inner wealth and

strength is not sufficiently established, bouts of generosity are often followed

by an exaggerated need for appreciation and gratitude, and consequently by

persecutory anxieties of having been impoverished and robbed.

  Strong envy of the feeding breast interferes with the capacity for completeenjoyment, and thus undermines the development of gratitude. There are very

pertinent psychological reasons why envy ranks among the seven ‘deadly

sins’. I would even suggest that it is unconsciously felt to be the greatest sin

of all, because it spoils and harms the good object which is the source of life.

This view is consistent with the view described by Chaucer in The Parsons

Tale: ‘It is certain that envy is the worst sin that is; for all other sins are sins

only against one virtue, whereas envy is against all virtue and against all

goodness.’  The  feeling  of  having  injured  and  destroyed  the  primal  object

impairs the individual’s trust in the sincerity of his later relations and makes

him doubt his capacity for love and goodness.

We  frequently  encounter  expressions  of  gratitude  which  turn  out  to  be

prompted mainly by feelings of guilt and much less by the capacity for love. I

think the distinction between such guilty feelings and gratitude on the deepest

level is important. This does not mean that some element of guilt does not

enter into the most genuine feelings of gratitude.

My  observations  have  shown  me  that  significant  changes  in  character,

which at close quarters reveal themselves as character deterioration, are much

more likely to happen in persons who have not established their first object

securely and are not capable of maintaining gratitude towards it. When in

those people persecutory anxiety increases for internal or external reasons,

they lose completely their primal good object, or rather its substitutes, be it

persons or values. The processes that underlie this change are a regressive

return to early splitting mechanisms and disintegration. Since this is a matter

of  degree,  such  a  disintegration,  though  ultimately  it  strongly  affects

character, does not necessarily lead to manifest illness. The craving for power

and prestige, or the need to pacify persecutors at any cost, are among the

aspects of the character changes I have in mind.

I have seen in some cases that when envy of a person arises, the feeling of

envy from its earliest sources is activated. Since these primary feelings are of

an omnipotent nature, this reflects on the current feeling of envy experienced

towards a substitute figure and contributes, therefore, both to the emotions

stirred by envy as well as to despondency and guilt. It seems likely that this

activation  of  the  earliest  envy  by  a  common  experience  is  common  to

everyone, but both the degree and the intensity of the feeling, as well as the

feeling of omnipotent destruction, vary with the individual. This factor may

prove to be of great importance in the analysis of envy for only if it can reach

down to its deeper sources is the analysis likely to take full effect.No doubt, in every individual, frustration and unhappy circumstances rouse

some envy and hate throughout life, but the strength of these emotions and

the way in which the individual copes with them varies considerably. This is

one of the many reasons why the capacity for enjoyment, bound up with a

feeling of gratitude for goodness received, differs vastly in people.


                                            III

 


To clarify my argument, some reference to my views on the early ego

seems necessary. I believe that it exists from the beginning of post-natal life,

though in a rudimentary form and largely lacking coherence. Already at the

earliest stage it performs a number of important functions. It might well be

that this early ego approximates to the unconscious part of the ego postulated

by Freud. Though he did not assume that an ego exists from the beginning, he

attributed to the organism a function which, as I see it, can only be performed

by the ego. The threat of annihilation by the death instinct within is, in my
                                                          18
view—which differs from Freud’s on this point—the primordial anxiety,

and it is the ego which, in the service of the life instinct—possibly even

called into operation by the life instinct—deflects to some extent that threat

outwards.  This  fundamental  defence  against  the  death  instinct  Freud

attributed to the organism, whereas I regard this process as the prime activity

of the ego.

  There are other primal activities of the ego which, in my view, derive from

the imperative need to deal with the struggle between life and death instincts.

One  of  these  functions  is  gradual  integration  which  stems  from  the  life

instinct and expresses itself in the capacity for love. The opposite tendency of

the ego to split itself and its objects occurs in part because the ego largely

lacks cohesion at birth, and in part because it constitutes a defence against the

primordial anxiety, and is therefore a means of preserving the ego. I have, for

many years, attributed great importance to one particular process of splitting:

the division of the breast into a good and a bad object. I took this to be an

expression of the innate conflict between love and hate and of the ensuing

anxieties. However, co-existing with this division, there appear to be various

processes of splitting, and it is only in recent years that some of them have

been more clearly understood. For instance, I found that concurrently with

the greedy and devouring internalization of the object—first of all the breast

—the ego in varying degrees fragments itself and its objects, and in this wayachieves a dispersal of the destructive impulses and of internal persecutory

anxieties. This process, varying in strength and determining the greater or

lesser normality of the individual, is one of the defences during the paranoid-

schizoid position, which I believe normally extends over the first three or
                      19
four months of life. I am not suggesting that during that period the infant is

not  capable  of  fully  enjoying  his  feeds,  the  relation  to  his  mother,  and

frequent  states  of  physical  comfort  or  well-being.  But  whenever  anxiety

arises, it is mainly of a paranoid nature and the defences against it, as well as

the mechanisms used, are predominantly schizoid. The same applies, mutatis

mutandis, to the infant’s emotional life during the period characterized by the

depressive position.

To return to the splitting process, which I take to be a precondition for the

young  infant’s  relative  stability;  during  the  first  few  months  he

predominantly keeps the good object apart from the bad one and thus, in a

fundamental way, preserves it—which also means that the security of the ego

is enhanced. At the same time, this primal division only succeeds if there is

an adequate capacity for love and a relatively strong ego. My hypothesis is,

therefore,  that  the  capacity  for  love  gives  impetus  both  to  integrating

tendencies and to a successful primal splitting between the loved and hated

object. This sounds paradoxical. But since, as I said, integration is based on a

strongly rooted good object that forms the core of the ego, a certain amount

of splitting is essential for integration; for it preserves the good object and

later on enables the ego to synthesize the two aspects of it. Excessive envy,

an expression of destructive impulses, interferes with the primal split between

the  good  and  bad  breast,  and  the  building  up  of  a  good  object  cannot

sufficiently be achieved. Thus the basis is not laid for a fully developed and

integrated adult personality; for the later differentiation between good and

bad  is  disturbed  in  various  connections.  In  so  far  as  this  disturbance  of

development is due to excessive envy, it derives from the prevalence, in the

earliest stages, of paranoid and schizoid mechanisms which, according to my

hypothesis, form the basis of schizophrenia.


In the exploration of early splitting processes, it is essential to differentiate

between a good object and an idealized one, though this distinction cannot be

drawn  sharply.  A  very  deep  split  between  the  two  aspects  of  the  object

indicates that it is not the good and bad object that are being kept apart but an

idealized and an extremely bad one. So deep and sharp a division reveals thatdestructive impulses, envy, and persecutory anxiety are very strong and that

idealization serves mainly as a defence against these emotions.

If the good object is deeply rooted, the split is fundamentally of a different

nature  and  allows  the  all-important  process  of  ego  integration  and  object

synthesis to operate. Thus a mitigation of hatred by love can come about in

some  measure  and  the  depressive  position  can  be  worked  through.  As  a

result, the identification with a good and whole object is the more securely

established; and this also lends strength to the ego and enables it to preserve

its identity as well as a feeling of possessing goodness of its own. It becomes

less liable to identify indiscriminately with a variety of objects, a process that

is characteristic of a weak ego. Furthermore, full identification with a good

object goes with a feeling of the self possessing goodness of its own. When

things go wrong, excessive projective identification, by which split-off parts

of the self are projected into the object, leads to a strong confusion between
                                                                            20
the self and the object, which also comes to stand for the self. Bound up

with  this  is  a  weakening  of  the  ego  and  a  grave  disturbance  in  object

relations.

  Infants whose capacity for love is strong feel less need for idealization than

those in whom destructive impulses and persecutory anxiety are paramount.

Excessive idealization denotes that persecution is the main driving force. As I

discovered many years ago in my work with young children, idealization is a

corollary of persecutory anxiety—a defence against it—and the ideal breast is

the counterpart of the devouring breast.

The  idealized  object  is  much  less  integrated  in  the  ego  than  the  good

object, since it stems predominantly from persecutory anxiety and much less

from the capacity for love. I also found that idealization derives from the

innate feeling that an extremely good breast exists, a feeling which leads to
                                                                      21
the longing for a good object and for the capacity to love it. This appears to

be a condition for life itself, that is to say, an expression of the life instinct.

Since  the  need  for  a  good  object  is  universal,  the  distinction  between  an

idealized and a good object cannot be considered as absolute.

  Some people deal with their incapacity (derived from excessive envy) to

possess a good object by idealizing it. This first idealization is precarious, for

the  envy  experienced  towards  the  good  object  is  bound  to  extend  to  its

idealized aspect. The same is true of idealizations of further objects and the

identification with them, which is often unstable and indiscriminate. Greed is

an important factor in these indiscriminate identifications, for the need to getthe  best  from  everywhere  interferes  with  the  capacity  for  selection  and

discrimination. This incapacity is also bound up with the confusion between

good and bad that arises in the relation to the primal object.

  While people who have been able to establish the primal good object with

relative  security  are  capable  of  retaining  their  love  for  it  in  spite  of  its

shortcomings,  with  others  idealization  is  a  characteristic  of  their  love

relations and friendships. This tends to break down and then one loved object

may frequently have to be exchanged for another; for none can come fully up

to  expectations.  The  former  idealized  person  is  often  felt  as  a  persecutor

(which shows the origin of idealization as a counterpart to persecution), and

into him is projected the subject’s envious and critical attitude. It is of great

importance that similar processes operate in the internal world which in this

way  comes  to  contain  particularly  dangerous  objects.  All  this  leads  to

instability in relationships. This is another aspect of the weakness of the ego,

to which I referred earlier in connection with indiscriminate identifications.

  Doubts connected with the good object easily arise even in a secure child-

mother  relation;  this  is  not  only  due  to  the  fact  that  the  infant  is  very

dependent on the mother, but also to the recurrent anxiety that his greed and

his destructive impulses will get the better of him—an anxiety which is an

important factor in depressive states. However, at any stage of life, under the

stress of anxiety, the belief and trust in good objects can be shaken; but it is

the intensity  and duration  of  such  states  of  doubt,  despondency,  and

persecution that determine whether the ego is capable of re-integrating itself
                                                  22
and of reinstating its good objects securely. Hope and trust in the existence

of goodness, as can be observed in everyday life, helps people through great

adversity, and effectively counteracts persecution.


                                            IV

 


It appears that one of the consequences of excessive envy is an early onset

of  guilt.  If  premature  guilt  is  experienced  by  an  ego  not  yet  capable  of

bearing it, guilt is felt as persecution and the object that rouses guilt is turned

into a persecutor. The infant then cannot work through either depressive or

persecutory anxiety because they become confused with each other. A few

months later, when the depressive position arises, the more integrated and

stronger ego has a greater capacity to bear the pain of guilt and to develop

corresponding defences, mainly the tendency to make reparation.The  fact  that  in  the  earliest  stage  (i.e.  during  the  paranoid-schizoid

position) premature guilt increases persecution and disintegration, brings the
                                                                                        23
consequence that the working-through of the depressive position also fails.

This failure can be observed in both child and adult patients: as soon as

guilt  is  felt,  the  analyst  becomes  persecutory  and  is  accused  on  many

grounds. In such cases we find that as infants they could not experience guilt

without  its  simultaneously  leading  to  persecutory  anxiety  with  its

corresponding defences. These defences appear later as projection on to the

analyst and omnipotent denial.

It is my hypothesis that one of the deepest sources of guilt is always linked

with the envy of the feeding breast, and with the feeling of having spoilt its

goodness by envious attacks. If the primal object has been established with

relative stability in early infancy, the guilt aroused by such feelings can be

coped with more successfully because then envy is more transient and less

liable to endanger the relation to the good object.

  Excessive envy interferes with adequate oral gratification and so acts as a

stimulus towards the intensification of genital desires and trends. This implies

that  the  infant  turns  too  early  towards  genital  gratification,  with  the

consequence that the oral relation becomes genitalized and the genital trends

become too much coloured by oral grievances and anxieties. I have often

contended  that  genital  sensations  and  desires  are  possibly  operative  from

birth onwards; for instance, it is well known that infant boys have erections at

a very early stage. But in speaking of these sensations arising prematurely I

mean that genital trends interfere with oral ones at a stage when normally the
                                24
oral desires are uppermost. Here again we have to consider the effects of

early confusion, which expresses itself in a blurring of the oral, anal, and

genital  impulses  and  phantasies.  An  overlapping  between  these  various

sources  both  of  libido  and  of  aggressiveness  is  normal.  But  when  the

overlapping  amounts  to  an  incapacity  to  experience  sufficiently  the

predominance of either of these trends at their proper stage of development,

then both later sexual life and sublimations are adversely affected. Genitality

based on a flight from orality is insecure because into it are carried over the

suspicions  and  disappointments  attaching  to  the  impaired  oral  enjoyment.

The  interference  with  oral  primacy  by  genital  trends  undermines  the

gratification  in  the  genital  sphere  and  often  is  the  cause  of  obsessional

masturbation  and  of  promiscuity.  For  the  lack  of  the  primary  enjoyment

introduces into the genital desires compulsive elements and, as I have seenwith some patients, may therefore lead to sexual sensations entering into all

activities, thought processes, and interests. With some infants, the flight into

genitality is also a defence against hating and injuring the first object towards

which ambivalent feelings operate. I have found that the premature onset of

genitality  may  be  bound  up  with  the  early  occurrence  of  guilt  and  is
                                                    25
characteristic of paranoid and schizoid cases.

  When the infant reaches the depressive position, and becomes more able to

face his psychic reality, he also feels that the object’s badness is largely due

to his own aggressiveness and the ensuing projection. This insight, as we can

see in the transference situation, gives rise to great mental pain and guilt

when the depressive position is at its height. But it also brings about feelings

of relief and hope, which in turn make it less difficult to reunite the two

aspects  of  the  object  and  of  the  self  and  to  work  through  the  depressive

position. This hope is based on the growing unconscious knowledge that the

internal and external object is not as bad as it was felt to be in its split-off

aspects.  Through  mitigation  of  hatred  by  love  the  object  improves  in  the

infant’s mind. It is no longer so strongly felt to have been destroyed in the

past and the danger of its being destroyed in the future is lessened; not being

injured, it is also felt to be less vulnerable in the present and future. The

internal  object  acquires  a  restraining  and  self-preservative  attitude  and  its

greater strength is an important aspect of its super-ego function.

In describing the overcoming of the depressive position, bound up with the

greater trust in the good internal object, I do not intend to convey that such

results cannot be temporarily undone. Strain of an internal or external nature

is liable to stir up depression and distrust in the self as well as in the object.

However, the capacity to emerge from such depressive states, and to regain

one’s feeling of inner security, is in my view the criterion of a well developed

personality.  By  contrast,  the  frequent  way  of  dealing  with  depression  by

hardening one’s feelings and denying depression is a regression to the manic

defences used during the infantile depressive position.


There is a direct link between the envy experienced towards the mother’s

breast and the development of jealousy. Jealousy is based on the suspicion of

and rivalry with the father, who is accused of having taken away the mother’s

breast and the mother. This rivalry marks the early stages of the direct and

inverted  Oedipus  complex,  which  normally  arises  concurrently  with  the
                                                                  26
depressive position in the second quarter of the first year.The development of the Oedipus complex is strongly influenced by the

vicissitudes of the first exclusive relation with the mother, and when this

relation is disturbed too soon, the rivalry with the father enters prematurely.

Phantasies of the penis inside the mother, or inside her breast, turn the father

into a hostile intruder. This phantasy is particularly strong when the infant

has not had the full enjoyment and happiness that the early relation to the

mother can afford him and has not taken in the first good object with some

security. Such failure partly depends on the strength of envy.

  When in earlier writings I described the depressive position, I showed that

at that stage the infant progressively integrates his feelings of love and hatred,

synthesizes the good and bad aspects of the mother, and goes through states

of mourning bound up with feelings of guilt. He also begins to understand

more of the external world and realizes that he cannot keep his mother to

himself as his exclusive possession. Whether or not the infant can find help

against that grief in the relation to the second object, the father, or to other

people  in  his  surroundings,  largely  depends  on  the  emotions  which  he

experiences towards his lost unique object. If that relation was well founded,

the fear of losing the mother is less strong and the capacity to share her is

greater. Then he can also experience more love towards his rivals. All this

implies  that  he  has  been  able  to  work  through  the  depressive  position

satisfactorily, which in turn depends on envy towards the primal object not

being excessive.

  Jealousy  is,  as  we  know,  inherent  in  the  Oepidus  situation  and  is

accompanied by hate and death wishes. Normally, however, the gain of new

objects who can be loved—the father and siblings—and other compensations

which the developing ego derives from the external world, mitigate to some

extent  jealousy  and  grievance.  If  paranoid  and  schizoid  mechanisms  are

strong,  jealousy—and  ultimately  envy—remain  unmitigated.  The

development of the Oedipus complex is essentially influenced by all these

factors.

  Among the features of the earliest stage of the Oedipus complex are the

phantasies of the mother’s breast and the mother containing the penis of the

father, or the father containing the mother. This is the basis of the combined

parent figure, and I have elaborated the importance of this phantasy in earlier
        27
writings. The influence of the combined parent figure on the infant’s ability

to differentiate between the parents, and to establish good relations with each

of them, is affected by the strength of envy and the intensity of his Oedipusjealousy.  For  the  suspicion  that  the  parents  are  always  getting  sexual

gratification from one another reinforces the phantasy—derived from various

sources—that  they  are  always  combined.  If  these  anxieties  are  strongly

operative, and therefore unduly prolonged, the consequence may be a lasting

disturbance in the relation to both parents. In very ill individuals, the inability

to disentangle the relation to the father from the one to the mother, because of

their being inextricably interlinked in the patient’s mind, plays an important

rôle in severe states of confusion.

If  envy  is  not  excessive,  jealousy  in  the  Oedipus  situation  becomes  a

means of working it through. When jealousy is experienced, hostile feelings

are directed not so much against the primal object but rather against the rivals

—father or siblings—which brings in an element of distribution. At the same

time, when these relations develop, they give rise to feelings of love, and

become  a  new  source  of  gratification.  Furthermore,  the  change  from  oral

desires to genital ones reduces the importance of the mother as a giver of oral

enjoyment. (As we know, the object of envy is largely oral.) With the boy, a

good  deal  of  hate  is  deflected  on  to  the  father  who  is  envied  for  the

possession of the mother; this is the typical Oedipus jealousy. With the girl,

the genital desires for the father enable her to find another loved object. Thus

jealousy to some extent supersedes envy; the mother becomes the chief rival.

The girl desires to take her mother’s place and to possess and take care of the

babies which the loved father gives to the mother. The identification with the

mother  in  this  rôle  makes  a  wider  range  of  sublimations  possible,  It  is

essential  also  to  consider  that  the  working-through  of  envy  by  means  of

jealousy is at the same time an important defence against envy. Jealousy is

felt to be much more acceptable and gives rise much less to guilt than the

primary envy which destroys the first good object.

In analysis we can often see the close connection between jealousy and

envy. For instance, a patient felt very jealous of a man with whom he thought

that I was in close personal contact. The next step was a feeling that in any

case I was probably in private life uninteresting and boring, and suddenly the

whole of the analysis appeared to him as boring. The interpretation—in this

case by the patient himself—that this was a defence led to the recognition of

a devaluation of the analyst as a result of an upsurge of envy.

  Ambition is another factor highly instrumental in stirring up envy. This

frequently relates first to the rivalry and competition in the Oedipus situation;

but if excessive, it clearly shows its root in the envy of the primal object.Failure to fulfil one’s ambition is often aroused by the conflict between the

urge  to  make  reparation  to  the  object  injured  by  destructive  envy  and  a

renewed reappearance of envy.

  Freud’s discovery of penis-envy in women and its link with aggressive

impulses was a basic contribution to the understanding of envy. When penis-

envy and castration wishes are strong, the envied object, the penis, is to be

destroyed and the man who owns it is to be deprived of it. In his ‘Analysis

Terminable and Interminable’ Freud (1937) emphasized the difficulty arising

in the analysis of women patients by the very fact that they can never acquire

the penis that they desire. He stated that a woman patient feels ‘an internal

conviction that the analysis will be of no use and that nothing can be done to

help her. And we can only agree that she is right, when we learn that her

strongest motive in coming for treatment was the hope that, after all, she

might still obtain a male organ, the lack of which was so painful to her.’

A number of factors contribute to penis-envy which I have discussed in
                    28
other connections. In this context I wish to consider the woman’s penis-

envy  mainly  in  so  far  as  it  is  of  oral  origin.  As  we  know,  under  the

dominance  of  oral  desires,  the  penis  is  strongly  equated  with  the  breast

(Abraham) and in my experience the woman’s penis-envy can be traced back

to envy of the mother’s breast. I have found that if the penis-envy of women

is analysed on these lines, we can see that its root lies in the earliest relation

to the mother, in the fundamental envy of the mother’s breast, and in the

destructive feelings allied with it.

  Freud has shown how vital is the attitude of the girl to her mother in her

subsequent  relations  to  men.  When  envy  of  the  mother’s  breast  has  been

strongly transferred to the father’s penis, the outcome may be a reinforcing of

her homosexual attitude. Another outcome is a sudden and abrupt turning to

the  penis  away  from  the  breast,  because  of  the  excessive  anxieties  and

conflicts  to  which  the  oral  relation  gives  rise.  This  is  essentially  a  flight

mechanism and therefore does not lead to stable relations with the second

object.  If  the  main  motive  for  this  flight  is  envy  and  hatred  experienced

towards the mother, these emotions are soon transferred to the father, and

therefore a lasting and loving attitude to him cannot be established. At the

same time, the envious relation to the mother expresses itself in an excessive

Oedipus rivalry. This rivalry is much less due to love of the father than to

envy  of  the  mother’s  possession  of  the  father  and  his  penis.  The  envy

experienced towards the breast is then fully carried over into the Oedipussituation. The father (or his penis) has become an appendage to the mother

and  it  is  on  these  grounds  that  the  girl  wants  to  rob  her  mother  of  him.

Therefore in later life, every success in her relation to men becomes a victory

over  another  woman.  This  applies  even  where  there  is  no  obvious  rival,

because the rivalry is then directed against the man’s mother, as can be seen

in  the  frequent  disturbances  of  the  relation  between  daughter-in-law  and

mother-in-law. If the man is mainly valued because his conquest is a triumph

over another woman, she may lose interest in him as soon as success has been

achieved. The attitude towards the rival woman then implies: ‘You (standing

for the mother) had that wonderful breast which I could not get when you

withheld it from me and which I still wish to rob you of; therefore I take from

you that penis which you cherish.’ The need to repeat this triumph over a

hated rival often strongly contributes to the search for another and yet another

man.

  When  hate  and  envy  of  the  mother  are  not  so  strong,  nevertheless

disappointment and grievance may lead to a turning away from her; but an

idealization of the second object, the father’s penis and the father, may then

be more successful. This idealization derives mainly from the search for a

good object, a search which has not succeeded in the first place and therefore

may fail again, but need not fail if the love for the father is dominant in the

jealousy situation; for then the woman can combine some hatred against the

mother and love for the father and later on for other men. In this case friendly

emotions  towards  women  are  possible,  as  long  as  they  do  not  too  much

represent  a  mother  substitute.  Friendship  with  women  and  homosexuality

may then be based on the need to find a good object instead of the avoided

primal object. The fact that such people—and this applies to men as well as

to women—can have good object relations is therefore often deceptive. The

underlying envy towards the primal object is split off but remains operative

and is liable to disturb any relations.

In a number of cases I found that frigidity, occurring in different degrees,

was a result of unstable attitudes to the penis, based mainly on a flight from

the primal object. The capacity for full oral gratification, which is rooted in a

satisfactory relation to the mother, is the basis for experiencing full genital

orgasm (Freud).

In men, the envy of the mother’s breast is also a very important factor. If it

is  strong  and  oral  gratification  thereby  impaired,  hatred  and  anxieties  are

transferred to the vagina. Whereas normally the genital development enablesthe boy to retain his mother as a love-object, a deep disturbance in the oral

relation opens the way for severe difficulties in the genital attitude towards

women. The consequence of a disturbed relation first to the breast and then to

the vagina are manifold, such as impairment of genital potency, compulsive

need for genital gratification, promiscuity, and homosexuality.

It appears that one source of guilt about homosexuality is the feeling of

having turned away with hate from the mother and betrayed her by making an

ally of the father’s penis and of the father. Both during the Oedipus stage and

in  later  life  this  element  of  betrayal  of  a  loved  woman  may  have

repercussions, such as a disturbance in friendships with men, even if they are

not of a manifest homosexual nature. On the other hand, I have observed that

the guilt towards a loved woman and the anxiety implied in that attitude often

reinforce the flight from her and increase homosexual tendencies.

  Excessive envy of the breast is likely to extend to all feminine attributes, in

particular  to  the  woman’s  capacity  to  bear  children.  If  development  is

successful,  the  man  derives  compensation  for  these  unfulfilled  feminine

desires by a good relation to his wife or lover and by becoming the father of

the  children  she  bears  him.  This  relation  opens  up  experiences  such  as

identification with his child which in many ways make up for early envy and

frustrations;  also  the  feeling  that  he  has  created  the  child  counteracts  the

man’s early envy of the mother’s femininity.

In both male and female, envy plays a part in the desire to take away the

attributes of the other sex, as well as to possess or spoil those of the parent of

the same sex. It follows that paranoid jealousy and rivalry in the direct and

inverted  Oedipus  situation  are  in  both  sexes,  however  divergent  their

development, based on excessive envy towards the primal object, the mother,

or rather her breast.

The ‘good’ breast that feeds and initiates the love relation to the mother is
                                                29
the  representative  of  the  life  instinct  and  is  also  felt  as  the  first

manifestation of creativeness. In this fundamental relation the infant receives

not only the gratification he desires but feels that he is being kept alive. For

hunger, which rouses the fear of starvation—possibly even all physical and

mental pain—is felt as the threat of death. If the identification with a good

and  life-giving  internalized  object  can  be  maintained,  this  becomes  an

impetus towards creativeness. Though superficially this may manifest itself
                                                                                          30
as a coveting of the prestige, wealth, and power which others have attained,

its actual aim is creativeness. The capacity to give and to preserve life is feltas the greatest gift and therefore creativeness becomes the deepest cause for

envy. The spoiling of creativity implied in envy is illustrated in Milton’s
              31
Paradise Lost where Satan, envious of God, decides to become the usurper

of Heaven. He makes war on God in his attempt to spoil the heavenly life and

falls out of Heaven. Fallen, he and his other fallen angels build Hell as a rival

to Heaven, and become the destructive force which attempts to destroy what
            32
God creates. This theological idea seems to come down from St Augustine,

who describes Life as a creative force opposed to Envy, a destructive force.

In this connection, the First Letter to the Corinthians reads, ‘Love envieth

not’.

My psycho-analytic experience has shown me that envy of creativeness is

a fundamental element in the disturbance of the creative process. To spoil and

destroy the initial source of goodness soon leads to destroying and attacking

the babies that the mother contains and results in the good object being turned

into a hostile, critical, and envious one. The super-ego figure on which strong

envy has been projected becomes particularly persecutory and interferes with

thought  processes  and  with  every  productive  activity,  ultimately  with

creativeness.

The  envious  and  destructive  attitude  towards  the  breast  underlies

destructive criticism which is often described as ‘biting’ and ‘pernicious’. It

is particularly creativeness which becomes the object of such attacks. Thus

Spenser in ‘The Faerie Queene’ describes envy as a ravenous wolf:


    He hated all good workes and vertuous deeds

    .     .     .     .

    And eke the verse of famous Poets witt
                                                            33
    He does backebite, and spightfull poison spues

    From leprous mouth on all that ever writt.

 


  Constructive criticism has different sources; it aims at helping the other

person  and  furthering  his  work.  Sometimes  it  derives  from  a  strong

identification with the person whose work is under discussion. Maternal or

fatherly  attitudes  may  also  enter,  and  often  a  confidence  in  one’s  own

creativeness counteracts envy.

A particular cause of envy is the relative absence of it in others. The envied

person is felt to possess what is at bottom most prized and desired—and thisis a good object, which also implies a good character and sanity. Moreover,

the person who can ungrudgingly enjoy other people’s creative work and

happiness  is  spared  the  torments  of  envy,  grievance,  and  persecution.

Whereas envy is a source of great unhappiness, a relative freedom from it is

felt to underlie contented and peaceful states of mind—ultimately sanity. This

is  also  in  fact  the  basis  of  inner  resources  and  resilience  which  can  be

observed in people who, even after great adversity and mental pain, regain

their peace of mind. Such an attitude, which includes gratitude for pleasures

of the past and enjoyment of what the present can give, expresses itself in

serenity. In old people, it makes possible the adaptation to the knowledge that

youth cannot be regained and enables them to take pleasure and interest in the

lives  of  young  people.  The  well-known  fact  that  parents  relive  in  their

children and grand-children their own lives—if this is not an expression of

excessive  possessiveness  and  deflected  ambition—illustrates  what  I  am

trying to convey. Those who feel that they have had a share in the experience
                                                                                          34
and pleasures of life are much more able to believe in the continuity of life.

Such capacity for resignation without undue bitterness and yet keeping the

power of enjoyment alive has its roots in infancy and depends on how far the

baby  had  been  able  to  enjoy  the  breast  without  excessively  envying  the

mother for its possession. I suggest that the happiness experienced in infancy

and the love for the good object which enriches the personality underlie the

capacity for enjoyment and sublimation, and still make themselves felt in old

age. When Goethe said, ‘He is the happiest of men who can make the end of

his life agree closely with the beginning’, I would interpret ‘the beginning’ as

the early happy relation to the mother which throughout life mitigates hate

and anxiety and still gives the old person support and contentment. An infant

who has securely established the good object can also find compensations for

loss and deprivation in adult life. All this is felt by the envious person as

something  he  can  never  attain  because  he  can  never  be  satisfied,  and

therefore his envy is reinforced.


                                            V

 


                                                                                    35
I shall now illustrate some of my conclusions by clinical material. My

first instance is taken from the analysis of a woman patient. She had been

breast-fed, but circumstances had otherwise not been favourable and she wasconvinced that her babyhood and feeding had been wholly unsatisfactory.

Her grievance about the past linked with hopelessness about the present and

future.  Envy  of  the  feeding  breast,  and  the  ensuing  difficulties  in  object

relations, had already been extensively analysed prior to the material to which

I am going to refer.

The  patient  telephoned  and  said  that  she  could  not  come  for  treatment

because of a pain in her shoulder. On the next day she rang me to say that she

was still not well but expected to see me on the following day. When, on the

third day, she actually came, she was full of complaints. She had been looked

after by her maid, but nobody else had taken an interest in her. She described

to me that at one moment her pain had suddenly increased, together with a

sense of extreme coldness. She had felt an impetuous need for somebody to

come at once and cover up her shoulder, so that it should get warm, and to go

away again as soon as that was done. At that instant it occurred to her that

this must be how she had felt as a baby when she wanted to be looked after

and nobody came.

It was characteristic of the patient’s attitude to people, and threw light on

her earliest relation to the breast, that she desired to be looked after but at the

same time repelled the very object which was to gratify her. The suspicion of

the gift received, together with her impetuous need to be cared for, which

ultimately meant a desire to be fed, expressed her ambivalent attitude towards

the breast. I have referred to infants whose response to frustration is to make

insufficient use of the gratification that the feed, even if delayed, could give

them. I would surmise that though they do not give up their desires for a

gratifying breast, they cannot enjoy it and therefore repel it. The case under

discussion illustrates some of the reasons for this attitude: suspicion of the

gift she wished to receive because the object was already spoilt by envy and

hatred, and at the same time deep resentment about every frustration. We also

have to remember—and this applies to other adults in whom envy is marked

—that  many  disappointing  experiences,  no  doubt  partly  due  to  her  own

attitude, had contributed to her feeling that the desired care would not be

satisfactory.

In the course of this session the patient reported a dream: she was in a

restaurant, seated at a table; however nobody came to serve her. She decided

to join a queue and fetch herself something to eat. In front of her was a

woman who took two or three little cakes and went away with them. The

patient  also  took  two  or  three  little  cakes.  From  her  associations  I  amselecting the following: the woman seemed very determined, and her figure

was reminiscent of mine. There was a sudden doubt about the name of the

cakes (actually petits fours) which she first thought were ‘petit fru’, which

reminded  her  of  ‘petit  frau’  and  thus  of  ‘Frau  Klein’.  The  gist  of  my

interpretations  was  that  her  grievance  about  the  missed  analytic  sessions

related to the unsatisfactory feeds and unhappiness in babyhood. The two

cakes out of the ‘two or three’ stood for the breast which she felt she had

been  twice  deprived  of  by  missing  analytic  sessions.  There  were  ‘two  or

three’ because she was not sure whether she would be able to come on the

third day. The fact that the woman was ‘determined’ and that the patient

followed her example in taking the cakes pointed both at her identification

with the analyst and at projection of her own greed on to her. In the present

context, one aspect of the dream is most relevant. The analyst who went away

with the two or three petits fours stood not only for the breast which was

withheld,  but  also  for  the  breast  which  was  going  to feed  itself.  (Taken

together with other material, the ‘determined’ analyst represented not only a

breast but a person with whose qualities, good and bad, the patient identified

herself.)

To frustration had thus been added envy of the breast. This envy had given

rise to bitter resentment, for the mother had been felt to be selfish and mean,

feeding and loving herself rather than her baby. In the analytic situation I was

suspected of having enjoyed myself during the time when she was absent, or

of having given the time to other patients whom I preferred. The queue which

the patient had decided to join referred to other more favoured rivals.

The response to the analysis of the dream was a striking change in the

emotional situation. The patient now experienced a feeling of happiness and

gratitude more vividly than in previous analytic sessions. She had tears in her

eyes, which was unusual, and said that she felt as if she now had had an
                            36
entirely satisfactory feed. It also occurred to her that her breast-feeding and

her infancy might have been happier than she had assumed. Also, she felt

more hopeful about the future and the result of her analysis. The patient had

more fully realized one part of herself, which was by no means unknown to

her in other connections. She was aware that she was envious and jealous of

various  people  but  had  not  been  able  to  recognize  it  sufficiently  in  the

relation to the analyst because it was too painful to experience that she was

envying and spoiling the analyst as well as the success of the analysis. In this

session,  after  the  interpretations  referred  to,  her  envy  had  lessened;  thecapacity for enjoyment and gratitude had come to the fore, and she was able

to experience the analytic session as a happy feed. This emotional situation

had  to  be  worked  through  over  and  over  again,  both  in  the  positive  and

negative transference, until a more stable result was achieved.

It was by enabling her gradually to bring the split-off parts of her self

together in relation to the analyst, and by her recognizing how envious and

therefore suspicious she was of me, and in the first place of her mother, that

the  experience  of  that  happy  feed  came  about.  This  was  bound  up  with

feelings of gratitude. In the course of the analysis envy was diminished and

feelings of gratitude became much more frequent and lasting.


My second instance is taken from the analysis of a woman patient with strong

depressive  and  schizoid  features.  She  had  suffered  from  depressive  states

over a long period. The analysis proceeded and made some headway, though

the  patient  again  and  again  expressed  her  doubts  about  the  work.  I  had

interpreted the destructive impulses against the analyst, parents, and siblings,

and the analysis succeeded in making her recognize specific phantasies of

destructive attacks on her mother’s body. Such insight was usually followed

by depression but not of an unmanageable nature.

It is remarkable that during the early part of her treatment the depth and

severity of the patient’s difficulties could not be seen. Socially, she gave an

impression of being a pleasant person, though liable to be depressed. Her

reparative tendencies and helpful attitude towards friends were quite genuine.

However, the severity of her illness became apparent at one stage, partly due

to  the  previous  analytic  work  and  partly  to  some  external  experiences.

Several disappointments occurred; but it was an unexpected success in her

professional career that brought more to the fore what I had been analysing

for some years, namely, the intense rivalry with me and a feeling that she

might in her own field become equal, or rather superior, to me. Both she and

I came to recognize the importance of her destructive envy towards me; and,

as  always  when  we  reach  these  deep  strata,  it  appeared  that  whatever

destructive impulses were there, they were felt to be omnipotent and therefore

irrevocable  and  irremediable.  I  had  until  then  analysed  her  oral-sadistic

desires extensively, and that is also how we arrived at her partial realization

of her destructive impulses towards her mother and myself. The analysis had

also dealt with urethral- and anal-sadistic desires, but in this respect I felt that

I had not made much headway and that her understanding of these impulsesand  phantasies  was  more  of  an  intellectual  nature.  During  the  particular

period  I  now  want  to  discuss,  urethral  material  appeared  with  increased

strength.

A  feeling  of  great  elation  about  her  success  soon  developed  and  was

ushered in by a dream which showed the triumph over me and, underlying

this, the destructive envy of me standing for her mother. In the dream she was

up in the air on a magic carpet which supported her and was above the top of

a tree. She was sufficiently high up to look through a window into a room

where a cow was munching something which appeared to be an endless strip

of blanket. In the same night she also had a bit of a dream in which her pants

were wet.

The associations to this dream made it clear that being on top of the tree

meant having outstripped me, for the cow represented myself, at whom she

looked with contempt. Quite early on in her analysis she had had a dream in

which I was represented by an apathetic cow-like woman, whereas she was a

little girl who made a brilliant and successful speech. My interpretations at

that time that she had made the analyst into a contemptible person, whereas

she gave such a successful performance in spite of being so much younger,

had only partly been accepted although she fully realized that the little girl

was herself and the cow-woman was the analyst. This dream led gradually to

a stronger realization of her destructive and envious attacks upon me and her

mother. Ever since, the cowwoman, standing for myself, had been a well-

established feature in the material, and therefore it was quite clear that in the

new dream the cow in the room into which she was looking was the analyst.

She associated that the endless strip of blanket represented an endless stream

of words, and it occurred to her that these were all the words I had ever said

in the analysis and which I now had to swallow. The strip of blanket was a hit

at the woolliness and worthlessness of my interpretations. Here we see the

full devaluation of the primal object, significantly represented by the cow, as

well as the grievance against the mother who had not fed her satisfactorily.

The punishment inflicted on me by having to eat all my words throws light

on the deep distrust and the doubts which had again and again assailed her in

the course of the analysis. It became quite clear after my interpretations that

the ill-treated analyst could not be trusted, and that she could also have no

confidence in the devalued analysis. The patient was surprised and shocked at

her attitude towards me, which prior to the dream she had for a long time

refused to acknowledge in its full impact.The wet pants in the dream and the association to them expressed (among

other  meanings)  poisonous  urethral  attacks  on  the  analyst  which  were  to

destroy her mental powers and change her into the cow-woman. Very soon

she had another dream illustrating this particular point. She was standing at

the bottom of a staircase, looking up at a young couple with whom something

was very wrong. She threw a woollen ball up to them, which she herself

described as ‘good magic’, and her associations showed that bad magic, and

more specifically poison, must have given rise to the need to use good magic

afterwards. The associations to the couple enabled me to interpret a strongly

denied current jealousy situation and led us from the present back to earlier

experiences, ultimately of course to the parents. The destructive and envious

feeling towards the analyst, and in the past towards her mother, turned out to

underlie the jealousy and envy towards the couple in the dream. The fact that

this light ball never reached the couple implied that her reparation did not

succeed; and the anxiety about such failure was an important element in her

depression.

This is only an extract from the material which convincingly proved to the

patient  her  poisonous  envy  of  the  analyst  and  of  her  primal  object.  She

succumbed to depression of a depth such as she had never had before. The

main cause of this depression, which followed on her state of elation, was

that she had been made to realize a completely split-off part of herself which

so far she had been unable to acknowledge. As I said earlier, it was very

difficult to help her to realize her hate and agressiveness. But when we came

to this particular source of destructiveness, her envy, as the impetus towards

damaging and humiliating the analyst, whom in another part of her mind she

highly valued, she could not bear to see herself in that light. She did not

appear to be particularly boastful or conceited, but by means of a variety of

splitting processes and manic defences she had clung to an idealized picture

of herself. As a consequence of the realization, which at that stage of the

analysis  she  could  no  longer  deny,  that  she  felt  bad  and  despicable,  the

idealization  broke  down  and  distrust  of  herself  as  well  as  guilt  about

irrevocable harm done in the past and in the present came up. Her guilt and

depression focused on her feeling of ingratitude towards the analyst who, she

knew,  had  helped  her  and  was  helping  her,  and  towards  whom  she  felt

contempt and hate: ultimately on the ingratitude towards her mother, whom

she unconsciously saw as spoilt and damaged by her envy and destructive

impulses.The analysis of her depression led to an improvement which after some

months was followed by a renewed deep depression. This was caused by the

patient recognizing more fully her virulent analsadistic attacks on the analyst,

and in the past on her family, and confirmed her feeling both of illness and of

badness. It was the first time that she was able to see how strongly urethral-

and  anal-sadistic  features  had  been  split  off.  Each  of  these  had  involved

important parts of the patient’s personality and interests. The steps towards

integration which took place following the analysis of the depression implied

regaining these lost parts, and the necessity to face them was the cause of her

depression.


The next instance is of a woman patient whom I would describe as fairly

normal. She had in the course of time become more and more aware of envy

experienced both towards an older sister and towards her mother. The envy of

the sister had been counteracted by a feeling of strong intellectual superiority

which had a basis in fact, and by an unconscious feeling that the sister was

extremely neurotic. The envy of the mother was counteracted by very strong

feelings of love and appreciation of her goodness.

The patient reported a dream in which she was alone in a railway carriage

with  a  woman,  of  whom  she  could  only  see  the  back,  who  was  leaning

towards  the  door  of  the  compartment  in  great  danger  of  falling  out.  The

patient held her strongly, grasping her by the belt with one hand; with the

other hand she wrote a notice to the effect that a doctor was engaged with a

patient in this compartment and should not be disturbed, and she put up this

notice on the window.

  From the associations to the dream I select the following: the patient had a

strong  feeling  that  the  figure  on  whom  she  kept  a  tight  grip  was  part  of

herself, and a mad one. In the dream she had a conviction that she should not

let her fall out through the door but should keep her in the compartment and

deal with her. The analysis of the dream revealed that the compartment stood

for herself. The associations to the hair, which was only seen from behind,

were to the older sister. Further associations led to recognition of rivalry and

envy in relation to her, going back to the time when the patient was still a

child, while her sister was already being courted. She then spoke of a dress

which her mother wore and which as a child the patient had both admired and

coveted. This dress had very clearly shown the shape of the breasts, and it

became more evident than ever before, though none of this was entirely new,that what she originally envied and spoiled in her phantasy was the mother’s

breast.

This recognition gave rise to increased feelings of guilt, towards both her

sister and her mother, and led to a further revision of her earliest relations.

She arrived at a much more compassionate understanding of the deficiencies

of  this  sister  and  felt  that  she  had  not  loved  her  sufficiently.  She  also

discovered that she had loved her in her early childhood more than she had

remembered.

I interpreted that the patient felt that she had to keep a grip on a mad, split-

off  part  of  herself,  which  was  also  linked  with  the  internalization  of  the

neurotic sister. Following the interpretation of the dream, the patient, who

had reasons for regarding herself as fairly normal, had a feeling of strong

surprise  and  shock.  This  case  illustrates  a  conclusion  that  is  becoming

increasingly familiar, namely, that a residue of paranoid and schizoid feelings

and mechanisms, often split-off from the other parts of the self, exists even in
                37
normal people.

The patient’s feeling that she had to keep a firm hold on that figure implied

that she should also have helped her sister more, prevented her, as it were,

from falling; and this feeling was now re-experienced in connection with her

as an internalized object. The revision of her earliest relations was bound up

with changes in feelings towards her primal introjected objects. The fact that

her sister also represented the mad part of herself turned out to be partly a

projection of her own schizoid and paranoid feelings on to her sister. It was

together with this realization that the split in her ego diminished.


I now wish to refer to a man patient and report a dream which had a strong

effect in making him recognize not only destructive impulses towards the

analyst and towards his mother, but envy as a very specific factor in his

relation to them. Up till then, and with strong feelings of guilt, he had already

recognized in some measure his destructive impulses, but still did not realize

envious and hostile feelings directed against the creativeness of the analyst,

and of his mother in the past. He was aware, though, that he experienced

envy  towards  other  people  and  that,  together  with  a  good  relation  to  his

father, he had also feelings of rivalry and jealousy. The following dream

brought a much stronger insight into his envy of the analyst and threw light

on his early desires to possess all the feminine attributes of his mother.

In the dream the patient had been fishing; he was wondering whether heshould kill the fish he caught in order to eat it, but decided to put it into a

basket and let it die. The basket in which he was carrying the fish was a

woman’s laundry basket. The fish suddenly turned into a beautiful baby and

there was something green about the baby’s clothes. Then he noticed—and at

that  point  he  became  very  concerned—that  the  baby’s  intestines  were

protruding because it had been damaged by the hook which it had swallowed

in its fish state. The association to green was the cover of the books in the

International Psycho-Analytical Library series, and the patient remarked that

the fish in the basket stood for one of my books which he had obviously

stolen. Further associations, however, showed that the fish was not only my

work and my baby but also stood for myself. My swallowing the hook, which

meant having swallowed the bait, expressed his feeling that I had thought

better of him than he deserved and not recognized that there were also very

destructive parts of his self operative in relation to me. Although the patient

still could not fully acknowledge that the way he treated the fish, the baby,

and myself meant destroying me and my work out of envy, he unconsciously

realized  it.  I  also  interpreted  that  the  laundry  basket  in  this  connection

expressed his desire to be a woman, to have babies, and deprive his mother of

them. The effect of this step in integration was a strong onset of depression

due  to  his  having  to  face  the  aggressive  components  of  his  personality.

Although this had been foreshadowed in the earlier part of his analysis, he

now experienced it as a shock and as horror of himself.

The following night the patient dreamed of a pike, to which he associated

whales  and  sharks,  but  he  did  not  feel  in  the  dream  that  the  pike  was  a

dangerous creature. It was old and looked tired and very worn. On it was a

suckerfish, and he at once suggested that the suckerfish does not suck the

pike or the whale but sucks itself on to its surface and is thus protected from

attacks  by  other  fish.  The  patient  recognized  that  this  explanation  was  a

defence against the feeling that he was the suckerfish and I was the old and

worn-out pike and was in that state because I had been so badly treated in the

dream of the previous night, and because he felt I had been sucked dry by

him. This had made me not only into an injured but also into a dangerous

object. In other words, persecutory as well as depressive anxiety had come to

the fore; the pike associated to whales and sharks showed the persecutory

aspects,  whereas  its  old  and  worn-out  appearance  expressed  the  patient’s

sense of guilt about the harm he felt he had been doing and was doing to me.

The strong depression which followed this insight lasted for several weeks,more or less uninterrupted, but did not interfere with the patient’s work and

family  life.  He  described  this  depression  as  different  from  any  he  had

experienced formerly and much deeper. The urge for reparation, expressed in

physical and mental work, was increased by the depression and paved the

way to an overcoming of it. The result of this phase in the analysis was very

noticeable. Even when the depression had lifted after having been worked

through, the patient was convinced that he would never see himself again in

the  way  he  had  done  before,  though  this  no  longer  implied  a  feeling  of

dejection but a greater knowledge of himself as well as greater tolerance of

other  people.  What  the  analysis  had  achieved  was  an  important  step  in

integration, bound up with the patient being capable of facing his psychic

reality. In the course of his analysis, however, there were times when this

attitude could not be maintained. That is to say, as in every case, the working-

through was a gradual process.

  Although his observation and judgement of people had previously been

fairly normal, there was definite improvement as a result of this stage of his

treatment.  A  further  consequence  was  that  memories  of  childhood  and

attitude to siblings came up with greater strength and led back to the early

relation to the mother. During the state of depression I have referred to, he

had, as he recognized, lost to a large extent the pleasure and interest in the

analysis; but he regained them completely when the depression lifted. He

soon brought a dream which he himself saw as mildly belittling the analyst,

but which turned out in the analysis to express strong devaluation. In the

dream he had to deal with a delinquent boy, but was not satisfied with the

way in which he had handled the situation. The boy’s father suggested taking

the  patient  by  car  to  his  destination.  He  noticed  that  he  was  being  taken

further  and  further  away  from  where  he  wanted  to  go.  After  a  while  he

thanked the father and got out of his car; but he was not lost because he kept,

as  usual,  a  general  sense  of  direction.  In  passing,  he  looked  at  a  rather

extraordinary building which, he thought, looked interesting and suitable for

an exhibition but would not be pleasant to live in. His associations to it linked

with some aspect of my appearance. Then he spoke of that building having

two wings and remembered the expression ‘taking somebody under one’s

wing’.  He  recognized  that  the  delinquent  boy  in  whom  he  had  taken  an

interest stood for himself and the continuation of the dream showed why he

was delinquent: when the father, representing the analyst, was taking him

more and more away from his destination, this expressed doubts he made useof partly in order to devalue me; he queried whether I was taking him in the

right direction, whether it was necessary to go so deep, and whether I was

doing harm to him. When he referred to his keeping a sense of direction and

to his not feeling lost, this implied the contrary of the accusations against the

boy’s father (the analyst): he knew that the analysis was very valuable to him

and that it was his envy of me which increased his doubts.

He also understood that the interesting building, which he would not like to

live in, represented the analyst. On the other hand, he felt that by analysing

him  I  had  taken  him  under  my  wing  and  was  protecting  him  against  his

conflicts and anxieties. The doubts and the accusations against me in the

dream were used as devaluation and related not only to envy but also to

despondency  about  the  envy  and  to  his  feelings  of  guilt  because  of  his

ingratitude.

  There was another interpretation of this dream, which was also confirmed

by later ones, and which was based on the fact that in the analytic situation I

often stood for the father, changing quickly into the mother, and at times

representing  both  parents  simultaneously.  This  interpretation  was  that  the

accusation against the father for taking him in the wrong direction was linked

with his early homosexual attraction towards the father. This attraction had

proved  during  the  analysis  to  be  bound  up  with  intense  feelings  of  guilt,

because I was able to show the patient that the strongly split-off envy and

hatred of his mother and her breast had contributed to his turning towards the

father,  and  that  his  homosexual  desires  were  felt  to  be  a  hostile  alliance

against the mother. The accusation that the father took him in the wrong

direction linked with the general feeling we so often find in patients that he

had been seduced into homosexuality. Here we have the projection of the

individual’s own desires on to the parent.

The analysis of his sense of guilt had various effects; he experienced a

deeper love for his parents; he also realized—and these two facts are closely

linked—that  there  had  been  a  compulsive  element  in  his  need  to  make

reparation. An over-strong identification with the object harmed in phantasy

—originally the mother—had impaired his capacity for full enjoyment and

thereby to some extent impoverished his life. It became clear that even in his

earliest relation to his mother, though there was no reason to doubt that he

had been happy in the suckling situation, he had not been able to enjoy it

completely because of his fear of exhausting or depriving the breast. On the

other hand, the interference with his enjoyment gave cause for grievance andincreased his feelings of persecution. This is an instance of the process I

described in a previous section by which in the early stages of development

guilt—in particular guilt about destructive envy of the mother and the analyst

—is liable to change into persecution. Through the analysis of primary envy

and  a  corresponding  lessening  of  depressive  and  persecutory  anxiety,  his

capacity for enjoyment and gratitude at a deep level increased.


I shall now mention the case of another man patient in whom a tendency to

depression also went with a compulsive need for reparation; his ambition,

rivalry,  and  envy,  co-existing  with  many  good  character  traits,  had  been
                                                              38
gradually analysed. Nevertheless, it was some years before the envy of the

breast and of its creativeness and the desire to spoil it, which was very much

split off, were fully experienced by the patient. Early on in his analysis he

had a dream that he described as ‘ludicrous’: he was smoking his pipe and it

was filled with my papers which had been torn out of one of my books. He

first expressed great surprise about this because ‘one does not smoke printed

papers’. I interpreted that this was only a minor feature of the dream; the

main meaning was that he had torn up my work and was destroying it. I also

pointed out that the destruction of my papers was of an anal-sadistic nature,

implied  in  smoking  them.  He  had  denied  these  aggressive  attacks;  for,

together with the strength of his splitting processes, he had a great capacity

for denial. Another aspect of this dream was that persecutory feelings came

up in connection with the analysis. Previous interpretations had been resented

and felt as something which he had to ‘put into his pipe and smoke’. The

analysis of his dream helped the patient to recognize his destructive impulses

against  the  analyst,  and  also  that  they  had  been  stimulated  by  a  jealousy

situation which had arisen on the previous day; it centred on the feeling that

somebody else was more valued by me than himself. But the insight gained

did not lead to an understanding of his envy of the analyst, though it was

interpreted to him. I have no doubt, however, that this paved the way for

material in which destructive impulses and envy gradually became more and

more clear.

A climax was reached at a later stage in his analysis when all these feelings

in relation to the analyst came home to the patient in full force. The patient

reported  a  dream  which  once  again  he  described  as  ‘ludicrous’:  he  was

moving along with great speed, as if in a motor car. He was standing on a

semi-circular contraption which was made either out of wire or some ‘atomicstuff’. As he put it, ‘this kept me going’. Suddenly he noticed that the thing

he was standing on was falling to pieces, and he was much distressed. He

associated to the semi-circular object the breast and the erection of the penis,

implying his potency. His sense of guilt about not making the right use of his

analysis  and  about  his  destructive  impulses  towards  me  entered  into  this

dream. He felt in his depression that I could not be preserved and there were

many links to similar anxieties, partly even conscious, that he had not been

able to protect his mother when his father was away during the war and later

on. His feeling of guilt in relation to his mother and to myself had been

extensively analysed by then. But recently he had come more specifically to

feel that it was his envy that was destructive of me. His feelings of guilt and

unhappiness were all the greater because in one part of his mind he was

grateful to the analyst. The phrase ‘this kept me going’ implied how essential

the analysis was to him and that it was a pre-condition for his potency in the

widest sense, that is to say for the success of all his aspirations.

The realization of his envy and hate towards me came as a shock and was

followed by strong depression and a feeling of unworthiness. I believe that

this kind of shock, which I have now reported in several cases, is the result of

an important step in the healing of the split between parts of the self, and thus

a stage of progress in ego-integration.

A  still  fuller  realization  of  his  ambition  and  envy  came  in  a  session

following the second dream. He spoke of his knowing his limitations and, as

he put it, he did not expect that he would cover himself and his profession

with glory. At this moment, and still under the influence of the dream, he

understood that this way of putting it showed the strength of his ambition and

his  envious  comparison  with  me.  After  an  initial  feeling  of  surprise,  this

recognition carried full conviction.


                                            VI

 


I  have  often  described  my  approach  to  anxiety  as  a  focal  point  of  my

technique.  However,  from  the  very  beginning,  anxieties  cannot  be

encountered without the defences against them. As I pointed out in an earlier

section, the first and foremost function of the ego is to deal with anxiety. I

even think it is likely that the primordial anxiety, engendered by the threat of

the death instinct within, might be the explanation why the ego is brought

into  activity  from  birth  onwards.  The  ego  is  constantly  protecting  itselfagainst the pain and tension to which anxiety gives rise, and therefore makes

use of defences from the beginning of post-natal life. I have for many years

held the view that the greater or lesser capacity of the ego to bear anxiety is a

constitutional factor that strongly influences the development of defences. If

its  capacity  to  cope  with  anxiety  is  inadequate,  the  ego  may  return

regressively to earlier defences, or even be driven to the excessive use of

those  appropriate  to  its  stage.  As  a  result,  persecutory  anxiety  and  the

methods of dealing with it can be so strong that subsequently the working-

through of the depressive position is impaired. In some cases, particularly of

a psychotic type, we are confronted from the beginning with defences of such

an apparently impenetrable nature that it may for some time seem impossible

to analyse them.

I  shall  now  enumerate  some  of  the  defences  against  envy  that  I  have

encountered in the course of my work. Some of the earliest defences often

described before, such as omnipotence, denial, and splitting, are reinforced

by envy. In an early section I have suggested that idealization not only serves

as  a  defence  against  persecution  but  also  against  envy.  In  infants,  if  the

normal  splitting  between  the  good  and  the  bad  object  does  not  initially

succeed, this failure, bound up with excessive envy, often results in splitting

between an omnipotently idealized and a very bad primal object. Strongly

exalting the object and its gifts is an attempt to diminish envy. However, if

envy is very strong, it is likely, sooner or later, to turn against the primal

idealized object and against other people who, in the course of development,

come to stand for it.

As suggested earlier, when the fundamental normal splitting into love and

hate  and  into  the  good  and  the  bad  object  is  not  successful, confusion
                                                  39
between the good and bad object may arise. I believe this to be the basis of

any confusion—whether in severe confusional states or in milder forms such

as indecision—namely a difficulty in coming to conclusions and a disturbed

capacity for clear thinking. But confusion is also used defensively: this can be

seen on all levels of development. By becoming confused as to whether a

substitute for the original figure is good or bad, persecution as well as the

guilt  about  spoiling  and  attacking  the  primary  object  by  envy  is  to  some

extent counteracted. The fight against envy takes on another character when,

together with the depressive position, severe feelings of guilt set in. Even

with people in whom envy is not excessive, the concern for the object, the

identification with it, and the fear of its loss and of the harm done to itscreativeness, is an important factor in the difficulty of working through the

depressive position.

The flight from the mother to other people, who are admired and idealized

in order to avoid hostile feelings towards that most important envied (and

therefore hated) object, the breast, becomes a means of preserving the breast
                                                  40
—which means also preserving the mother. I have often pointed out that the

way in which the turning from the first to the second object, the father, is

carried out is of major importance. If envy and hatred are predominant, these

emotions are to some degree transferred to the father or to siblings, and later

to other people, and thereafter the flight mechanism fails.

  Bound up with the turning away from the primal object is dispersal of the

feeling  towards  it  which,  at  a  later  stage  of  development,  might  lead  to

promiscuity. The widening of object relations in infancy is a normal process.

In so far as the relation to new objects is in some part a substitute for love for

the mother, and not predominantly a flight from the hate of her, the new

objects are helpful, and a compensation for the unavoidable feeling of loss of

the unique first object—a loss arising with the depressive position. Love and

gratitude are then in varying degrees preserved in the new relations, though

these  emotions  are  to  some  extent  cut  off  from  the  feelings  towards  the

mother. However, if the dispersal of emotions is predominantly used as a

defence against envy and hatred, such defences are not a basis for stable

object relations because they are influenced by the persistent hostility to the

first object.

  Defence against envy often takes the form of devaluation of the object. I

have suggested that spoiling and devaluing are inherent in envy. The object

which has been devalued need not be envied any more. This soon applies to

the idealized object, which is devalued and therefore no longer idealized.

How quickly this idealization breaks down depends on the strength of envy.

But devaluation and ingratitude are resorted to at every level of development

as defences against envy, and in some people remain characteristic of their

object relations. I have referred to those patients who, in the transference

situation, after having been decidedly helped by an interpretation, criticize it,

until at last nothing good is left of it. To give an instance: a patient, who

during an analytic session had arrived at a satisfactory solution of an external

problem, started the next session by saying that he felt very annoyed with me:

I  had  roused  great  anxiety  on  the  previous  day  in  making  him  face  this

particular problem. It also appeared that he felt accused and devalued by mebecause, until the problem was analysed, the solution had not occurred to

him. It was only on reflection that he acknowledged that the analysis had

actually been helpful.

A defence particular to more depressive types is devaluation of the self.

Some  people  may  be  unable  to  develop  their  gifts  and  use  them  in  a

successful  way.  In  other  cases  this  attitude  only  comes  up  on  certain

occasions, whenever there is danger of rivalry with an important figure. By

devaluing their own gifts they both deny envy and punish themselves for it.

In analysis it can be seen, however, that devaluation of the self again stirs up

envy of the analyst, who is felt to be superior, particularly because the patient

has strongly devalued himself. Depriving oneself of success has, of course,
                                                                                          41
many determinants, and this applies to all the attitudes I am referring to.

But  I  found  as  one  of  the  deepest  roots  of  this  defence  the  guilt  and

unhappiness about not having been able to preserve the good object because

of envy. People who have rather precariously established their good object

suffer under anxiety lest it be spoilt and lost by competitive and envious

feelings, and therefore have to avoid success and competition.

  Another defence against envy is closely linked with greed. By internalizing

the  breast  so  greedily  that  in  the  infant’s  mind  it  becomes  entirely  his

possession and controlled by him, he feels that all the good that he attributes

to it will be his own. This is used to counteract envy. It is the very greed with

which this internalization is carried out that contains the germ of failure. As I

said  earlier,  a  good  object  which  is  well  established,  and  therefore

assimilated, not only loves the subject but is loved by it. This, I believe, is

characteristic of the relation to a good object, but does not apply, or only in a

minor degree, to an idealized one. By powerful and violent possessiveness,

the  good  object  is  felt  to  turn  into  a  destroyed  persecutor  and  the

consequences of envy are not sufficiently prevented. By contrast, if tolerance

towards a loved person is experienced, it is also projected on to others, who

thus become friendly figures.

A frequent method of defence is to stir up envy in others by one’s own

success, possessions, and a good fortune, thereby reversing the situation in

which envy is experienced. The ineffectiveness of this method derives from

the  persecutory  anxiety  to  which  it  gives  rise.  Envious  people,  and  in

particular the envious internal object, are felt to be the worst persecutors.

Another reason why this defence is precarious derives ultimately from the

depressive position. The desire to make other people, particularly loved ones,envious  and  to  triumph  over  them  gives  rise  to  guilt  and  to  the  fear  of

harming them. The anxiety stirred up impairs the enjoyment of one’s own

possessions and again increases envy.

  There is another, and not infrequent defence, the stifling of feelings of love

and corresponding intensifying of hate, because this is less painful than to

bear the guilt arising from the combination of love, hate, and envy. This may

not express itself as hate but takes on the appearance of indifference. An

allied  defence  is  to  withdraw  from  contact  with  people.  The  need  for

independence, which, as we know, is a normal phenomenon of development,

may be reinforced in order to avoid gratitude or guilt about ingratitude and

envy. In analysis, we find that unconsciously this independence is actually

quite spurious: the individual remains dependent on his internal object.
                        42
  Herbert Rosenfeld has described a particular method of dealing with the

situation when split-off parts of the personality, including the most envious

and  destructive  parts,  come  together,  and  steps  in  integration  occur.  He

showed that ‘acting out’ is used in order to avoid the undoing of the split; in

my view acting out in so far as it is used to avoid integration, becomes a

defence against the anxieties aroused by accepting the envious part of the

self.

I have by no means described all the defences against envy because their

variety  is  infinite.  They  are  closely  interlinked  with  the  defences  against

destructive impulses and persecutory and depressive anxiety. How successful

they  are  depends  on  many  external  and  internal  factors.  As  has  been

mentioned, when envy is strong, and therefore likely to reappear in all object

relations, defences against it seem to be precarious; those against destructive

impulses not dominated by envy appear to be much more effective, though

they might imply inhibitions and limitations of the personality.

  When schizoid and paranoid features are in the ascendant, defences against

envy cannot be successful, for the attacks on the subject lead to an increased

feeling of persecution that can only be dealt with by renewed attacks, that is

to say, by reinforcing the destructive impulses. In this way is set up a vicious

circle that impairs the ability to counteract envy. This applies particularly to

schizophrenic cases and explains to some extent the difficulties in the way of
            43
curing them.

The outcome is more favourable when, in some measure, a relation to a

good object exists, for this also means that the depressive position has been

partially worked through. The experience of depression and guilt implies thewish to spare the loved object and to restrict envy.

The  defences  I  have  enumerated,  and  many  others,  form  part  of  the

negative  therapeutic  reaction  because  they  are  a  powerful  obstacle  to  the

capacity to take in what the analyst has to give. I have referred earlier to some

of  the  forms  taken  by  envy  of  the  analyst.  When  the  patient  is  able  to

experience gratitude—and this means that at such times he is less envious—

he is in a much better position to benefit by the analysis and to consolidate

the  gain  already  achieved.  In  other  words,  the  more  depressive  features

predominate over schizoid and paranoid features, the better are the prospects

of the cure.

The urge to make reparation and the need to help the envied object are also

very  important  means  of  counteracting  envy.  Ultimately  this  involves

counteracting destructive impulses by mobilizing feelings of love.


Since  I  have  referred  several  times  to  confusion,  it  may  be  useful  to

summarize some of the important states of confusion as they normally arise

at different stages of development and in various connections. I have often
            44
pointed out that from the beginning of post-natal life urethral and anal (and

even genital) libidinal and aggressive desires are operative—though under the

dominance of the oral—and that within a few months the relation to part-

objects overlaps with that to whole people.

I  have  already  discussed  those  factors—in  particular  strong  paranoid-

schizoid features and excessive envy—which from the beginning blur the

distinction, and impair successful splitting, between the good and bad breast;

thus confusion in the infant is reinforced. I believe it essential in analysis to

trace  all  states  of  confusion  in  our  patients,  even  the  most  severe  in

schizophrenia, to this early inability to distinguish between the good and bad

primal  object,  though  the  defensive  use  of  confusion  against  envy  and

destructive impulses must also be considered.

To enumerate a few consequences of this early difficulty: the premature

onset  of  guilt,  the  infant’s  incapacity  to  experience  separately  guilt  and

persecution, and the resulting increase in persecutory anxiety, have already

been mentioned above; I have also drawn attention to the importance of the

confusion between the parents resulting from an intensification by envy of

the combined parent figure. I linked the premature onset of genitality with the

flight from orality leading to an increased confusion between oral, anal, and

genital trends and phantasies.  Other  factors  that  make  a  very  early  contribution  to  confusion  and

perplexed states of mind are projective and introjective identification because

they may temporarily have the effect of blurring the distinction between the

self and objects, and between the internal and external world. Such confusion

interferes with the recognition of psychic reality, which contributes to the

understanding and realistic perception of external reality. Distrust and fear of

taking in mental food goes back to the distrust of what the envied and spoiled

breast offered. If, primarily, the good food is confused with the bad, later the

ability for clear thinking and for developing standards of values is impaired.

All these disturbances, which in my view are also bound up with defence

against anxiety and guilt, and which are aroused by hate and envy, express

themselves in inhibitions in learning and development of the intellect. I am

leaving out of account here the various other factors that contribute to such

difficulties.

The  states  of  confusion  that  I  have  briefly  summarized,  to  which  the

intense  conflict  between  destructive  (hate)  and  integrating  (love)  trends

contributes, are up to a point normal. It is with growing integration and by

working  successfully  through  the  depressive  position  which  includes  a

greater  clarification  of  internal  reality,  that  the  perception  of  the  external

world becomes more realistic—a result which is normally well on the way in
                                                                                  45
the second half of the first year and the beginning of the second year. These

changes are essentially bound up with a decrease in projective identification,

which forms part of paranoid-schizoid mechanisms and anxieties.


                                          VII

 


I shall now attempt a brief description of the difficulties that characterize

progress during an analysis. To enable the patient to face primary envy and

hate  only  becomes  possible  after  long  and  painstaking  work.  Although

feelings of competition and envy are familiar to most people, their deepest

and  earliest  implications,  experienced  in  the  transference  situation,  are

extremely  painful,  and  therefore  difficult,  for  the  patient  to  accept.  The

resistance we find in both male and female cases in analysing their Oedipus

jealousy and hostility, though very strong, is not as intense as that which we

encounter in analysing the envy and hate of the breast. To help a patient to go

through these deep conflicts and sufferings is the most effective means of

furthering his stability and integration, because it enables him, by means ofthe transference, to establish more securely his good object and his love for it

and to gain some confidence in himself. Needless to say, the analysis of this

earliest relation involves the exploration of his later ones, and enables the

analyst to understand more fully the patient’s adult personality.

In  the  course  of  the  analysis  we  have  to  be  prepared  to  encounter

fluctuations  between  improvement  and  setbacks.  This  may  show  in  many

ways. For instance, the patient has experienced gratitude and appreciation for

the analyst’s skill. This very skill, the cause for admiration, soon gives way to

envy; envy may be counteracted by pride in having a good analyst. If pride

stirs up possessiveness, there may by a revival of infantile greed, which could

be expressed in the following terms: I have everything I want; I have the

good mother all to myself. Such a greedy and controlling attitude is liable to

spoil the relation to the good object and gives rise to guilt, which may soon

lead to another defence: for instance, I do not want to injure the analyst-

mother, I would rather refrain from accepting her gifts. In this situation the

early guilt about rejecting milk and love offered by the mother is revived,

because the analyst’s help is not accepted. The patient also experiences guilt

because he is depriving himself (the good part of his self) of improvement

and help, and he reproaches himself for putting too great a burden on the

analyst  by  not  sufficiently  co-operating;  in  this  way  he  feels  that  he  is

exploiting the analyst. Such attitudes alternate with the persecutory anxiety of

being robbed of his defences and emotions, of his thoughts and all his ideals.

In states of great anxiety there seems to exist in the patient’s mind no other

alternative but that he is robbing or being robbed.

  Defences, as I have suggested, remain operative even when more insight

comes about. Every step nearer to integration, and the anxiety stirred up by

this, may lead to early defences appearing with greater strength, and even to

new ones. We must also expect that primary envy will come up again and

again,  and  we  are  therefore  confronted  with  repeated  fluctuations  in  the

emotional  situation.  For  instance,  when  the  patient  feels  despicable,  and

therefore  inferior  to  the  analyst,  to  whom  at  that  moment  he  attributes

goodness and patience, very soon envy of the analyst reappears. His own

unhappiness and the pain and conflicts he goes through are contrasted with

what he feels to be the analyst’s peace of mind—actually his sanity—and this

is a particular cause for envy.

The  incapacity  of  the  patient  to  accept  with  gratitude  an  interpretation

which in some parts of his mind he recognizes as helpful is one aspect of thenegative therapeutic reaction. Under the same heading there are many other

difficulties, a few of which I shall now mention. We must be prepared to find

that whenever the patient makes progress in integration, that is to say, when

the envious, hating and hated part of the personality has come closer together

with other parts of the self, intense anxieties might come to the fore, and

increase the patient’s distrust in his loving impulses. The stifling of love,

which I have described as a manic defence during the depressive position, is

rooted in the danger threatening from destructive impulses and persecutory

anxiety. In an adult, dependence on a loved person revives the helplessness of

the infant and is felt to be humiliating. But there is more to it than infantile

helplessness: the child can be excessively dependent on the mother, if his

anxiety  lest  his  destructive  impulses  change  her  into  a  persecutory  or

damaged object is too great; and this over-dependence can be revived in the

transference situation. The anxiety lest, if one gives way to love, greed should

destroy the object, is another cause for stifling loving impulses. There is also

the fear that love will lead to too much responsibility and that the object will

make  too  many  demands.  The  unconscious  knowledge  that  hate  and

destructive impulses are operative may make the patient feel more sincere in

not admitting love either to himself or others.

  Since no anxiety can arise without the ego using whatever defences it can

produce,  splitting  processes  play  an  important  rôle  as  methods  against

experiencing  persecutory  and  depressive  anxiety.  When  we  interpret  such

splitting processes, the patient becomes more conscious of a part of himself

of which, because he feels it to be the representative of destructive impulses,

he is terrified. With patients in whom early splitting processes (always bound

up  with  schizoid  and  paranoid  features)  are  less  dominant, repression  of

impulses is stronger, and therefore the clinical picture is different. That is to

say, we deal then with the more neurotic type of patient, who has succeeded

to some extent in overcoming early splitting, and in whom repression has

become the main defence against emotional disturbances.

  Another difficulty impeding the analysis for long periods is the tenacity

with which the patient clings to a strong positive transference; this may to

some extent be deceptive because it is based on idealization and covers up the

hate and envy which are split off. It is characteristic that oral anxieties are

then often avoided and genital elements are in the foreground.

I have tried to show in various connections that destructive impulses, the

expression of the death instinct, are first of all felt to be directed against theego.  Confronted  with  them,  even  though  it  has  happened  gradually,  the

patient feels exposed to destruction while he is in the process of accepting

these impulses as aspects of himself and integrating them. That is to say, the

patient at certain times faces several great dangers as a result of integration:

his ego may be overwhelmed; the ideal part of his self may be lost when the

existence of the split-off, destructive, and hated part of the personality is

recognized; the analyst may become hostile and retaliate for the patient’s

destructive impulses which are no longer repressed, thus also becoming a

dangerous super-ego figure; the analyst, in so far as he stands for a good

object,  is  threatened  with  destruction.  The  danger  to  the  analyst,  which

contributes to the strong resistance we meet in attempting to undo splitting

and  to  bring  about  steps  in  integration,  becomes  understandable  if  we

remember that the infant feels his primal object to be the source of goodness

and life, and therefore irreplaceable. His anxiety lest he has destroyed it is the

cause of major emotional difficulties and enters prominently into the conflicts

arising  in  the  depressive  position.  The  feeling  of  guilt  resulting  from  the

realization of destructive envy may lead temporarily to an inhibition of the

patient’s capacities.

We  encounter  a  very  different  situation  when,  as  a  defence  against

integration, omnipotent and even megalomanic phantasies increase. This can

be  a  critical  stage  because  the  patient  may  take  refuge  in  reinforcing  his

hostile  attitudes  and  projections.  Thus  he  thinks  himself  superior  to  the

analyst, whom he accuses of undervaluing him, and whom in this way he

finds  some  justification  for  hating.  He  takes  credit  for  everything  so  far

achieved in the analysis. To go back to the early situation, as an infant, the

patient may have had phantasies of being more powerful than his parents, and

even that he or she created, as it were, the mother or gave birth to her and

possessed  the  mother’s  breast.  Accordingly  it  would  be  the  mother  who

robbed  the  patient  of  the  breast  and  not  the  patient  who  robbed  her.

Projection, omnipotence, and persecution are then at their highest. Some of

these phantasies are operative whenever feelings of priority in scientific or

other work are very strong. There are other factors as well which might stir

up the craving for priority such as ambition from various sources, and in

particular the feeling of guilt, basically bound up with envy and destruction

of the primary object or its later substitutes. For such guilt about robbing the

primal object may lead to denial, which takes the form of claiming complete

originality and thereby excluding the possibility of having taken or acceptedanything from the object.

In the last paragraph I stressed the difficulties arising at certain points in

the analysis of patients whose envy is constitutionally strong. However, the

analysis of those deep and severe disturbances is in many cases a safeguard

against potential danger of psychosis resulting from excessively envious and

omnipotent attitudes. But it is essential not to attempt to hurry these steps in

integration. For if the realization of the division in his personality were to
                                                                                          46
come suddenly, the patient would have great difficulties in coping with it.

The more strongly had the envious and destructive impulses been split off,

the more dangerous the patient feels them to be when he becomes conscious

of them. In analysis we should make our way slowly and gradually towards

the painful insight into the divisions in the patient’s self. This means that the

destructive  sides  are  again  and  again  split  off  and  regained,  until  greater

integration comes about. As a result, the feeling of responsibility becomes

stronger,  and  guilt  and  depression  are  more  fully  experienced.  When  this

happens,  the  ego  is  strengthened,  omnipotence  of  destructive  impulses  is

diminished,  together  with  envy,  and  the  capacity  for  love  and  gratitude,

stifled in the course of splitting processes, is released. Therefore the split-off

aspects gradually become more acceptable and the patient is increasingly able

to repress destructive impulses towards loved objects instead of splitting the

self. This implies that the projection on the analyst, which turns him into a

dangerous and retaliating figure, also diminishes, and that the analyst in turn

finds it easier to help the patient towards further integration. That is to say,

the negative therapeutic reaction is losing in strength.

It  makes  great  demands  on  the  analyst  and  on  the  patient  to  analyse

splitting processes and the underlying hate and envy in both the positive and

negative transference. One consequence of this difficulty is the tendency of

some analysts to reinforce the positive and avoid the negative transference,

and to attempt to strengthen feelings of love by taking the rôle of the good

object which the patient had not been able to establish securely in the past.

This procedure differs essentially from the technique which, by helping the

patient  to  achieve  a  better  integration  of  his  self,  aims  at  a  mitigation  of

hatred by love. My observations have demonstrated to me that techniques

based on reassurance are seldom successful; in particular their results are not

lasting.  There  is  indeed  an  ingrained  need  for  reassurance  in  everybody,

which goes back to the earliest relation to the mother. The infant expects her

to  attend  not  only  to  all  his  needs,  but  also  craves  for  signs  of  her  lovewhenever  he  experiences  anxiety.  This  longing  for  reassurance  is  a  vital

factor in the analytic situation and we must not underrate its importance in

our patients, adults and children alike. We find that though their conscious,

and often unconscious, purpose is to be analysed, the patient’s strong desire

to receive evidence of love and appreciation from the analyst, and thus to be

reassured,  is  never  completely  given  up.  Even  the  patient’s  co-operation,

which allows for an analysis of very deep layers of the mind, of destructive

impulses, and of persecutory anxiety, may up to a point be influenced by the

urge to satisfy the analyst and to be loved by him. The analyst who is aware

of  this  will  analyse  the  infantile  roots  of  such  wishes;  otherwise,  in

identification with his patient, the early need for reassurance may strongly

influence  his  counter-transference  and  therefore  his  technique.  This

identification may also easily tempt the analyst to take the mother’s place and

give  in  to  the  urge  immediately  to  alleviate  his  child’s  (the  patient’s)

anxieties.

One of the difficulties of bringing about steps in integration arises when

the patient says: ‘I can understand what you are telling me but I do not feel

it.’ We are aware that we are in fact referring to a part of the personality

which, to all intents and purposes, is not sufficiently accessible either to the

patient  or  to  the  analyst  at  that  time.  Our  attempts  to  help  the  patient  to

integrate  only  carry  conviction  if  we  can  show  him,  in  the  material  both

present and past, how and why he is again and again splitting off parts of his

self. Such evidence is often also provided by a dream preceding the session,

and it may be gathered from the whole context of the analytic situation. If an

interpretation of splitting is sufficiently supported in the way I described, it

might be confirmed in the next session by the patient reporting a bit of a

dream  or  bringing  some  more  material.  The  cumulative  result  of  such

interpretations  gradually  enables  the  patient  to  make  some  progress  in

integration and insight.

The  anxiety  that  prevents  integration  has  to  be  fully  understood  and

interpreted in the transference situation. I have earlier pointed out the threat,

both to the self and to the analyst, arising in the patient’s mind if split-off

parts of the self are regained in the analysis. In dealing with this anxiety one

should not underrate the loving impulses when they can be detected in the

material. For it is these which in the end enable the patient to mitigate his

hate and envy.

  However  much  the  patient  may  at  a  given  moment  feel  that  theinterpretation  does  not  strike  home,  this  may  often  be  an  expression  of

resistance.  If  we  have  from  the  beginning  of  the  analysis  paid  sufficient

attention to the ever-repeated attempts to split off destructive parts of the

personality, in particular hate and envy, we have in fact, at least in most

cases, enabled the patient to make some steps towards integration. It is only

after painstaking, careful, and consistent work on the part of the analyst that

we can expect a more stable integration in the patient.

I shall now illustrate this phase in the analysis by two dreams.

The second male patient I referred to, at a later stage of his analysis, when

greater integration and improvement in various ways had occurred, reported

the  following  dream,  which  shows  the  fluctuations  in  the  process  of

integration caused by the pain of depressive feelings. He was in an upstairs

flat  and  ‘X’,  a  friend  of  a  friend  of  his,  was  calling  him  from  the  street

suggesting a walk together. The patient did not join ‘X’, because a black dog

in the flat might get out and be run over. He stroked the dog. When he looked

out of the window, he found that ‘X’ had ‘receded’.

  Some of the associations brought the flat into connection with mine and

the black dog with my black cat, which he described as ‘she’. The patient

never liked ‘X’, who was an old fellow-student of his. He described him as

suave and insincere; ‘X’ also often borrowed money (though he returned it

later) and did so in a manner which suggested that he had every right to ask

for such favours. ‘X’ turned out, however, to be very good in his profession.

The  patient  recognized  that  ‘a  friend  of  his  friend’  was  one  aspect  of

himself.  The  gist  of  my  interpretations  was  that  he  had  come  closer  to

realizing an unpleasant and frightening part of his personality; the danger to

the dog-cat—the analyst—was that she would be run over (that is to say,

injured) by ‘X’. When ‘X’ had been asking him to join him for a walk, this

symbolized  a  step  towards  integration.  At  this  stage  a  hopeful  element

entered into the dream by the association that ‘X’, in spite of his faults, had

turned out to be good in his profession. It is also characteristic of progress

that the side of himself to which he came closer in this dream was not so

destructive and envious as in previous material.

The patient’s concern with the safety of the dog-cat expressed the wish to

protect the analyst against his own hostile and greedy tendencies, represented

by ‘X’, and led to a temporary widening of the split that had already partly

been healed. When, however, ‘X’, the rejected part of himself, ‘receded’, this

showed that he had not altogether gone and that the process of integrationwas only temporarily disturbed. The mood of the patient at that time was

characterized  by  depression;  guilt  towards  the  analyst  and  the  wish  to

preserve  her  were  prominent.  In  this  context,  the  fear  of  integration  was

caused by the feeling that the analyst must be protected from the patient’s

repressed greedy and dangerous impulses. I had no doubt that he was still

splitting  off  a  part  of  his  personality,  but  the repression  of  greedy  and

destructive  impulses  had  become  more  noticeable.  The  interpretation,

therefore, had to deal both with splitting and with repression.

The first man patient also brought at a later stage of his analysis a dream

that showed rather more advanced steps in integration. He dreamed that he

had  a  delinquent  brother  who  committed  a  serious  crime.  He  had  been

received  in  a  house  and  had  killed  the  inhabitants  and  robbed  them.  The

patient was deeply disturbed by this but felt that he must be loyal to his

brother and save him. They fled together and found themselves in a boat.

Here the patient associated Les Misérables by Victor Hugo, and mentioned

Javert who had persecuted an innocent person all his life and even followed

him right into the sewers of Paris where he was hiding. But Javert ended by

committing suicide because he had recognized that he had spent his whole

life in the wrong way.

The patient then went on with his account of the dream. He and his brother

were arrested by a policeman who looked kindly at him, and so the patient

hoped he would not be executed after all; he seemed to leave his brother to

his fate.

The patient realized at once that the delinquent brother was part of himself.

He  had  recently  used  the  expression  ‘delinquent’  referring  to  very  minor

matters in his own conduct. We shall also remember here that in a previous

dream he had referred to a delinquent boy with whom he could not deal.

The step in integration to which I am referring was shown by the patient

taking the responsibility for the delinquent brother and by being with him in

‘the same boat’. I interpreted the crime of murdering and robbing the people

who had kindly received him as his phantasied attacks on the analyst, and

referred to his often-expressed anxiety lest his greedy wish to get as much out

of me as possible would harm me. I linked this with the early guilt in relation

to his mother. The kindly policeman stood for the analyst who would not

judge him harshly and would help him to get rid of the bad part of himself. I

pointed out, moreover, that in the process of integration the use of splitting—

both of the self and of the object—had reappeared. This was shown by theanalyst figuring in a double rôle: as the kindly policeman and the persecutory

Javert, who in the end took his own life, and on whom the patient’s ‘badness’

was also projected. Although the patient had understood his responsibility for

the ‘delinquent’ part of his personality, he was still splitting his self. For he

was represented by the ‘innocent’ man, whereas the sewers into which he was

pursued meant the depths of his anal and oral destructiveness.

The recurrence of splitting was caused not only by persecutory but also by

depressive anxiety, for the patient felt that he could not confront the analyst

(when she appeared in a kindly rôle) with the bad part of himself without

harming her. This was one of the reasons why he resorted to uniting with the

policeman against the bad part of himself, which at that moment he wished to

annihilate.


Freud early accepted that some individual variations in development are due

to constitutional factors: for instance, he expressed in ‘Character and Anal

Erotism’  (1908)  the  view  that  strong  anal  erotism  is  in  many  people
              47
constitutional. Abraham discovered an innate element in the strength of oral

impulses, which he connected with the aetiology of manic-depressive illness.

He  said  that  ‘.  .  .  what  really  is  constitutional  and  inherited  is  an  over-

accentuation of oral erotism in the same way that in certain families anal
                                                                                48
erotism seems to be a preponderant factor from the very beginning.’

I have previously suggested that greed, hate, and persecutory anxieties in

relation to the primal object, the mother’s breast, have an innate basis. In this

discussion, I have added that envy too, as a powerful expression of oral- and

anal-sadistic  impulses,  is  constitutional.  The  variations  in  the  intensity  of

these constitutional factors are in my view linked with the preponderance of

the one or other instinct in the fusion of the life and death instincts postulated

by Freud. I believe there is a connection between the preponderance of the

one or other instinct and the strength or weakness of the ego. I have often

referred to the strength of the ego in relation to the anxieties it has to cope

with as a constitutional factor. Difficulties in bearing anxiety, tension, and

frustration are an expression of an ego which, from the beginning of post-

natal  life,  is  weak  in  proportion  to  the  intense  destructive  impulses  and

persecutory  feelings  it  experiences.  These  strong  anxieties  imposed  on  a

weak ego lead to an excessive use of defences such as denial, splitting, and

omnipotence,  which  to  some  extent  are  always  characteristic  of  earliest

development. In keeping with my thesis, I would add that a constitutionallystrong ego does not easily become a prey to envy and is more capable of

effecting  the  splitting  between  good  and  bad  which  I  assume  to  be  a

precondition for establishing the good object. The ego is then less liable to

those splitting processes which lead to fragmentation and are part of marked

paranoid-schizoid features.

  Another  factor  that  influences  development  from  the  beginning  is  the

variety of external experiences through which the infant goes. This in some

measure explains the development of his early anxieties, which would be

particularly  great  in  a  baby  who  had  a  difficult  birth  and  unsatisfactory

feeding. My accumulated observations, however, have convinced me that the

impact  of  these  external  experiences  is  in  proportion  to  the  constitutional

strength  of  the  innate  destructive  impulses  and  the  ensuing  paranoid

anxieties. Many infants have not had very unfavourable experiences and yet

suffer from serious difficulties in feeding and sleeping, and we can see in

them every sign of great anxiety for which external circumstances do not

account sufficiently.

It is also well known that some infants are exposed to great deprivations

and unfavourable circumstances, and yet do not develop excessive anxieties,

which  would  suggest  that  their  paranoid  and  envious  traits  are  not

predominant; this is often confirmed by their later history.

I have had many opportunities in my analytic work to trace the origin of

character formation to variations in innate factors. There is much more to be

learnt  about  pre-natal  influences;  but  even  greater  knowledge  about  them

would not detract from the importance of inborn elements in determining the

strength of the ego and of instinctual drives.

The  existence  of  the  innate  factors  referred  to  above  points  to  the

limitations  of  psycho-analytic  therapy.  While  I  fully  realize  this,  my

experience has taught me that nevertheless we are able in a number of cases

to produce fundamental and positive changes, even where the constitutional

basis was unfavourable.


                                      CONCLUSION

 


For  many  years  the  envy  of  the  feeding  breast  as  a  factor  which  adds

intensity to the attacks on the primal object has been part of my analyses. It

is, however, only more recently that I have laid particular emphasis on the

spoiling and destructive quality of envy in so far as it interferes with thebuilding  up  of  a  secure  relation  to  the  good  external  and  internal  object,

undermines the sense of gratitude, and in many ways blurs the distinction

between good and bad.

In all the cases I have described, the relation to the analyst as an internal

object was of fundamental importance. This I found to be true generally.

When anxiety about envy and its consequences reaches a climax, the patient

in varying degrees feels persecuted by the analyst as an internal grudging and

envious object, disturbing his work, life, and activities. When this occurs, the

good object is felt to be lost, and with it inner security. My observations have

shown me that when, at any stage in life, the relation to the good object is

seriously disturbed—a disturbance in which envy plays a prominent rôle—

not  only  are  inner  security  and  peace  interfered  with  but  character

deterioration sets in. The prevalence of internal persecutory objects reinforces

destructive  impulses;  whereas,  if  the  good  object  is  well  established,  the

identification with it strengthens the capacity for love, constructive impulses,

and gratitude. This is in keeping with the hypothesis I put forward at the

beginning of this contribution: if the good object is deeply rooted, temporary

disturbances  may  be  withstood  and  the  foundation  of  mental  health,  of

character formation, and of successful ego development is laid.

I  have  described  in  other  connections  the  importance  of  the  earliest

internalized  persecutory  object—the  retaliating,  devouring,  and  poisonous

breast. I would now assume that the projection of the infant’s envy lends a

particular  complexion  to  his  anxiety  about  the  primal  and  later  internal

persecution.  The  ‘envious  super-ego’  is  felt  to  disturb  or  annihilate  all

attempts at reparation and creativeness. It is also felt to make constant and

exorbitant  demands  on  the  individual’s  gratitude.  For  to  persecution  are

added the guilt feelings that the persecutory internal objects are the result of

the individual’s own envious and destructive impulses which have primarily

spoilt the good object. The need for punishment, which finds satisfaction by

the increased devaluation of the self, leads to a vicious circle.

As we all know, the ultimate aim of psycho-analysis is the integration of

the patient’s personality. Freud’s conclusion that where id was, ego shall be,

is a pointer in that direction. Splitting processes arise in the earliest stages of

development.  If  they  are  excessive,  they  form  an  integral  part  of  severe

paranoid and schizoid features which may be the basis of schizophrenia. In

normal  development,  these  schizoid  and  paranoid  trends  (the  paranoid-

schizoid position) are, to a large extent, overcome during the period which ischaracterized  by  the  depressive  position,  and  integration  develops

successfully. The important steps towards integration introduced during that

stage  prepare  the  capacity  of  the  ego  for  repression  which  I  believe

increasingly operates in the second year of life.

In ‘The Emotional Life of the Infant’ I suggested that the young child is

able to deal with emotional difficulties by repression if splitting processes in

the early stages have not been too powerful, and therefore a consolidation of

the  conscious  and  unconscious  parts  of  the  mind  has  come  about.  In  the

earliest stages splitting and other defence mechanisms are always paramount.

Already, in Inhibition, Symptoms and Anxiety, Freud had suggested that there

may be methods of defence earlier than repression. In the present work I have

not dealt with the vital significance of repression for normal development,

because the effect of primary envy and its close connection with splitting

processes have been my main subject matter.

As regards technique, I have attempted to show that by analysing over and

over again the anxieties and defences bound up with envy and destructive

impulses,  progress  in  integration  can  be  achieved.  I  have  always  been

convinced of the importance of Freud’s finding that ‘working-through’ is one

of the main tasks of the analytic procedure, and my experience in dealing

with splitting processes and tracing them back to their origin has made this

conviction even stronger. The deeper and more complex the difficulties we

are analysing, the greater is the resistance we are likely to encounter, and this

has a bearing on the necessity to give adequate scope to ‘working-through’.

This necessity arises particularly with regard to envy of the primary object.

Patients  might  recognize  their  envy,  jealousy,  and  competitive  attitudes

towards  other  people,  even  the  wish  to  harm  their  faculties,  but  only  the

analyst’s perseverance in analysing these hostile feelings in the transference,

and thereby enabling the patient to re-experience them in his earliest relation,

can lead to the splitting within the self being diminished.

My experience has shown me that when the analysis of these fundamental

impulses, phantasies, and emotions fails, this is partly because the pain and

depressive anxiety made manifest, in some people outweigh the desire for

truth and, ultimately, the desire to be helped. I believe that a patient’s co-

operation has to be based on a strong determination to discover the truth

about himself if he is to accept and assimilate the analyst’s interpretations

relating to these early layers of the mind. For these interpretations, if deep

enough, mobilize a part of the self that is felt as an enemy to the ego as wellas to the loved object, and has, therefore, been split off and annihilated. I

have found that the anxieties aroused by interpretations of hate and envy

toward the primal object, and the feeling of persecution by the analyst whose

work stirs up those emotions, are more painful than any other material we

interpret.

  These  difficulties  apply  particularly  to  patients  with  strong  paranoid

anxieties and schizoid mechanisms, for they are less able to experience, side

by side with the persecutory anxiety stirred up by interpretations, a positive

transference  and  trust  in  the  analyst—ultimately  they  are  less  capable  of

maintaining feelings of love. At the present stage of our knowledge, I am

inclined to the view that these are the patients, not necessarily of a manifest

psychotic type, with whom success is limited, or may not be achieved.

  When the analysis can be carried to these depths, envy and the fear of envy

diminish,  leading  to  a  greater  trust  in  constructive  and  reparative  forces,

actually in the capacity for love. The result is also greater tolerance towards

one’s  own  limitations,  as  well  as  improved  object  relations  and  a  clearer

perception of internal and external reality.

The insight gained in the process of integration makes it possible, in the

course of the analysis, for the patient to recognize that there are potentially

dangerous  parts  of  his  self.  But  when  love  can  be  sufficiently  brought

together with the split-off hate and envy, these emotions become bearable

and  diminish,  because  they  are  mitigated  by  love.  The  various  anxiety

contents mentioned earlier are also lessened, such as the danger of being

overwhelmed by a split-off, destructive part of the self. This danger seems all

the greater because, as a consequence of excessive early omnipotence, the

harm done in phantasy appears irrevocable. The anxiety lest hostile feelings

destroy  the  loved  objects  diminishes  when  these  feelings  become  better

known and are integrated in the personality. The pain the patient experiences

during the analysis is also gradually lessened by improvements bound up

with progress in integration, such as regaining some intiative, becoming able

to make decisions he was previously unable to reach and, in general, using

his gifts more freely. This is linked up with a lessening inhibition of his

capacity  to  make  reparation.  His  power  of  enjoyment  increases  in  many

ways, and hope reappears, though it may still alternate with depression. I

have found that creativeness grows in proportion to being able to establish

the good object more securely, which in successful cases is the result of the

analysis of envy and destructiveness.  Similarly, as in infancy, repeated happy experiences of being fed and loved

are  instrumental  in  establishing  securely  the  good  object,  so  during  an

analysis  repeated  experiences  of  the  effectiveness  and  truth  of  the

interpretations  given  lead  to  the  analyst—and  retrospectively  the  primal

object—being built up as good figures.

All these changes amount to an enrichment of the personality. Together

with hate, envy, and destructiveness, other important parts of the self which

had  been  lost  are  regained  in  the  course  of  the  analysis.  There  is  also

considerable relief in feeling more of a whole person, in gaining control over

one’s  self,  and  in  a  deeper  sense  of  security  in  relation  to  the  world  in

general. In ‘Some Schizoid Mechanisms’ I have suggested that the sufferings

of  the  schizophrenic,  due  to  his  feelings  of  being  split  in  bits,  are  most

intense. These sufferings are underrated because his anxieties appear in a

different form from those of the neurotic. Even when we are not dealing with

psychotics, but are analysing people whose integration had been disturbed

and who feel uncertain about both themselves and others, similar anxieties

are  experienced  and  are  relieved  when  fuller  integration  is  achieved.

Complete and permanent integration is in my view never possible. For under

strain from external or internal sources, even well integrated people may be

driven  to  stronger  splitting  processes,  even  though  this  may  be  a  passing

phase.

In the paper, ‘On Identification’, I suggested how important it is for the

development  of  mental  health  and  personality  that  in  the  early  splitting

processes fragmentation should not dominate. I wrote there: ‘The feeling of

containing  an  unharmed  nipple  and  breast—although  co-existing  with

phantasies  of  a  breast  devoured  and  therefore  in  bits—has  the  effect  that

splitting and projecting are not predominantly related to fragmented parts of

the personality but to more coherent parts of the self. This implies that the

ego is not exposed to a fatal weakening by dispersal and for this reason is

more capable of repeatedly undoing splitting and achieving integration and
                                        49
synthesis in its relation to objects.’

I believe this capacity to regain the split-off parts of the personality to be a

precondition for normal development. This implies that splitting is to some

extent  overcome  during  the  depressive  position  and  that  repression  of

impulses and phantasies gradually takes its place.

  Character analysis has always been an important and very difficult part of
                  50
analytic therapy. It is, I believe, through tracing back certain aspects ofcharacter formation to the early processes I have described that we can, in a

number of cases, effect far-reaching changes in character and personality.

We can consider from another angle the aspects of technique which I have

tried to convey here. From the beginning, all emotions attach themselves to

the  first  object.  If  destructive  impulses,  envy,  and  paranoid  anxiety  are

excessive, the infant grossly distorts and magnifies every frustration from

outer  sources,  and  the  mother’s  breast  turns  externally  and  internally

predominantly  into  a  persecutory  object.  Then  even  actual  gratifications

cannot sufficiently counteract persecutory anxiety. In taking the analysis back

to earliest infancy, we enable the patient to revive fundamental situations—a

revival which I have often spoken of as ‘memories in feeling’. In the course

of  this  revival,  it  becomes  possible  for  the  patient  to  develop  a  different

attitude  to  his  early  frustrations.  There  is  no  doubt  that  if  the  infant  was

actually  exposed  to  very  unfavourable  conditions,  the  retrospective

establishing of a good object cannot undo bad early experiences. However,

the introjection of the analyst as a good object, if not based on idealization

has, to some extent, the effect of providing an internal good object where it

has been largely lacking. Also, the weakening of projections, and therefore

the achieving of greater tolerance, bound up with less resentment, make it

possible for the patient to find some features and to revive pleasant memories

of the past, even when the early situation was very unfavourable. The means

by  which  this  is  achieved  is  the  analysis  of  the  negative  and  positive

transference which takes us back to earliest object relations. All this becomes

possible because the integration resulting from the analysis has strengthened

the ego, which was weak at the beginning of life. It is on these lines that the

psycho-analysis of psychotics may also succeed. The more integrated ego

becomes capable of experiencing guilt and feelings of responsibility, which it

was unable to face in infancy; object synthesis, and therefore a mitigation of

hate  by  love,  come  about,  and  greed  and  envy,  which  are  corollaries  of

destructive impulses, lose in power.

To express it in another way, persecutory anxiety and schizoid mechanisms

are diminished, and the patient can work through the depressive position.

When  his  initial  inability  to  establish  a  good  object  is,  to  some  extent,

overcome, envy is diminished and his capacity for enjoyment and gratitude

increases step by step. These changes extend to many aspects of the patient’s

personality and range from earliest emotional life to adult experiences and

relations. In the analysis of the effects of early disturbances on the wholedevelopment, lies, I believe, our greatest hope of helping our patients.                                          11

 

  ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF MENTAL FUNCTIONING

 

                                        (1958)

 


THE paper I present here is a contribution to merapsychology, an attempt to

carry  further  Freud’s  fundamental  theories  on  this  subject  in  the  light  of

conclusions derived from progress in psycho-analytic practice.

  Freud’s formulation of mental structure in terms of id, ego and super-ego

has become the basis for all psycho-analytic thinking. He made it clear that

these parts of the self are not sharply separated from one another and that the

id is the foundation of all mental functioning. The ego develops out of the id,

but  Freud  gave  no  consistent  indication  at  which  stage  this  happens;

throughout life the ego reaches deep down into the id and is therefore under

the constant influence of unconscious processes.

  Moreover, his discovery of the life and death instincts, with their polarity

and fusion operating from birth onwards, was a tremendous advance in the

understanding of the mind. I recognized, in watching the constant struggle in

the young infant’s mental processes between an irrepressible urge to destroy

as well as to save himself, to attack his objects and to preserve them, that

primordial forces struggling with each other were at work. This gave me a

deeper insight into the vital clinical importance of Freud’s concept of life and
                                                                                1
death  instincts.  When  I  wrote The  Psycho-Analysis  of  Children,  I  had

already come to the conclusion that under the impact of the struggle between

the two instincts, one of the ego’s main functions – the mastery of anxiety—
                                                                  2
is brought into operation from the very beginning of life.

  Freud assumed that the organism protects itself against the danger arising

from the death instinct working within by deflecting it outwards, while that

portion of it which cannot be deflected is bound by the libido. He considered

in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1922) the operation of the life and death

instincts as biological processes. But it has not been sufficiently recognized

that Freud in some of his writings based his clinical considerations on the

concept of the two instincts, as for example in ‘The Economic Problem of

Masochism’ (1924). May I recall the last few sentences of that paper. He

said: ‘Thus moral masochism becomes a classical piece of evidence for theexistence of fusion of instinct. Its danger lies in the fact that it originates from

the  death  instinct  and  corresponds  to  that  part  of  the  instinct  which  has

escaped being turned outwards as an instinct of destruction. But since, on the

other  hand,  it  has  the  value  of  an  erotic  component,  even  the  subject  of

destruction of himself cannot take place without libidinal satisfaction.’ (S.E.

19,  p.  170).  In  the New  Introductory  Lectures  (1933),  he  put  the

psychological aspect of his new discovery in even stronger terms. He said:

‘This hypothesis opens a prospect to us of investigations which may some

day be of great importance for the understanding of pathological processes.

For fusions may also come apart, and we may expect that functioning will be

most gravely affected by defusions of such a kind. But these conceptions are

still too new; no one has yet tried to apply them in our work.’ (S.E. 22, p.

105). I would say that in so far as Freud took the fusion and defusion of the

two instincts as underlying the psychological conflict between aggressive and

libidinal impulses, it would be the ego, and not the organism, which deflects

the death instinct.

  Freud stated that no fear of death exists in the unconscious, but this does

not seem compatible with his discovery of the dangers arising from the death

instinct working within. As I see it, the primordial anxiety which the ego

fights  is  the  threat  arising  from  the  death  instinct.  I  pointed  out  in  ‘The
                                          3
Theory of Anxiety and Guilt’ (1948) that I do not agree with Freud’s view

that ‘the unconscious seems to contain nothing that would lend substance to

the concept of the annihilation of life’ and that, therefore, ‘the fear of death

should  be  regarded  as  analogous  to  the  fear  of  castration’.  In  ‘The  Early

Development of Conscience in the Child’ (1933), I referred to Freud’s theory

of the two instincts, according to which at the outset of life the instinct of

aggression, or the death instinct, is being opposed and bound by the libido or

life  instinct—the  Eros—and  said:  ‘The  danger  of  being  destroyed  by  this

instinct of aggression sets up, I think, an excessive tension in the ego, which

is felt by it as an anxiety, so that it is faced at the very beginning of its

development with the task of mobilizing libido against its death-instinct.’ I

concluded that the danger of being destroyed by the death instinct thus gives
                                          4
rise to primordial anxiety in the ego.

The  young  infant  would  be  in  danger  of  being  flooded  by  his  self-

destructive impulses if the mechanism of projection could not operate. It is

partly in order to perform this function that the ego is called into action at

birth by the life instinct. The primal process of projection is the means of                                            5
deflecting the death instinct outwards. Projection also imbues the first object

with  libido.  The  other  primal  process  is  introjection,  again  largely  in  the

service of the life instinct; it combats the death instinct because it leads to the

ego taking in something life-giving (first of all food) and thus binding the

death instinct working within.

  From the beginning of life the two instincts attach themselves to objects,
                                    6
first of all the mother’s breast. I believe, therefore, that some light may be

thrown on the development of the ego in connection with the functioning of

the  two  instincts  by  my  hypothesis  that  the  introjection  of  the  mother’s

feeding breast lays the foundation for all internalization processes. According

to whether destructive impulses or feelings of love predominate, the breast

(for which the bottle can symbolically come to stand) is felt at times to be

good, at times to be bad. The libidinal cathexis of the breast, together with

gratifying experiences, builds up in the infant’s mind the primal good object,

the projection on the breast of destructive impulses the primal bad object.

Both these aspects are introjected and thus the life and death instincts, which

had  been  projected,  again  operate  within  the  ego.  The  need  to  master

persecutory  anxiety  gives  impetus  to  splitting  the  breast  and  mother,

externally and internally, into a helpful and loved and, on the other hand, a

frightening  and  hated  object.  These  are  the  prototypes  of  all  subsequent

internalized objects.

The strength of the ego—reflecting the state of fusion between the two

instincts—is, I believe, constitutionally determined. If in the fusion the life

instinct predominates, which implies an ascendancy of the capacity for love,

the ego is relatively strong, and is more able to bear the anxiety arising from

the death instinct and to counteract it.

To what extent the strength of the ego can be maintained and increased is

in part affected by external factors, in particular the mother’s attitude towards

the infant. However, even when the life instinct and the capacity for love

predominate, destructive impulses are still deflected outwards and contribute

to the creation of persecutory and dangerous objects which are reintrojected.

Furthermore,  the  primal  processes  of  introjection  and  projection  lead  to

constant changes in the ego’s relation to its objects, with fluctuations between

internal and external, good and bad ones, according to the infant’s phantasies

and  emotions  as  well  as  under  the  impact  of  his  actual  experiences.  The

complexity of these fluctuations engendered by the perpetual activity of the

two  instincts  underlies  the  development  of  the  ego  in  its  relation  to  theexternal world as well as the building up of the internal world.

The internalized good object comes to form the core of the ego around

which  it  expands  and  develops.  For  when  the  ego  is  supported  by  the

internalized good object, it is more able to master anxiety and preserve life by

binding with libido some portions of the death instinct operative within.

  However, a part of the ego, as Freud described in the New Introductory

Lectures (1933), comes to ‘stand over’ against the other part as a result of the

ego splitting itself. He made it clear that this split-off part performing many

functions  is  the  super-ego.  He  also  stated  that  the  super-ego  consists  of

certain aspects of the introjected parents and is largely unconscious.

  With these views I agree. Where I differ is in placing at birth the processes

of introjection which are the basis of the super-ego. The super-ego precedes
                                                                  7
by some months the beginning of the Oedipus complex, a beginning which I

date, together with that of the depressive position, in the second quarter of the

first  year.  Thus  the  early  introjection  of  the  good  and  bad  breast  is  the

foundation of the super-ego and influences the development of the Oedipus

complex. This conception of super-ego formation is in contrast to Freud’s

explicit statements that the identifications with the parents are the heir of the

Oedipus complex and only succeed if the Oedipus complex is successfully

overcome.

In my view, the splitting of the ego, by which the super-ego is formed,

comes  about  as  a  consequence  of  conflict  in  the  ego,  engendered  by  the
                                8
polarity of the two instincts. This conflict is increased by their projection as

well  as  by  the  resulting  introjection  of  good  and  bad  objects.  The  ego,

supported  by  the  internalized  good  object  and  strengthened  by  the

identification with it, projects a portion of the death instinct into that part of

itself which it has split off—a part which thus comes to be in opposition to

the rest of the ego and forms the basis of the super-ego. Accompanying this

deflection of a portion of the death instinct is a deflection of that portion of

the life instinct which is fused with it. Along with these deflections, parts of

the good and bad objects are split off from the ego into the super-ego. The

super-ego  thus  acquires  both  protective  and  threatening  qualities.  As  the

process of integration—present from the beginning in both the ego and the

super-ego—goes on, the death instinct is bound, up to a point, by the super-

ego. In the process of binding, the death instinct influences the aspects of the

good objects contained in the super-ego, with the result that the action of the

super-ego ranges from restraint of hate and destructive impulses, protectionof the good object and self-criticism, to threats, inhibitory complaints and

persecution. The super-ego—being bound up with the good object and even

striving  for  its  preservation—comes  close  to  the  actual  good  mother  who

feeds the child and takes care of it, but since the super-ego is also under the

influence of the death instinct, it partly becomes the representative of the

mother who frustrates the child, and its prohibitions and accusations arouse

anxiety.  To  some  extent,  when  development  goes  well,  the  super-ego  is

largely felt as helpful and does not operate as too harsh a conscience. There is

an inherent need in the young child—and, I assume, even in the very young

infant—to be protected as well as to be submitted to certain prohibitions,

which amounts to a control of destructive impulses. I have suggested in Envy

and Gratitude (pp. 179–80 above), that the infantile wish for an ever-present,

inexhaustible breast includes the desire that the breast should do away with or

control the infant’s destructive impulses and in this way protect his good

object as well as safeguard him against persecutory anxieties. This function

pertains  to  the  super-ego.  However,  as  soon  as  the  infant’s  destructive

impulses and his anxiety are aroused, the super-ego is felt to be strict and

over-bearing and the ego then, as Freud described it, ‘has to serve three harsh

masters’, the id, the super-ego, and external reality.

  When at the beginning of the twenties I embarked on the new venture of

analysing by play technique children from their third year onwards, one of

the unexpected phenomena I came across was a very early and savage super-

ego. I also found that young children introject their parents—first of all the

mother and her breast—in a phantastic way, and I was led to this conclusion

by observing the terrifying character of some of their internalized objects.

These extremely dangerous objects give rise, in early infancy, to conflict and

anxiety within the ego; but under the stress of acute anxiety they, and other

terrifying figures, are split off in a manner different from that by which the

super-ego  is  formed,  and  are  relegated  to  the  deeper  layers  of  the

unconscious. The difference in these two ways of splitting—and this may

perhaps  throw  light  on  the  many  as  yet  obscure  ways  in  which  splitting

processes  take  place—is  that  in  the  splitting-off  of  frightening  figures

defusion seems to be in the ascendant; whereas super-ego formation is carried

out with a predominance of fusion of the two instincts. Therefore the super-

ego is normally established in close relation with the ego and shares different

aspects  of  the  same  good  object.  This  makes  it  possible  for  the  ego  to

integrate and accept the super-ego to a greater or less extent. In contrast, theextremely  bad  figures  are  not  accepted  by  the  ego  in  this  way  and  are

constantly rejected by it.

  However, with young infants, and I assume that this is more strongly the

case the younger the infant is, the boundaries between split-off figures and

those  less  frightening  and  more  tolerated  by  the  ego  are  fluid.  Splitting

normally succeeds only temporarily or partially. When it fails, the infant’s

persecutory anxiety is intense, and this is particularly the case in the first

stage of development characterized by the paranoid-schizoid position, which

I assume to be at its height in the first three or four months of life. In the very

young infant’s mind the good breast and the bad devouring breast alternate

very quickly, possibly are felt to exist simultaneously.

The  splitting-off  of  persecutory  figures  which  go  to  form  part  of  the

unconscious is bound up with splitting off idealized figures as well. Idealized

figures are developed to protect the ego against the terrifying ones. In these

processes  the  life  instinct  appears  again  and  asserts  itself.  The  contrast

between persecutory and idealized, between good and bad objects—being an

expression of life and death instincts and forming the basis of phantasy life—

is to be found in every layer of the self. Among the hated and threatening

objects, which the early ego tries to ward off, are also those which are felt to

have  been  injured  or  killed  and  which  thereby  turn  into  dangerous

persecutors. With the strengthening of the ego and its growing capacity for

integration and synthesis, the stage of the depressive position is reached. At

this stage the injured object is no longer predominantly felt as a persecutor

but as a loved object towards whom a feeling of guilt and the urge to make
                              9
reparation are experienced. This relation to the loved injured object goes to

form an important element in the super-ego. According to my hypothesis, the

depressive position is at its height towards the middle of the first year. From

then onwards, if persecutory anxiety is not excessive and the capacity for

love is strong enough, the ego becomes increasingly aware of its psychic

reality and more and more feels that it is its own destructive impulses which

contribute to the spoiling of its objects. Thus injured objects, which were felt

to be bad, improved in the child’s mind and approximate more to the real

parents; the ego gradually develops its essential function of dealing with the

external world.

The success of these fundamental processes and the subsequent integration

and strengthening of the ego depend, as far as internal factors are concerned,

on the ascendancy of the life instinct in the interaction of the two instincts.But splitting processes continue; throughout the stage of the infantile neurosis

(which is the means of expressing as well as working through early psychotic

anxieties)  the  polarity  between  the  life  and  death  instincts  makes  itself

strongly felt in the form of anxieties arising from persecutory objects which

the ego attempts to cope with by splitting and later by repression.

  With the beginning of the latency period, the organized part of the super-

ego, although often very harsh, is much more cut off from its unconscious

part. This is the stage in which the child deals with his strict super-ego by

projecting it on to his environment—in other words, externalizing it—and

trying to come to terms with those in authority. However, although in the

older child and in the adult these anxieties are modified, changed in form,

warded off by stronger defences, and therefore are also less accessible to

analysis than in the young child, when we penetrate to deeper layers of the

unconscious, we find that dangerous and persecutory figures still co-exist

with idealized ones.

To return to my concept of primal splitting processes, I have recently put

forward  the  hypothesis  that  it  is  essential  for  normal  development  that  a

division between the good and bad object, between love and hate, should take

place in earliest infancy. When such a division is not too severe, and yet

sufficient to differentiate between good and bad, it forms in my view one of

the basic elements for stability and mental health. This means that the ego is

strong enough not to be overwhelmed by anxiety and that, side by side with

splitting, some integration is going on (though in a rudimentary form) which

is only possible if in the fusion the life instinct predominates over the death

instinct. As a result, integration and synthesis of objects can eventually be

better  achieved.  I  assume,  however,  that  even  under  such  favourable

conditions,  terrifying  figures  in  the  deep  layers  of  the  unconscious  make

themselves felt when internal or external pressure is extreme. People who are

on the whole stable—and that means that they have firmly established their

good object and therefore are closely identified with it—can overcome this

intrusion of the deeper unconscious into their ego and regain their stability. In

neurotic, and still more in psychotic individuals, the struggle against such

dangers threatening from the deep layers of the unconscious is to some extent

constant and part of their instability or their illness.

  Since clinical developments in recent years have made us more aware of

the psycho-pathological processes in schizophrenics, we can see more clearly

that  in  them  the  super-ego  becomes  almost  indistinguishable  from  theirdestructive impulses and internal persecutors. Herbert Rosenfeld (1952) in

his paper on the super-ego of the schizophrenic, has described the part which

such  an  overwhelming  super-ego  plays  in  schizophrenia.  The  persecutory
                                                                                        10
anxieties these feelings engender I found also at the root of hypochondria. I

think the struggle and its outcome is different in manic depressive illnesses,

but must satisfy myself here with these hints.

If,  owing  to  a  predominance  of  destructive  impulses  which  goes  with

excessive weakness of the ego, the primary splitting processes are too violent,

at  a  later  stage  integration  and  synthesis  of  objects  are  impeded  and  the

depressive position cannot be worked through sufficiently.

I have emphasized that the dynamics of the mind are the result of the

working of the life and death instincts, and that in addition to these forces the

unconscious consists of the unconscious ego and soon of the unconscious

super-ego. It is part of this concept that I regard the id as identical with the

two instincts. Freud has in many places spoken about the id, but there are

some inconsistencies in his definitions. In at least one passage, however, he

defines the id in terms of instincts only; he says in the New Introductory

Lectures: ‘Instinctual cathexes seeking discharge—that, in our view, is all

there is in the id. It even seems that the energy of these instinctual impulses is

in a state different from that in the other regions of the mind.’ (S.E. 22, p. 74).

My  concept  of  the  id,  from  the  time  I  wrote The  Psycho-Analysis  of

Children (1933), has been in accordance with the definition contained in the

above quotation; it is true that I have occasionally used the term id more

loosely in the sense of representing the death instinct only or the unconscious.

  Freud stated that the ego differentiates itself from the id by the repression-

resistance barrier. I have found that splitting is one of the initial defences and

precedes repression, which I assume begins to operate in about the second

year. Normally no splitting is absolute, any more than repression is absolute.

The conscious and unconscious parts of the ego are therefore not separated

by a rigid barrier; as Freud described it, in speaking of the different areas of

the mind, they are shaded off into each other.

When, however, there is a very rigid barrier produced by splitting, the

implication is that development has not proceeded normally. The conclusion

would be that the death instinct is dominant. On the other hand, when the life

instinct  is  in  the  ascendant,  integration  and  synthesis  can  successfully
                                                                                      11
progress.  The  nature  of  splitting  determines  the  nature  of  repression. If

splitting processes are not excessive, the conscious and unconscious remainpermeable to one another. However, whereas splitting performed by an ego

which is still largely unorganized cannot adequately lead to modification of

anxiety,  in  the  older  child  and  in  the  adult  repression  is  a  much  more

successful  means  both  of  warding  off  anxieties  and  modifying  them.  In

repression  the  more  highly  organized  ego  divides  itself  off  against  the

unconscious thoughts, impulses, and terrifying figures more effectively.

  Although my conclusions are based on Freud’s discovery of the instincts

and their influence on the different parts of the mind, the additions I have

suggested in this paper have involved a number of differences, upon which I

would now make some concluding remarks.

You may recall that Freud’s emphasis on the libido was much greater than

that on aggression. Although long before he discovered the life and death

instincts  he  had  seen  the  importance  of  the  destructive  component  of

sexuality  in  the  form  of  sadism,  he  did  not  give  sufficient  weight  to

aggression in its impact on emotional life. Perhaps, therefore, he never fully

worked out his discovery of the two instincts and seemed reluctant to extend

it to the whole of mental functioning. Yet, as I pointed out earlier, he applied

this discovery to clinical material to a greater extent than has been realized.

If, however, Freud’s conception of the two instincts is taken to its ultimate

conclusion,  the  interaction  of  the  life  and  death  instincts  will  be  seen  to

govern the whole of mental life.

I have already suggested that the formation of the super-ego precedes the

Oedipus complex and is initiated by the introjection of the primal object. The

super-ego maintains its connection with the other parts of the ego through

having internalized different aspects of the same good object, a process of

internalization which is also of the greatest importance in the organization of

the ego. I attribute to the ego from the beginning of life a need and capacity

not only to split but also to integrate itself. Integration, which gradually leads

to a climax in the depressive position, depends on the preponderance of the

life instinct and implies in some measure the acceptance by the ego of the

working of the death instinct. I see the formation of the ego as an entity to be

largely determined by the alternation between splitting and repression on the

one hand, and integration in relation to objects on the other.

  Freud stated that the ego constantly enriches itself from the id. I have said

earlier that in my view the ego is called into operation and developed by the

life instinct. The way in which this is achieved is through its earliest object

relations. The breast, on which the life and death instincts are projected, is thefirst object which by introjection is internalized. In this way both instincts

find an object to which they attach themselves and thereby by projection and

re-introjection the ego is enriched as well as strengthened.

The more the ego can integrate its destructive impulses and synthesize the

different aspects of its objects, the richer it becomes; for the split-off parts of

the self and of impulses which are rejected because they arouse anxiety and

give pain also contain valuable aspects of the personality and of the phantasy

life which is impoverished by splitting them off. Though the rejected aspects

of the self and of internalized objects contribute to instability, they are also at

the source of inspiration in artistic productions and in various intellectual

activities.

My conception of earliest object relations and super-ego development is in

keeping with my hypothesis of the operation of the ego at least from birth

onwards, as well as of the all-pervading power of the life and death instincts.                                          12

 

    OUR ADULT WORLD AND ITS ROOTS IN INFANCY

 

                                        (1959)

 


IN  considering  from  the  psycho-analytic  point  of  view  the  behaviour  of

people in their social surroundings, it is necessary to investigate how the

individual develops from infancy into maturity. A group—whether small or

large—consists of individuals in a relationship to one another; and therefore

the understanding of personality is the foundation for the understanding of

social life. An exploration of the individual’s development takes the psycho-

analyst back, by gradual stages, to infancy; and I shall first enlarge, therefore,

on fundamental trends in the young child.

The  various  signs  of  difficulties  in  the  infant—states  of  rage,  lack  of

interest  in  his  surroundings,  incapacity  to  bear  frustration,  and  fleeting

expressions  of  sadness—did  not  formerly  find  any  explanation  except  in

terms of physical factors. For until Freud made his great discoveries there

was a general tendency to regard childhood as a period of perfect happiness,

and the various disturbances displayed by children were not taken seriously.

Freud’s findings have, in the course of time, helped us to understand the

complexity  of  the  child’s  emotions  and  have  revealed  that  children  go

through serious conflicts. This has led to a better insight into the infantile

mind and its connection with the mental processes of the adult.

The play technique that I developed in the psycho-analysis of very young

children, and other advances in technique resulting from my work, allowed

me to draw new conclusions about very early stages of infancy and deeper

layers of the unconscious. Such retrospective insight is based on one of the

crucial findings of Freud, the transference situation, that is to say the fact that

in a psycho-analysis the patient re-enacts in relation to the psycho-analyst

earlier—and,  I  would  add,  even  very  early—situations  and  emotions.

Therefore the relationship to the psycho-analyst at times bears, even in adults,

very childlike features, such as over-dependence and the need to be guided,

together with quite irrational distrust. It is part of the technique of the psycho-

analyst to deduce the past from these manifestations. We know that Freud

first discovered the Oedipus complex in the adult and was able to trace itback  to  childhood.  Since  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  analyse  very  young

children, I was able to gain an even closer insight into their mental life, which

led me back to an understanding of the mental life of the baby. For I was

enabled by the meticulous attention I paid to the transference in the play

technique to come to a deeper understanding of the ways in which—in the

child  and  later  also  in  the  adult—mental  life  is  influenced  by  earliest

emotions  and  unconscious  phantasies.  It  is  from  this  angle  that  I  shall

describe  with  the  use  of  as  few  technical  terms  as  possible  what  I  have

concluded about the emotional life of the infant.

I have put forward the hypothesis that the newborn baby experiences, both

in the process of birth and in the adjustment to the postnatal situation, anxiety

of a persecutory nature. This can be explained by the fact that the young

infant, without being able to grasp it intellectually, feels unconsciously every

discomfort as though it were inflicted on him by hostile forces. If comfort is

given to him soon—in particular warmth, the loving way he is held, and the

gratification of being fed—this gives rise to happier emotions. Such comfort

is felt to come from good forces and, I believe, makes possible the infant’s

first loving relation to a person or, as the psycho-analyst would put it, to an

object. My hypothesis is that the infant has an innate unconscious awareness

of the existence of the mother. We know that young animals at once turn to

the mother and find their food from her. The human animal is not different in

that respect, and this instinctual knowledge is the basis for the infant’s primal

relation to his mother. We can also observe that at an age of only a few weeks

the baby already looks up to his mother’s face, recognizes her footsteps, the

touch of her hands, the smell and feel of her breast or of the bottle that she

gives him, all of which suggest that some relation, however primitive, to the

mother has been established.

He not only expects food from her but also desires love and understanding.

In  the  earliest  stages,  love  and  understanding  are  expressed  through  the

mother’s handling of her baby, and lead to a certain unconscious oneness that

is based on the unconscious of the mother and of the child being in close

relation  to  each  other.  The  infant’s  resultant  feeling  of  being  understood

underlies the first and fundamental relation in his life—the relation to the

mother. At the same time, frustration, discomfort and pain, which I suggested

are  experienced  as  persecution,  enter  as  well  into  his  feelings  about  his

mother, because in the first few months she represents to the child the whole

of the external world; therefore both good and bad come in his mind fromher, and this leads to a twofold attitude toward the mother even under the best

possible conditions.

Both the capacity to love and the sense of persecution have deep roots in

the infant’s earliest mental processes. They are focused first of all on the

mother.  Destructive  impulses  and  their  concomitants—such  as  resentment

about frustration, hate stirred up by it, the incapacity to be reconciled, and

envy of the all-powerful object, the mother, on whom his life and well-being

depend—these  various  emotions  arouse  persecutory  anxiety  in  the  infant.

Mutatis  mutandis  these  emotions  are  still  operative  in  later  life.  For

destructive impulses towards anybody are always bound to give rise to the

feeling that that person will also become hostile and retaliatory.

Innate aggressiveness is bound to be increased by unfavourable external

circumstances and, conversely, is mitigated by the love and understanding

that  the  young  child  receives;  and  these  factors  continue  to  operate

throughout  development.  But  although  the  importance  of  external

circumstances is by now increasingly recognized, the importance of internal

factors is still underrated. Destructive impulses, varying from individual to

individual,  are  an  integral  part  of  mental  life,  even  in  favourable

circumstances,  and  therefore  we  have  to  consider  the  development  of  the

child and the attitudes of the adults as resulting from the interaction between

internal and external influences. The struggle between love and hate—now

that our capacity to understand babies has increased—can to some extent be

recognized  through  careful  observation.  Some  babies  experience  strong

resentment about any frustration and show this by being unable to accept

gratification  when  it  follows  on  deprivation.  I  would  suggest  that  such

children have a stronger innate aggressiveness and greed than those infants

whose occasional outbursts of rage are soon over. If a baby shows that he is

able to accept food and love, this means that he can overcome resentment

about frustration relatively quickly and, when gratification is again provided,

regains his feelings of love.

Before continuing my description of the child’s development, I feel that I

should briefly define from the psycho-analytic point of view the terms self

and ego.  The  ego,  according  to  Freud,  is  the  organized  part  of  the  self,

constantly influenced by instinctual impulses but keeping them under control

by  repression;  furthermore  it  directs  all  activities  and  establishes  and

maintains the relation to the external world. The self is used to cover the

whole of the personality, which includes not only the ego but the instinctuallife which Freud called the id.

My work has led me to assume that the ego exists and operates from birth

onwards and that in addition to the functions mentioned above it has the

important task of defending itself against anxiety stirred up by the struggle

within and by influences from without. Furthermore it initiates a number of

processes from which I shall first of all select introjection and projection. To

the no less important process of splitting, that is to say dividing, impulses and

objects I shall turn later.

We owe to Freud and Abraham the great discovery that introjection and

projection are of major significance both in severe mental disturbances and in

normal mental life. I have here to forgo even the attempt to describe how in

particular Freud was led from the study of manic-depressive illness to the

discovery of introjection which underlies the super-ego. He also expounded

the vital relation between super-ego and ego and the id. In the course of time

these basic concepts underwent further development. As I came to recognize

in  the  light  of  my  psycho-analytic  work  with  children,  introjection  and

projection  function  from  the  beginning  of  post-natal  life  as  some  of  the

earliest activities of the ego, which in my view operates from birth onwards.

Considered  from  this  angle,  introjection  means  that  the  outer  world,  its

impact, the situations the infant lives through, and the objects he encounters,

are not only experienced as external but are taken into the self and become

part of his inner life. Inner life cannot be evaluated even in the adult without

these additions to the personality that derive from continuous introjection.

Projection, which goes on simultaneously, implies that there is a capacity in

the child to attribute to other people around him feelings of various kinds,

predominantly love and hate.

I have formed the view that love and hate towards the mother are bound up

with the very young infant’s capacity to project all his emotions on to her,

thereby  making  her  into  a  good  as  well  as  dangerous  object.  However,

introjection and projection, though they are rooted in infancy, are not only

infantile processes. They are part of the infant’s phantasies, which in my

view also operate from the beginning and help to mould his impression of his

surroundings; and by introjection this changed picture of the external world

influences what goes on in his mind. Thus an inner world is built up which is

partly a reflection of the external one. That is to say, the double process of

introjection and projection contributes to the interaction between external and

internal factors. This interaction continues throughout every stage of life. Inthe same way introjection and projection go on throughout life and become

modified in the course of maturation; but they never lose their importance in

the individual’s relation to the world around him. Even in the adult, therefore,

the judgement of reality is never quite free from the influence of his internal

world.

I have already suggested that from one angle the processes of projection

and  introjection  that  I  have  been  describing  have  to  be  considered  as

unconscious phantasies. As my friend the late Susan Isaacs put it in her paper

(1952) on this subject ‘Phantasy is (in the first instance) the mental corollary,

the psychic representative of instinct. There is no impulse, no instinctual urge

or  response  which  is  not  experienced  as  unconscious  phantasy  .  .  .  .  A

phantasy  represents  the  particular  content  of  the  urges  or  feelings  (for

example, wishes, fears, anxieties, triumphs, love or sorrow) dominating the

mind at the moment.’

  Unconscious phantasies are not the same as day-dreams (though they are

linked with them) but an activity of the mind that occurs on deep unconscious

levels  and  accompanies  every  impulse  experienced  by  the  infant.  For

instance, a hungry baby can temporarily deal with his hunger by hallucinating

the satisfaction of being given the breast, with all the pleasures he normally

derives from it, such as the taste of the milk, the warm feel of the breast, and

being held and loved by the mother. But unconscious phantasy also takes the

opposite form of feeling deprived and persecuted by the breast which refuses

to give this satisfaction. Phantasies—becoming more elaborate and referring

to  a  wider  variety  of  objects  and  situations—continue  throughout

development and accompany all activities; they never stop playing a great

part  in  mental  life.  The  influence  of  unconscious  phantasy  on  art,  on

scientific work, and on the activities of every-day life cannot be overrated.

I have already mentioned that the mother is introjected, and that this is a

fundamental factor in development. As I see it, object relations start almost at

birth. The mother in her good aspects—loving, helping, and feeding the child

—is the first good object that the infant makes part of his inner world. His

capacity to do so is, I would suggest, up to a point innate. Whether the good

object  becomes  sufficiently  part  of  the  self  depends  to  some  extent  on

persecutory anxiety—and accordingly resentment—not being too strong; at

the same time a loving attitude on the part of the mother contributes much to

the success of his process. If the mother is taken into the child’s inner world

as a good and dependable object, an element of strength is added to the ego.For I assume that the ego develops largely round this good object, and the

identification with the good characteristics of the mother becomes the basis

for  further  helpful  identifications.  The  identification  with  the  good  object

shows externally in the young child’s copying the mother’s activities and

attitudes; this can be seen in his play and often also in his behaviour towards

younger  children.  A  strong  identification  with  the  good  mother  makes  it

easier for the child to identify also with a good father and later on with other

friendly figures. As a result, his inner world comes to contain predominantly

good objects and feelings, and these good objects are felt to respond to the

infant’s love. All this contributes to a stable personality and makes it possible

to extend sympathy and friendly feelings to other people. It is clear that a

good relation of the parents to each other and to the child, and a happy home

atmosphere, play a vital rôle in the success of this process.

Yet,  however  good  are  the  child’s  feelings  towards  both  parents,

aggressiveness and hate also remain operative. One expression of this is the

rivalry  with  the  father  which  results  from  the  boy’s  desires  towards  the

mother and all the phantasies linked with them. Such rivalry finds expression

in the Oedipus complex, which can be clearly observed in children of three,

four, or five years of age. This complex exists, however, very much earlier

and is rooted in the baby’s first suspicions of the father taking the mother’s

love and attention away from him. There are great differences in the Oedipus

complex of the girl and of the boy, which I shall characterize only by saying

that whereas the boy in his genital development returns to his original object,

the mother, and therefore seeks female objects, with consequent jealousy of

the father and men in general, the girl to some extent has to turn away from

the mother and find the object of her desires in the father and later on in other

men. I have, however, stated this in an over-simplified form, because the boy

is also attracted towards the father and identifies with him; and therefore an

element of homosexuality enters into normal development. The same applies

to the girl, for whom the relation to the mother, and to women in general,

never loses its importance. The Oedipus complex is thus not a matter only of

feelings of hate and rivalry towards one parent and love towards the other,

but feelings of love and the sense of guilt also enter in connection with the

rival parent. Many conflicting emotions therefore centre upon the Oedipus

complex.

We turn now again to projection. By projecting oneself or part of one’s

impulses and feelings into another person, an identification with that personis  achieved,  though  it  will  differ  from  the  identification  arising  from

introjection. For if an object is taken into the self (introjected), the emphasis

lies  on  acquiring  some  of  the  characteristics  of  this  object  and  on  being

influenced by them. On the other hand, in putting part of oneself into the

other person (projecting), the identification is based on attributing to the other

person some of one’s own qualities. Projection has many repercussions. We

are inclined to attribute to other people—in a sense, to put into them—some

of our own emotions and thoughts; and it is obvious that it will depend on

how balanced or persecuted we are whether this projection is of a friendly or

a hostile nature. By attributing part of our feelings to the other person, we

understand their feelings, needs, and satisfactions; in other words, we are

putting ourselves into the other person’s shoes. There are people who go so

far in this direction that they lose themselves entirely in others and become

incapable of objective judgement. At the same time excessive introjection

endangers the strength of the ego because it becomes completely dominated

by the introjected object. If projection is predominantly hostile, real empathy

and  understanding  of  others  is  impaired.  The  character  of  projection  is,

therefore, of great importance in our relations to other people. If the interplay

between introjection and projection is not dominated by hostility or over-

dependence,  and  is  well  balanced,  the  inner  world  is  enriched  and  the

relations with the external world are improved.

I referred earlier to the tendency of the infantile ego to split impulses and

objects, and I regard this as another of the primal activities of the ego. This

tendency to split results in part from the fact that the early ego largely lacks

coherence. But—here again I have to refer to my own concepts—persecutory

anxiety  reinforces  the  need  to  keep  separate  the  loved  object  from  the

dangerous one, and therefore to split love from hate. For the young infant’s

self-preservation depends on his trust in a good mother. By splitting the two

aspects and clinging to the good one he preserves his belief in a good object

and his capacity to love it; and this is an essential condition for keeping alive.

For without at least some of this feeling, he would be exposed to an entirely

hostile world which he fears would destroy him. This hostile world would

also be built up inside him. There are, as we know, babies in whom vitality is

lacking and who cannot be kept alive, probably because they have not been

able to develop their trusting relation to a good mother. By contrast, there are

other babies who go through great difficulties but retain sufficient vitality to

make use of the help and food offered by the mother. I know of an infant whounderwent a prolonged and difficult birth and was injured in the process, but

when put to the breast, took it avidly. The same has been reported of babies

who  had  serious  operations  soon  after  birth.  Other  infants  in  such

circumstances  are  not  able  to  survive  because  they  have  difficulties  in

accepting nourishment and love, which implies that they have not been able

to establish trust and love towards the mother.

The process of splitting changes in form and content as development goes

on, but in some ways it is never entirely given up. In my view omnipotent

destructive impulses, persecutory anxiety, and splitting are predominant in

the first three to four months of life. I have described this combination of

mechanisms  and  anxieties  as  the  paranoid-schizoid  position,  which  in

extreme cases becomes the basis of paranoia and schizophrenic illness. The

concomitants  of  destructive  feelings  at  this  early  stage  are  of  great

importance, and I shall single out greed and envy as very disturbing factors,

first of all in the relation to the mother and later on to other members of the

family, in fact throughout life.

  Greed varies considerably from one infant to another. There are babies

who can never be satisfied because their greed exceeds everything they may

receive. With greed goes the urge to empty the mother’s breast and to exploit

all the sources of satisfaction without consideration for anybody. The very

greedy infant may enjoy whatever he receives for the time being; but as soon

as the gratification has gone, he becomes dissatisfied and is driven to exploit

first of all the mother and soon everybody in the family who can give him

attention, food, or any other gratification. There is no doubt that greed is

increased by anxiety—the anxiety of being deprived, of being robbed, and of

not being good enough to be loved. The infant who is so greedy for love and

attention  is  also  insecure  about  his  own  capacity  to  love;  and  all  these

anxieties reinforce greed. This situation remains in fundamentals unchanged

in the greed of the older child and of the adult.

As regards envy, it is not easy to explain how the mother who feeds the

infant and looks after him can also be an object of envy. But whenever he is

hungry or feels neglected, the child’s frustration leads to the phantasy that the

milk and love are deliberately withheld from him, or kept by the mother for

her benefit. Such suspicions are the basis of envy. It is inherent in the feeling

of envy not only that possession is desired, but that there is also a strong urge

to spoil other people’s enjoyment of the coveted object—an urge which tends

to spoil the object itself. If envy is very strong, its spoiling quality results in adisturbed relation to the mother as well as later to other people; it also means

that nothing can be fully enjoyed because the desired thing has already been

spoiled  by  envy.  Furthermore,  if  envy  is  strong,  goodness  cannot  be

assimilated, become part of one’s inner life, and so give rise to gratitude. By

contrast,  the  capacity  to  enjoy  fully  what  has  been  received,  and  the

experience of gratitude towards the person who gives it, influence strongly

both the character and the relations with other people. It is not for nothing

that in saying grace before meals, Christians use the words, ‘For what we are

about to receive may the Lord make us truly thankful.’ These words imply

that one asks for the one quality—gratitude—which will make one happy and

free from resentment and envy. I heard a little girl say that she loved her

mother most of all people, because what would she have done if her mother

had  not  given  birth  to  her  and  had  not  fed  her?  This  strong  feeling  of

gratitude was linked with her capacity for enjoyment and showed itself in her

character  and  relations  to  other  people,  particularly  in  generosity  and

consideration.  Throughout  life  such  capacity  for  enjoyment  and  gratitude

makes a variety of interests and pleasures possible.

In  normal  development,  with  growing  integration  of  the  ego,  splitting

processes diminish, and the increased capacity to understand external reality,

and to some extent to bring together the infant’s contradictory impulses, leads

also to a greater synthesis of the good and bad aspects of the object. This

means that people can be loved in spite of their faults and that the world is

not seen only in terms of black and white.

The super-ego—the part of the ego that criticizes and controls dangerous

impulses, and that Freud first placed roughly in the fifth year of childhood—

operates, according to my views, much earlier. It is my hypothesis that in the

fifth  or  sixth  month  of  life  the  baby  becomes  afraid  of  the  harm  his

destructive impulses and his greed might do, or might have done, to his loved

objects. For he cannot yet distinguish between his desires and impulses and

their actual effects. He experiences feelings of guilt and the urge to preserve

these objects and to make reparation to them for harm done. The anxiety now

experienced  is  of  a  predominantly  depressive  nature;  and  the  emotions

accompanying it, as well as the defences evolved against them, I recognized

as part of normal development, and termed the ‘depressive position’. Feelings

of guilt, which occasionally arise in all of us, have very deep roots in infancy,

and  the  tendency  to  make  reparation  plays  an  important  rôle  in  our

sublimations and object relations.  When we observe young infants from this angle, we can see that at times,

without any particular external cause, they appear depressed. At this stage

they try to please the people around them in every way available to them—

smiles, playful gestures, even attempts to feed the mother by putting a spoon

with food into her mouth. At the same time this is also a period in which

inhibitions over food and nightmares often set in, and all these symptoms

come to a head at the time of weaning. With older children, the need to deal

with  guilt  feelings  expresses  itself  more  clearly;  various  constructive

activities are used for this purpose and in the relation to parents or siblings

there is an excessive need to please and to be helpful, all of which expresses

not only love but also the need to make reparation.

  Freud has postulated the process of working through as an essential part of

psycho-analytic procedure. To put it in a nutshell, this means enabling the

patient to experience his emotions, anxieties, and past situations over and

over  again  both  in  relation  to  the  analyst  and  to  different  people  and

situations in the patient’s present and past life. There is, however, a working

through  occurring  to  some  extent  in  normal  individual  development.

Adaptation to external reality increases and with it the infant achieves a less

phantastic picture of the world around him. The recurring experience of the

mother  going  away  and  coming  back  to  him  makes  her  absence  less

frightening, and therefore his suspicion of her leaving him diminishes. In this

way he gradually works through his early fears and comes to terms with his

conflicting  impulses  and  emotions.  Depressive  anxiety  at  this  stage

predominates and persecutory anxiety lessens. I hold that many apparently

odd  manifestations,  inexplicable  phobias,  and  idiosyncrasies  that  can  be

observed in young children are indications of, as well as ways of, working

through the depressive position. If the feelings of guilt arising in the child are

not excessive, the urge to make reparation and other processes that are part of

growth  bring  relief.  Yet  depressive  and  persecutory  anxieties  are  never

entirely  overcome;  they  may  temporarily  recur  under  internal  or  external

pressure, though a relatively normal person can cope with this recurrence and

regain his balance. If, however, the strain is too great, the development of a

strong and well-balanced personality may be impeded.

  Having  dealt—though  I  am  afraid  in  an  over-simplified  way—with

paranoid  and  depressive  anxieties  and  their  implications,  I  should  like  to

consider the influence of the processes I have described on social relations. I

have spoken of introjection of the external world and have hinted that thisprocess  continues  throughout  life.  Whenever  we  can  admire  and  love

somebody—or hate and despise somebody—we also take something of them

into ourselves and our deepest attitudes are shaped by such experiences. In

the one case it enriches us and becomes a foundation for precious memories;

in the other case we sometimes feel that the outer world is spoilt for us and

the inner world is therefore impoverished.

I  can  here  only  touch  on  the  importance  of  actual  favourable  and

unfavourable experiences to which the infant is from the beginning subjected,

first of all by his parents, and later on by other people. External experiences

are of paramount importance throughout life. However, much depends, even

in the infant, on the ways in which external influences are interpreted and

assimilated by the child, and this in turn largerly depends on how strongly

destructive impulses and persecutory and depressive anxieties are operative.

In the same way our adult experiences are influenced by our basic attitudes,

which either help us to cope better with misfortunes or, if we are too much

dominated by suspicion and self-pity, turn even minor disappointments into

disasters.

  Freud’s discoveries about childhood have increased the understanding of

problems of upbringing, but these findings have often been misinterpreted.

Though it is true that a too disciplinarian upbringing reinforces the child’s

tendency to repression, we have to remember that too great indulgence may

be almost as harmful for the child as too much restraint. The so-called ‘full

self-expression’ can have great disadvantages both for the parents and for the

child. Whereas in former times the child was often the victim of the parents’

disciplinarian  attitude,  the  parents  may  now  become  the  victims  of  their

offspring. It is an old joke that there was a man who never tasted breast of

chicken; for when he was a child, his parents ate it, and when he grew up, his

children were given it. When dealing with our children, it is essential to keep

a balance between too much and too little discipline. To turn a blind eye to

some of the smaller misdeeds is a very healthy attitude. But if these grow into

persistent lack of consideration, it is necessary to show disapproval and to

make demands on the child.

  There is another angle from which the parents’ excessive indulgence must

be considered: while the child may take advantage of his parents’ attitude, he

also experiences a sense of guilt about exploiting them and feels a need for

some restraint which would give him security. This would also make him

able to feel respect for his parents, which is essential for a good relationtowards  them  and  for  developing  respect  for  other  people.  Moreover,  we

must  also  consider  that  parents  who  are  suffering  too  much  under  the

unrestrained self-expression of the child—however much they try to submit

to it—are bound to feel some resentment which will enter into their attitude

towards the child.

I have already described the young child who reacts strongly against every

frustration—and there is no upbringing possible without some unavoidable

frustration—and who is apt to resent bitterly any failings and shortcomings in

his  environment  and  to  underrate  goodness  received.  Accordingly  he  will

project his grievances very strongly on to the people around him. Similar

attitudes are well known in adults. If we contrast the individuals who are

capable  of  bearing  frustration  without  too  great  resentment  and  can  soon

regain their balance after a disappointment with those who are inclined to put

the whole blame on to the outer world, we can see the detrimental effect of

hostile  projection.  For  projection  of  grievance  rouses  in  other  people  a

counter-feeling of hostility. Few of us have the tolerance to put up with the

accusation, even if it is not expressed in words, that we are in some ways the

guilty  party.  In  fact,  it  very  often  makes  us  dislike  such  people,  and  we

appear all the more as enemies to them; in consequence they regard us with

increased  persecutory  feelings  and  suspicions,  and  relations  become  more

and more disturbed.

One  way  of  dealing  with  excessive  suspicion  is  to  try  to  pacify  the

supposed or actual enemies. This is rarely successful. Of course, some people

can  be  won  over  by  flattery  and  appeasement,  particularly  if  their  own

feelings of persecution make for the need to be appeased. But such a relation

easily breaks down and changes into mutual hostility. In passing, I would

mention  the  difficulties  that  such  fluctuations  in  the  attitudes  of  leading

statesmen may produce in international affairs.

  Where persecutory anxiety is less strong, and projection, mainly attributing

to others good feelings, thereby becomes the basis of empathy, the response

from the outer world is very different. We all know people who have the

capacity to be liked; for we have the impression that they have some trust in

us, which evokes on our part a feeling of friendliness. I am not speaking of

people who are trying to make themselves popular in an insincere way. On

the contrary, I believe it is the people who are genuine and have the courage

of their convictions who are in the long run respected and even liked.

An interesting instance of the influence of early attitudes throughout life isthe fact that the relation to early figures keeps reappearing and problems that

remain  unresolved  in  infancy  or  early  childhood  are  revived  though  in

modified form. For example, the attitude towards a subordinate or a superior

repeats up to a point the relation to a younger sibling or to a parent. If we

meet  a  friendly  and  helpful  older  person,  unconsciously  the  relation  to  a

loved parent or grandparent is revived; while a condescending and unpleasant

older individual stirs up anew the rebellious attitudes of the child towards his

parents. It is not necessary that such people should be physically, mentally, or

even in actual age similar to the original figures; something in common in

their attitude is enough. When somebody is entirely under the sway of his

early situation and relations, his judgement of people and events is bound to

be disturbed. Normally such revival of early situations is limited and rectified

by objective judgement. That is to say, we are all capable of being influenced

by irrational factors, but in normal life we are not dominated by them.

The capacity for love and devotion, first of all to the mother, in many ways

develops into devotion to various causes that are felt to be good and valuable.

This  means  that  the  enjoyment  which  in  the  past  the  baby  was  able  to

experience because he felt loved and loving, in later life becomes transferred

not only to his relations to people, which is very important, but also to his

work  and  to  all  that  he  feels  worth  striving  for.  This  means  also  an

enrichment of the personality and capacity to enjoy his work, and opens up a

variety of sources of satisfaction.

In  this  striving  to  further  our  aims,  as  well  as  in  our  relation  to  other

people, the early wish to make reparation is added to the capacity for love. I

have already said that in our sublimations, which grow out of the earliest

interests of the child, constructive activities gain more impetus because the

child unconsciously feels that in this way he is restoring loved people whom

he had damaged. This impetus never loses its strength, though very often it is

not recognized in ordinary life. The irrevocable fact that none of us is ever

entirely free from guilt has very valuable aspects because it implies the never

fully exhausted wish to make reparation and to create in whatever way we

can.

All forms of social service benefit by this urge. In extreme cases, feelings

of guilt drive people towards sacrificing themselves completely to a cause or

to their fellow beings, and may lead to fanaticism. We know, however, that

some  people  risk  their  own  lives  in  order  to  save  others,  and  this  is  not

necessarily  of  the  same  order.  It  is  not  so  much  guilt  which  might  beoperative  in  such  cases  as  the  capacity  for  love,  generosity,  and  an

identification with the endangered fellow being.

I have emphasized the importance of the identification with the parents,

and subsequently with other people, for the young child’s development and I

now wish to stress one particular aspect of successful identification which

reaches into adulthood. When envy and rivalry are not too great, it becomes

possible  to  enjoy  vicariously  the  pleasures  of  others.  In  childhood  the

hostility and rivalry of the Oedipus complex are counteracted by the capacity

to enjoy vicariously the happiness of the parents. In adult life, parents can

share the pleasures of childhood and avoid interfering with them because they

are capable of identifying with their children. They become able to watch

without envy their children growing up.

This attitude becomes particularly important when people grow older and

the pleasures of youth become less and less available. If gratitude for past

satisfactions has not vanished, old people can enjoy whatever is still within

their reach. Furthermore, with such an attitude, which gives rise to serenity,

they can identify themselves with young people. For instance, anyone who is

looking out for young talents and who helps to develop them—be it in his

function as teacher or critic, or in former times as patron of the arts and of

culture—is only able to do so because he can identify with others; in a sense

he  is  repeating  his  own  life,  sometimes  even  achieving  vicariously  the

fulfilment of aims unfulfilled in his own life.

At every stage the ability to identify makes possible the happiness of being

able to admire the character or achievements of others. If we cannot allow

ourselves to appreciate the achievements and qualities of other people—and

that means that we are not able to bear the thought that we can never emulate

them—we are deprived of sources of great happiness and enrichment. The

world would be in our eyes a much poorer place if we had no opportunities of

realizing that greatness exists and will go on existing in the future. Such

admiration also stirs up something in us and increases indirectly our belief in

ourselves. This is one of the many ways in which identifications derived from

infancy become an important part of our personality.

The ability to admire another person’s achievements is one of the factors

making successful team work possible. If envy is not too great, we can take

pleasure  and  pride  in  working  with  people  who  sometimes  outstrip  our

capacities, for we identify with these outstanding members of the team.

The  problem  of  identification  is,  however,  very  complex.  When  Freuddiscovered the super-ego, he saw it as part of the mental structure derived

from the influence of the parents on the child—an influence that becomes

part of the child’s fundamental attitudes. My work with young children has

shown  me  that  even  from  babyhood  onwards  the  mother,  and  soon  other

people in the child’s surroundings, are taken into the self, and this is the basis

of a variety of identifications, favourable and unfavourable. I have above

given instances of identifications that are helpful both to the child and to the

adult. But the vital influence of early environment has also the effect that

unfavourable  aspects  of  the  attitudes  of  the  adult  towards  the  child  are

detrimental  to  his  development  because  they  stir  up  in  him  hatred  and

rebellion or too great submissiveness. At the same time he internalizes this

hostile  and  angry  adult  attitude.  Out  of  such  experiences,  an  excessively

disciplinarian  parent,  or  a  parent  lacking  in  understanding  and  love,  by

identification influences the character formation of the child and may lead

him to repeat in later life what he himself has undergone. Therefore a father

sometimes uses the same wrong methods towards his children that his father

used  towards  him.  On  the  other  hand,  the  rebellion  against  the  wrongs

experienced  in  childhood  can  lead  to  the  opposite  reaction  of  doing

everything differently from the way the parents did it. This would lead to the

other extreme, for instance to over-indulgence of the child, to which I have

referred  earlier.  To  have  learnt  from  our  experiences  in  childhood  and

therefore to be more understanding and tolerant towards our own children, as

well as towards people outside the family circle, is a sign of maturity and

successful development. But tolerance does not mean being blind to the faults

of others. It means recognizing those faults and nevertheless not losing one’s

ability to co-operate with people or even to experience love towards some of

them.

In describing the child’s development I have emphasized particularly the

importance of greed. Let us consider now what part greed plays in character

formation and how it influences the attitudes of the adult. The rôle of greed

can be easily observed as a very destructive element in social life. The greedy

person wants more and more, even at the expense of everybody else. He is

not really capable of consideration and generosity towards others. I am not

speaking here only of material possessions but also of status and prestige.

The very greedy individual is liable to be ambitious. The rôle of ambition,

both in its helpful and in its disturbing aspects, shows itself wherever we

observe human behaviour. There is no doubt that ambition gives impetus toachievement, but, if it becomes the main driving force, co-operation with

others  is  endangered.  The  highly  ambitious  person,  in  spite  of  all  his

successes, always remains dissatisfied, in the same way as a greedy baby is

never satisfied. We know well the type of public figure who, hungry for more

and more success, appears never to be content with what he had achieved.

One feature in this attitude—in which envy also plays an important rôle—is

the inability to allow others to come sufficiently to the fore. They may be

allowed  to  play  a  subsidiary  part  as  long  as  they  do  not  challenge  the

supremacy of the ambitious person. We find also that such people are unable

and unwilling to stimulate and encourage younger people, because some of

them might become their successors. One reason for the lack of satisfaction

they  derive  from  apparently  great  success  results  from  the  fact  that  their

interest is not so much devoted to the field in which they are working as to

their personal prestige. This description implies the connection between greed

and envy. The rival is seen not only as someone who has robbed and deprived

one  of  one’s  own  position  or  goods,  but  also  as  the  owner  of  valuable

qualities which stir up envy and the wish to spoil them.

  Where greed and envy are not excessive, even an ambitious person finds

satisfaction in helping others to make their contribution. Here we have one of

the attitudes underlying successful leadership. Again, to some extent, this is

already  observable  in  the  nursery.  An  older  child  may  take  pride  in  the

achievements of a younger brother or sister and do everything to help them.

Some children even have an integrating effect on the whole family life; by

being  predominantly  friendly  and  helpful  they  improve  the  family

atmosphere. I have seen that mothers who were very impatient and intolerant

of difficulties have improved through the influence of such a child. The same

applies to school life where sometimes only as few as one or two children

have a beneficial effect on the attitude of all the others by a kind of moral

leadership which is based on a friendly and co-operative relation to the other

children without any attempt to make them feel inferior.

To  return  to  leadership:  if  the  leader—and  that  may  also  apply  to  any

member of a group—suspects that he is the object of hate, all his antisocial

attitudes are increased by this feeling. We find that the person who is unable

to bear criticism because it touches at once on his persecutory anxiety is not

only a prey to suffering but also has difficulties in relation to other people

and may even endanger the cause for which he is working, in whatever walk

of life it may be; he will show an incapacity to correct mistakes and to learnfrom others.

If we look at our adult world from the viewpoint of its roots in infancy, we

gain an insight into the way our mind, our habits, and our views have been

built  up  from  the  earliest  infantile  phantasies  and  emotions  to  the  most

complex  and  sophisticated  adult  manifestations.  There  is  one  more

conclusion  to  be  drawn,  which  is  that  nothing  that  ever  existed  in  the

unconscious completely loses its influence on the personality.

A further aspect of the child’s development to be discussed is his character

formation. I have given some instances of how destructive impulses, envy

and  greed,  and  the  resulting  persecutory  anxieties  disturb  the  child’s

emotional  balance  and  his  social  relations.  I  have  also  referred  to  the

beneficial aspects of an opposite development and attempted to show how

they arise. I have tried to convey the importance of the interaction between

innate factors and the influence of the environment. In giving full weight to

this interplay we get a deeper understanding of how the child’s character

develops. It has always been a most important aspect of psycho-analytic work

that, in the course of a successful analysis, the patient’s character undergoes

favourable changes.

One consequence of a balanced development is integrity and strength of

character. Such qualities have a far-reaching effect both on the individual’s

self-reliance and on his relations to the outside world. The influence of a

really sincere and genuine character on other people is easily observed. Even

people who do not possess the same qualities are impressed and cannot help

feeling some respect for integrity and sincerity. For these qualities arouse in

them a picture of what they might themselves have become or perhaps even

still might become. Such personalities give them some hopefulness about the

world in general and greater trust in goodness.

I  have  concluded  this  paper  by  discussing  the  importance  of  character,

because in my view character is the foundation for all human achievement.

The effect of a good character on others lies at the root of healthy social

development.


                                        POSTSCRIPT

 


  When  I  discussed  my  views  on  character  development  with  an

anthropologist,  he  objected  to  the  assumption  of  a  general  foundation  for

character development. He quoted his experience that in his fieldwork he hadcome across an entirely different evaluation of character. For instance, he had

worked in a community where it was regarded as admirable to cheat other

people. He also described, in answer to some of my questions, that in that

community it was considered as a weakness to show mercy to an adversary. I

inquired  whether  there  were  no  circumstances  in  which  mercy  would  be

shown. He replied that if a person could place himself behind a woman in

such a way that he would be up to a point covered by her skirt, his life would

be  spared.  In  answer  to  further  questions  he  told  me  that  if  the  enemy

managed to get into a man’s tent, he would not be killed; and that there was

also safety within a sanctuary.

The anthropologist agreed when I suggested that the tent, the woman’s

skirt, and the sanctuary were symbols of the good and protective mother. He

also accepted my interpretation that the mother’s protection was extended to

a hated sibling—the man hiding behind the woman’s skirt—and that the ban

on  killing  within  one’s  own  tent  linked  with  the  rules  of  hospitality.  My

conclusion about the last point is that fundamentally hospitality links with

family life, with the relation of children to one another, and in particular to

the mother. For, as I suggested earlier, the tent represents the mother who

protects the family.

I am quoting this instance to suggest possible links between cultures that

appear to be entirely different, and to indicate that these links are found in the

relation to the primal good object, the mother, whatever may be the forms in

which distortions of character are accepted and even admired.                                          13

 

    A NOTE ON DEPRESSION IN THE SCHIZOPHRENIC

 

                                        (1960)

 


IN this contribution I shall concentrate mainly on depression as experienced

by  the  paranoid  schizophrenic.  My  first  point  arises  from  my  contention,

expressed  in  1935,  that  the  paranoid  position  (which  I  later  termed  the

paranoid-schizoid position) is bound up with splitting processes and contains

the  fixation  points  for  the  group  of  schizophrenias,  while  the  depressive

position contains the fixation points for manic-depressive illness. I also held

and still hold the view that paranoid and schizoid anxieties and depressive

feelings, as they may occur in more normal people under external or internal

pressure,  go  back  to  these  early  positions  which  are  revived  in  such

situations.

The often-observed connection between the groups of schizophrenic and

manic-depressive  illnesses  can  in  my  view  be  explained  by  the

developmental  link  existing  in  infancy  between  the  paranoid-schizoid  and

depressive  positions.  The  persecutory  anxieties  and  splitting  processes

characteristic of the paranoid-schizoid position continue, though changed in

strength and form, into the depressive position. Emotions of depression and

guilt, which develop more fully at the stage when the depressive position

arises,  are  already  (according  to  my  newer  concepts)  in  some  measure

operative during the paranoid-schizoid phase. The link between these two

positions—with all the changes in the ego which they imply—is that they are

both the outcome of the struggle between the life and death instincts. In the

earlier  stage  (extending  over  the  first  three  or  four  months  of  life)  the

anxieties arising from this struggle take on a paranoid form, and the still

incoherent ego is driven to reinforce splitting processes. With the growing

strength of the ego, the depressive position arises. During this stage paranoid

anxieties and schizoid mechanisms diminish and depressive anxiety gains in

strength. Here, too, we can see the working of the conflict between life and

death  instincts.  The  changes  which  have  taken  place  are  the  result  of

alterations in the states of fusion between the two instincts.

  Already in the first phase the primal object, the mother, is internalized inher good and bad aspects. I have often maintained that without the good

object at least to some extent becoming part of the ego, life cannot continue.

The relation to the object, however, changes in the second quarter of the first

year and the preservation of this good object is the essence of depressive

anxieties.  The  splitting  processes,  too,  change.  Whereas  at  the  beginning

there is a splitting between the good and bad object, this happens side by side

with  strong  fragmentation  both  of  the  ego  and  of  the  object.  As  the

fragmentation  processes  become  less,  the  division  between  the  injured  or

dead object and the live one comes more into the foreground. The lessening

of fragmentation and the focusing on the object go along with steps towards

integration which implies a growing fusion of the two instincts in which the

life instinct predominates.

In what follows I shall put forward some indications of why depressive

features in paranoid schizophrenics are not experienced in a form which is as

easily  recognized  as  in  manic-depressive  states,  and  I  shall  suggest  some

explanations for the difference in the nature of depression as experienced in

these  two  groups  of  illnesses.  In  the  past  I  have  laid  emphasis  on  the

distinction between paranoid anxiety, which I defined as being centred on the

preservation  of  the  ego,  and  depressive  anxiety,  which  focuses  on  the

preservation of the good internalized and external object. As I see it now, this

distinction is too schematic. For I have for many years put forward the view

that from the beginning of post-natal life the internalization of the object is

the basis of developmen. This implies that some internalization of the good

object  also  occurs  in  the  paranoid  schizophrenic.  From  birth  onwards,

however,  in  an  ego  lacking  in  strength  and  subjected  to  violent  splitting

processes the internalization of the good object differs in nature and strength

from that of the manic-depressive. It is less permanent, less stable, and does

not  allow  for  a  sufficient  identification  with  it.  Nevertheless,  since  some

internalization of the object does occur, anxiety on behalf of the ego—that is

to  say,  paranoid  anxiety—is  bound  to  include  also  some  concern  for  the

object.

  There is another new point to add: depressive anxiety and guilt (defined by

me as experienced in relation to the internalized good object), in so far as

they already occur in the paranoid-schizoid position, refer also to a part of the

ego, namely that part which is felt to contain the good object and therefore to

be the good part. That is to say, the guilt of the schizophrenic applies to

destroying  something  good  in  himself  and  also  to  weakening  his  ego  bysplitting processes.

  There is a second reason why the sense of guilt is experienced by the

schizophrenic in a very particular form and is therefore difficult to detect.

Owing  to  processes  of  fragmentation—and  I  shall  remind  you  here  of

Schreber’s capacity to divide himself into sixty souls—and to the violence

with which this splitting takes place in the schizophrenic, depressive anxiety

and guilt are very strongly split off. Whereas paranoid anxiety is experienced

in most parts of the split ego and therefore predominates, guilt and depression

are only experienced in some parts which are felt by the schizophrenic to be

out of reach, until the analysis brings them into consciousness.

  Moreover, since depression is mainly a result of synthesizing the good and

bad object and goes with a stronger integration of the ego, the nature of the

depression in the schizophrenic is bound to differ from that of the manic-

depressive.

A third reason why depression is so difficult to detect in the schizophrenic

is that projective identification, which is very strong in him, is used to project

depression and guilt into an object—during the analytic procedure mainly

into the analyst. Since re-introjection follows projective identification, the

attempt towards a lasting projection of depression does not succeed.

  Interesting  instances  of  how  in  schizophrenics  projective  identification

deals with depression have been given by Hanna Segal in a recent paper

(1956). In that paper the author exemplifies the process of improvement in

schizophrenics by helping them, by the analysis of deep layers, to diminish

splitting  and  projection  and  therefore  to  come  nearer  to  experiencing  the

depressive position, with ensuing guilt and urge for reparation.

It is only in the analysis of deep layers of the mind that we come across the

schizophrenic’s feelings of despair about being confused and in bits. Further

work  enables  us  in  some  cases  to  get  access  to  the  feeling  of  guilt  and

depression about being dominated by destructive impulses and about having

destroyed oneself and one’s good object by splitting processes. As a defence

against such pain we might find that fragmentation occurs again; it is only by

repeated experiences of such pain and the analysis of it that progress can be

made.

I wish here quite briefly to refer to the analysis of a very ill boy of nine

who  was  incapable  of  learning  and  was  deeply  disturbed  in  his  object

relations. In one session he experienced strongly a feeling of despair and guilt

about having fragmented himself and destroyed what was good in him, andthe affection for his mother, as well as inability to express it, came up. At that

moment he took his beloved watch out of his pocket, threw it on the floor and

stamped on it until it was in little pieces. That meant that he both expressed

and repeated the fragmentation of his self. I would now conclude that this

fragmentation appeared also as a defence against the pain of integration. I

have  had  similar  experiences  in  the  analysis  of  adults,  only  with  the

difference that they were not expressed by destroying a loved possession.

If the drive to make reparation is mobilized by the analysis of destructive

impulses and splitting process, steps towards improvement—and sometimes

towards  a  cure—can  be  made.  The  means  of  strengthening  the  ego,  of

enabling  the  schizophrenic  to  experience  the  split-off  goodness  both  of

himself and of the object, are based on healing the splitting process in some

measure and therefore diminishing the fragmentation, which means that the

lost parts of the self become more accessible to him. By contrast, I believe

that although therapeutic methods of helping the schizophrenic by enabling

him to perform constructive activities are useful, they are not as lasting as the

analysis of deep layers of the mind and of splitting processes.                                          14

 

                            ON MENTAL HEALTH

 

                                        (1960)

 


A well-integrated personality is the foundation for mental health. I shall begin

by  enumerating  a  few  elements  of  an  integrated  personality:  emotional

maturity, strength of character, capacity to deal with conflicting emotions, a

balance  between  internal  life  and  adaptation  to  reality,  and  a  successful

welding into a whole of the different parts of the personality.

To  some  extent  infantile  phantasies  and  desires  persist  even  in  an

emotionally  mature  person.  If  phantasies  and  desires  have  been  freely

experienced and successfully worked through—first of all in the play of the

child—they are a source of interests and activities and thereby enrich the

personality. But if grievance about unfulfilled desires has remained too potent

and  their  working-through  is  therefore  impeded,  personal  relations  and

enjoyment from various sources are disturbed, it becomes difficult to accept

those  substitutes  which  would  be  more  appropriate  to  later  stages  of

development, and the sense of reality is impaired.

  Even if development is satisfactory and leads to enjoyment from various

sources,  some  feeling  of  mourning  for  irretrievably  lost  pleasures  and

unfulfilled possibilities can still be found in the deeper layers of the mind.

While regret that childhood and youth will never return is often consciously

experienced by people near to middle age, in psycho-analysis we find that

even infancy and its pleasures are still unconsciously longed for. Emotional

maturity means that these feelings of loss can up to a point be counteracted

by the ability to accept substitutes, and infantile phantasies do not disturb

adult emotional life. Being able to enjoy pleasures which are available is

bound up at any age with a relative freedom from envy and grievances. One

way in which contentment at a later stage in life can therefore be found is to

enjoy vicariously the pleasures of young people, particularly of our children

and grandchildren. Another source of gratification, even before old age, is the

richness of memories which keep the past alive.

  Strength of character is based on some very early processes. The first and

fundamental relation in which the child experiences feelings of love as wellas of hate is the relation to the mother. Not only does she figure as an external

object, but the infant also takes into himself (introjects, according to Freud)

aspects of her personality. If the good aspects of the introjected mother are

felt to dominate over the frustrating ones—this internalized mother becomes

a  foundation  for  strength  of  character,  because  the  ego  can  develop  its

potentialities on that basis. For, if she can be felt to be guiding and protecting

but not dominating, the identification with her makes possible inner peace.

The success of this first relation extends to relations with other members of

the family, first of all to the father, and is reflected in adult attitudes, both in

the family circle and towards people in general.

The internalization of the good parents and the identification with them

underlie loyalty towards people and causes and the ability to make sacrifices

for  one’s  convictions.  Loyalty  towards  what  is  loved  or  felt  to  be  right

implies  that  hostile  impulses  bound  up  with  anxieties  (which  are  never

entirely eliminated) are turned towards those objects which endanger what is

felt to be good. This process never fully succeeds and the anxiety remains

that destructiveness may also endanger the good internalized object as well as

the external one.

  Many apparently well-balanced people have no strength of character. They

make life easy for themselves by avoiding inner and external conflicts. As a

consequence they aim at what is successful or expedient and they cannot

develop deep-rooted convictions.

  However, a strong character, if it is not mitigated by consideration for

others, is not characteristic of a balanced personality. Understanding of other

people, compassion, sympathy and tolerance, enrich our experience of the

world, and make us feel more secure in ourselves and less lonely.

  Balance depends upon some insight into the variety of our contradictory

impulses and feelings and the capacity to come to terms with these inner

conflicts. An aspect of balance is the adaptation to the external world—an

adaptation which does not interfere with the freedom of our own emotions

and thoughts. This implies an interaction: inner life always influences the

attitudes towards external reality and in turn is influenced by the adjustment

to the world of reality. Already the infant internalizes his first experiences

and the people who surround him and these internalizations influence his

inner life. If the goodness of the object predominates in these processes and

becomes part of the personality, his attitude towards the experiences coming

from the external world is in turn favourably influenced. It is not necessarilya perfect world which such an infant perceives, but it is certainly a world

much more worth while because his internal situation is a happier one. A

successful  interaction  of  this  kind  contributes  to  balance  and  to  a  good

relation to the external world.

  Balance does not mean the avoidance of conflict; it implies the strength to

live through painful emotions and to cope with them. If painful emotions are

excessively split off, this restricts the personality and leads to inhibitions of

various  kinds.  In  particular  the  repression  of  phantasy  life  has  strong

repercussions on development, for it results in inhibition of talents and of

intellect; it also impedes the appreciation of other people’s achievements and

the enjoyment which could be derived from them. Lack of enjoyment in work

and leisure and in contacts with other people leaves the personality barren

and  stirs  up  anxieties  and  dissatisfactions.  Such  anxieties,  both  of  a

persecutory  and  depressive  nature,  are—if  excessive—a  foundation  for

mental illness.

The fact that some people go through life fairly smoothly, particularly if

they are successful, does not exclude their liability to mental illness if they

have  never  come  to  terms  with  their  deeper  conflicts.  These  unsolved

conflicts may make themselves felt in particular at certain critical phases,

such as adolescence, middle age or old age, whereas people who are mentally

healthy are much more likely to remain balanced at any stage of life and are

less dependent on external success.

It is evident from my description that mental health is not compatible with

shallowness. For shallowness is bound up with denial of inner conflict and of

external difficulties. Denial is resorted to excessively because the ego is not

strong enough to cope with pain. Although in some situations denial appears

to be part of a normal personality, if it is predominant it leads to lack of depth

because  it  prevents  insight  into  one’s  inner  life  and  therefore  real

understanding of others. One of the satisfactions lost is the ability to give and

take—to experience gratitude and generosity.

The insecurity which underlies strong denial is also a cause on lack of trust

in ourselves because, unconsciously, insufficient insight results in parts of the

personality remaining unknown. To escape from that insecurity there is a

turning  to  the  external  world;  however,  if  misfortune  or  failure  in

achievements and in relations to people should arise, such individuals are

incapable of dealing with them.

By contrast, a person who can deeply experience sorrow when it arises isalso able to share other people’s grief and misfortune. At the same time, not

to be overwhelmed by grief or by other people’s unhappiness and to regain

and  maintain  a  balance  is  part  of  mental  health.  The  first  experience  of

sympathizing with other people’s sorrows is in relation to those closest to the

young child—parents and siblings. In adulthood parents who can understand

their children’s conflicts and share their occasional sadness have a deeper

insight into the complexities of the child’s inner life. This means that they are

also able to share fully the child’s pleasures and derive happiness from this

close bond.

  Some  striving  for  external  success  is  quite  compatible  with  a  strong

character if it does not become the focus on which satisfaction in life rests. In

my observation, if that is the main aim and the other attitudes which I have

mentioned  earlier  are  not  developed,  mental  balance  is  insecure.  External

satisfactions do not make up for the lack of peace of mind. This can only

come about if inner conflicts are reduced and therefore trust in oneself and in

others has been established. If such peace of mind is lacking, the individual is

liable  to  respond  to  any  external  reverses  with  strong  feelings  of  being

persecuted and deprived.

The description of mental health I have given shows its many-sided and

complex nature. For, as I have tried to indicate, it is based on an interplay

between the fundamental sources of mental life—the impulses of love and

hate—an interplay in which the capacity for love is predominant.

In order to throw light on the origin of mental health, I shall give a short

outline of the emotional life of the infant and young child. The young infant’s

good relation to the mother and to the food, love and care she provides is the

basis for a stable emotional development. However, even at this early stage,

and even under very favourable conditions, the conflict between love and

hate (or, to put it in Freud’s terms, between destructive impulses and libido)

plays an important rôle in this relation. Frustrations, which to some extent are

unavoidable, strengthen hate and aggressiveness. By frustration I do not only

mean  that  the  infant  is  not  always  fed  when  he  wants  to  be;  we  find  in

analysis  retrospectively  that  there  are  unconscious  desires—not  always

perceptible in the behaviour of the infant—which focus on the continuous

presence of the mother and her exclusive love. It is part of the emotional life

of the infant that he is greedy and desires more than even the best external

situation  can  fulfil.  Together  with  destructive  impulses  the  infant  also

experiences feelings of envy which reinforce his greed and interfere with hisbeing able to enjoy the available satisfactions. Destructive feelings give rise

to fear of retaliation and persecution, and this is the first form anxiety takes in

the infant.

This struggle has the effect that in so far as the infant wants to preserve the

loved aspects of the good mother, internal and external, he must continue to

split love from hate and thus to maintain the division of the mother into a

good one and a bad one. This enables him to derive a certain amount of

security from his relation to the loved mother and therefore to develop his

capacity for love. If splitting is not too deep, and integration and synthesis at

a later stage are not impeded, this is a precondition for a good relation to the

mother and for normal development.

I have mentioned persecutory feelings as the first form of anxiety. But

feelings of a depressive nature also are sporadically experienced from the

beginning  of  life.  They  gain  in  strength  with  the  growth  of  the  ego  and

increasing sense of reality and come to a head about the second half of the

first year (depressive position). At that stage the infant experiences more fully

depressive anxiety and a sense of guilt about his aggressive impulses towards

his loved mother. Many problems which arise in young children with varying

severity—such  as  disturbed  sleep,  difficulties  over  eating,  inability  to  be

contented  by  themselves,  and  constant  demands  for  attention  and  the

presence of the mother—are fundamentally an outcome of this conflict. At a

later stage another outcome increases difficulties in adapting to the demands

of upbringing.

  Together with the more developed sense of guilt, a wish to make reparation

is  experienced,  and  this  tendency  brings  relief  to  the  infant  because  by

pleasing his mother he feels that he undoes the harm which in his aggressive

phantasies he is inflicting on her. The ability—however primitive in the very

young child—to give effect to this urge forms one of the main factors in

helping him to some extent to overcome his depression and guilt. If he cannot

feel and express his wish for reparation, which would mean that his capacity

for love is not strong enough, the infant may resort to increased splitting

processes. As a result he may appear to be excessively good and submissive.

But  such  splitting  may  impair  gifts  and  talents  because  they  are  often

repressed  together  with  the  painful  feelings  which  underlie  the  child’s

conflicts. Thus not to be able as an infant to experience painful conflicts

implies also losing a great deal in other ways, such as the development of

interests and the capacity to appreciate people and to experience pleasures ofvarious kinds.

In  spite  of  all  these  internal  and  external  difficulties,  the  young  child

normally  finds  a  way  of  coping  with  his  fundamental  conflicts,  and  this

allows  him  at  other  times  to  experience  enjoyment  and  gratitude  for

happiness received. If he is lucky enough to have understanding parents, his

problems can be diminished, and—on the other hand—a too strict or too

lenient upbringing may increase them. The child’s capacity to cope with his

conflicts continues into adolescence and adulthood and is the foundation for

mental  health.  Mental  health  is  thus  not  only  a  product  of  the  mature

personality  but  in  some  way  applies  to  every  stage  in  the  individual’s

development.

I have mentioned the importance of the child’s background, but this is only

one aspect of a very complex interplay between internal and external factors.

By internal factors I mean that some children from the beginning have a

greater capacity for love than others, which is bound up with a stronger ego,

and that their phantasy life is richer and allows interests and gifts to develop.

We may, therefore, find that children under favourable circumstances do not

acquire  the  balance  which  I  take  to  be  the  foundation  for  mental  health,

whereas sometimes children under unfavourable conditions are able to do so.

  Certain  attitudes  which  are  prominent  in  the  early  stages  continue  in

varying measure into adult life. It is only if they are sufficiently modified that

mental health is possible. For instance, there is a feeling of omnipotence in

the  infant  which  makes  both  his  hating  and  his  loving  impulses  appear

extremely powerful to him. Remnants of this attitude can easily be observed

also in the adult, though normally the better adaptation to reality diminishes

the feeling that what has been wished has taken effect.

  Another factor in early development is denial of what is painful, and here

again we are aware that in adult life this attitude has not entirely vanished.

The urge to idealize both the self and the object is a result of the infant’s need

to split good from bad, both in himself and in his objects. There is a close

correlation between the need to idealize and persecutory anxiety. Idealization

has the effect of a reassurance, and in so far as this process remains operative

in the adult, it still serves the purpose of counteracting persecutory anxieties.

The  fear  of  enemies  and  of  hostile  attacks  is  mitigated  by  increasing  the

power of goodness of other people.

The  more  all  these  attitudes  have  been  modified  in  childhood  and  in

adulthood, the greater will be mental balance. When judgement is not blurredby persecutory anxiety and idealization, a mature outlook is possible.

The  attitudes  I  have  enumerated,  since  they  are  never  completely

overcome, play a part in the manifold defences which the ego uses in order to

combat anxiety. For instance, splitting is one way of preserving the good

object  and  the  good  impulses  against  the  dangerous  and  frightening

destructive impulses which create retaliatory objects, and this mechanism is

reinforced  whenever  anxiety  is  increased.  I  have  also  found  in  analysing

young  children  how  strongly  they  reinforce  omnipotence  when  they  are

frightened Projection and introjection, which are fundamental processes, are

other mechanisms which can be used defensively. The child feels himself to

be bad and he attempts to escape from guilt by attributing his own badness to

others, which means that he reinforces his persecutory anxieties. A way in

which introjection is used as a defence is to take into the self objects which

one  hopes  will  be  a  protection  against  the  bad  ones.  A  corollary  of

persecutory anxiety is idealization, for the greater the persecutory anxiety the

stronger  the  need  to  idealize.  The  idealized  mother  thus  becomes  a  help

against the persecutory one. Some element of denial is bound up with all

these defences because it is the means of coping with every frightening or

painful situation.

The more the ego develops, the more intricate are the defences used and

the better they dovetail, but they are less rigid. When insight is not stifled by

defences, mental health is possible. A mentally healthy person can become

aware of his need to see any unpleasant situation in a more pleasant light and

can correct his tendency to embellish it. In this way he is less exposed to the

painful  experience  of  idealization  breaking  down  and  persecutory  and

depressive anxieties getting the upper hand, just as he is more able to cope

with painful experiences derived from the external world.

One important element in mental health that I have so far not dealt with is

the integration which finds expression in the welding together of the different

parts  of  the  self.  The  need  for  integration  derives  from  the  unconscious

feeling  that  parts  of  the  self  are  unknown,  and  there  is  a  sense  of

impoverishment  due  to  the  self  being  deprived  of  some  of  its  parts.  The

unconscious feeling that parts of the self are unknown increases the urge for

integration. The need for integration, moreover, derives from the unconscious

knowledge that hate can only be mitigated by love; and if the two are kept

apart, this mitigation cannot succeed. In spite of this urge, integration always

implies pain, because the split-off hate and its consequences are extremelypainful to face; the incapacity to bear this pain re-awakens a tendency to split

off the threatening and disturbing parts of impulses. In a normal person, in

spite of these conflicts, a considerable amount of integration can take place,

and when it is disturbed for external or internal reasons a normal person can

find his way back to it. Integration also has the effect of tolerance towards

one’s own impulses and therefore also towards other people’s defects. My

experience  has  shown  me  that  complete  integration  never  exists,  but  the

nearer he reaches towards it, the more will the individual have insight into his

anxieties and impulses, the stronger will be his character, and the greater will

be his mental balance.                                          15

 

            SOME REFLECTIONS ON ‘THE ORESTEIA’

 

                                        (1963)

 


THE following discussion is based on Gilbert Murray’s famous translation of

the Oresteia. The main angle from which I intend to consider this trilogy is

the variety of symbolic rôles in which the characters appear.

Let me first give a brief outline of the three plays. In the first, Agamemnon,

the  hero  returns  triumphant  after  the  sack  of  Troy.  He  is  received  by

Clytemnestra, his wife, with false praise and admiration, and she persuades

him to walk into the house over a precious tapestry. There are some hints that

she uses the same tapestry later to envelop Agamemnon in his bath and to

make him helpless. She kills him with her battle-axe and appears before the

Elders in a state of great triumph. She justifies her murder as a revenge for

the sacrifice of Iphigenia. For Iphigenia had been killed on Agamemnon’s

command in order to make the winds favourable for the voyage to Troy.

  Clytemnestra’s revenge on Agamemnon, however, is not only caused by

the grief for her child. She has, during his absence, taken his arch-enemy as

her lover, and is therefore confronted with the fear of Agamemnon’s revenge.

It is clear that either Clytemnestra and her lover will be killed, or that she has

to kill her husband. Over and above these motives, she gives the impression

of deeply hating him, which appears clearly when she speaks to the Elders

and voices her triumph about his death. These feelings are soon followed by

depression. She restrains Aegisthus, who wants immediately to suppress the

opposition among the Elders by violence, and begs him: ‘let us not stain

ourselves with blood’.

The next part of the trilogy, the Cheophoroe, deals with Orestes who had

been sent away by his mother when he was a young child. He meets Electra

by the funeral mound of their father. Electra, who burns with hostility against

her mother, has come with the slave women sent by Clytemnestra after a very

frightening dream to bring libations to Agamemnon’s tomb. It is the leader of

these libation bearers who suggests to Electra and Orestes that full revenge

would imply killing Clytemnestra as well as Aegisthus. Her words confirm

for Orestes the command given to him by the Delphic Oracle—a commandwhich ultimately came from Apollo himself.

  Orestes disguises himself as a travelling merchant, and accompanied by his

friend Pylades, goes to the Palace, where, relying on not being recognized, he

tells Clytemnestra that Orestes has died. Clytemnestra gives expression to

grief. However, that she is not fully convinced is shown by her sending for

Aegisthus with the message that he should come with his spearmen. The

leader of the slave women suppresses this message; Aegisthus arrives alone

and  unarmed,  and  Orestes  kills  him.  A  slave  informs  Clytemnestra  of

Aegisthus’ death, and she feels herself to be in danger and calls for her battle-

axe. Orestes actually threatens to kill her; but instead of fighting him, she

implores him to spare her life. She also warns him that the Erinnyes would

punish him. In spite of her warnings, he kills his mother, and the Erinnyes at

once appear to him.

  Years have passed when the third play (the Eumenides) opens—years in

which Orestes has been hunted by the Erinnyes and kept away from his home

and from his father’s throne. He tries to reach Delphi where he hopes to be

pardoned. Apollo advises him to appeal to Athena, who represents justice and

wisdom. Athena arranges for a tribunal to which she calls the wisest men of

Athens, and before which Apollo, Orestes and the Erinnyes give evidence.

The votes cast for and against Orestes are equal, and Athena, who has the

casting  vote,  supports  the  pardon  for  Orestes.  In  the  course  of  the

proceedings, the Erinnyes maintain stubbornly that Orestes must be punished

and that they are not going to give up their prey. However, Athena promises

them that she will share with them her power over Athens and that they will

remain the guardians of law and order for ever and as such will be honoured

and loved. Her promises and arguments produce a change in the Erinnyes

who become the Eumenides, the ‘kindly ones’. They agree to Orestes being

pardoned, and he returns to his native town to become his father’s successor.

Before attempting to discuss those aspects of the Oresteia which are of

particular interest to me, I wish to restate some of my findings about early

development. In the analysis of young children, I discovered a ruthless and

persecuting super-ego, co-existing with the relation to the loved and even

idealized parents. Retrospectively I found that during the first three months,

in which destructive impulses, projection and splitting are at their height,

frightening and persecuting figures are part of the infant’s emotional life. To

begin with they represent the frightening aspects of the mother and threaten

the infant with all evils which he in states of hate and rage directs against hisprimal object. Although these figures are counteracted by love towards the
                                                                            1
mother,  they  are  nevertheless  the  cause  of  great  anxieties.  From  the

beginning, introjection and projection are operative and are the basis for the

internalization of the first and fundamental object, the mother’s breast and the

mother,  both  in  her  frightening  and  in  her  good  aspects.  It  is  this

internalization which is the foundation of the super-ego. I tried to show that

even  the  child  who  has  a  loving  relation  with  his  mother  has  also
                                                                                          2
unconsciously a terror of being devoured, torn up and destroyed by her.

These anxieties, though modified by a growing sense of reality, go on to a

greater or lesser extent throughout early childhood.

  Persecutory  anxieties  of  this  nature  are  part  of  the  paranoid-schizoid

position which characterizes the first few months of life. It includes a certain

amount  of  schizoid  withdrawal;  also  strong  destructive  impulses  (the

projection of which creates persecutory objects) and a splitting of the mother

figure into a very bad part and an idealized good one. There are many other

processes of splitting, such as fragmentation and a strong impetus to relegate
                                                                          3
the terrifying figures into the deep layers of the unconscious. Among the

mechanisms at their height during this stage is the denial of all frightening

situations; this is bound up with idealization. From the earliest stage onwards

these processes are reinforced by repeated experiences of frustration, which

can never be completely avoided.

It is part of the young infant’s anxiety situation that the terrifying figures

cannot be completely split off. Moreover, projection of hate and destructive

impulses can succeed only up to a point, and the division between the loved

and  the  hated  mother  cannot  be  fully  maintained.  Therefore  the  infant  is

unable to escape altogether from feelings of guilt, though in the early stages

these are only evanescent.

All these processes are bound up with the infant’s drive towards symbol

formation and form part of his phantasy life. Under the impact of anxiety,

frustration and his insufficient ability to express his emotions towards his

loved objects, he is driven to transfer his emotions and anxieties on to the

objects by which he is surrounded. This transfer occurs first of all to parts of

his own body as well as parts of his mother’s body.

The conflicts which the child experiences from birth are derived from the

struggle between life and death instincts which express themselves in conflict

between loving impulses and destructive ones. Both of them take on manifold

forms and have many ramifications. Thus, for instance, resentment increasesthe feelings of deprivation which are never missing in any infant’s life. While

the mother’s capacity to feed is a source of admiration, envy of this capacity

is a strong stimulus towards destructive impulses. It is inherent in envy that it

aims at spoiling and destroying the mother’s creativeness, on which at the

same time the infant depends; and this dependence reinforces hate and envy.

As soon as the relation to the father enters, there is admiration for the father’s

potency and power, which again leads to envy. Phantasies of reversing the

early situation and triumphing over the parents are elements in the emotional

life of the young infant. Sadistic impulses from oral and urethral and anal

sources find expression in these hostile feelings directed against the parents,

and in turn give rise to greater persecution and fear of retaliation by them.

I found that the frequent nightmares and phobias of young children derive

from the terror of persecutory parents who by internalization form the basis

of the relentless super-ego. It is a striking fact that children, in spite of love

and  affection  on  the  part  of  the  parents,  produce  threatening  internalized

figures;  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  I  found  the  explanation  for  this

phenomenon  in  the  projection  on  to  the  parents  of  the  child’s  own  hate,

increased by resentment about being in the parents’ power. This view at one

time seemed contradictory to Freud’s concept of the super-ego as mainly due

to the introjection of the punishing and restraining parents. Freud later on

agreed with my concept that the child’s hate and aggressiveness projected on

to the parents plays an important part in the development of the super-ego.

I came in the course of my work to see more clearly that a corollary to the

persecutory aspects of the internalized parents is their idealization. From the

beginning, under the influence of the life instinct, the infant also introjects a

good object, and the pressure of anxiety leads to the tendency to idealize this

object. This has repercussion on the development of the super-ego. We are

reminded here of Freud’s (1928) view, expressed in his paper on ‘Humour,’

(S.E. 21, p. 166) that the kind attitude of the parents enters into the child’s

super-ego.

  When persecutory anxiety is still in the ascendant, early feelings of guilt

and  depression  are  to  some  extent  experienced  as  persecution.  Gradually,

with increasing strength of the ego, greater integration and progress in the

relation to whole objects, persecutory anxiety loses in power and depressive

anxiety  dominates.  Greater  integration  implies  that  hate  in  some  measure

becomes mitigated by love, that the capacity for love gains in strength, and

that the split between hated and therefore terrifying objects, and loved ones,diminishes. Evanescent feelings of guilt, linked with a feeling of incapacity to

prevent destructive impulses from harming the loved objects, increase and

become more poignant. I have described this stage as the depressive position,

and my psycho-analytic experience with children and adults has confirmed

my findings that to go through the depressive position results in very painful

feelings.  I  cannot  here  discuss  the  manifold  defences  the  stronger  ego

develops to deal with depression and guilt.

At  this  stage  the  super-ego  makes  itself  felt  as  conscience;  it  forbids

murderous  and  destructive  tendencies  and  links  with  the  child’s  need  for

guidance and some restraint by his actual parents. The super-ego is the basis

for the moral law which is ubiquitous in humanity. However, even in normal

adults, under strong internal and external pressure, the split-off impulses and

the  split-off  dangerous  and  persecutory  figures  reappear  temporarily  and

influence the super-ego. The anxieties then experienced approximate to the

terrors of the infant, though in a different form.

The stronger the neurosis of the child, the less he is able to effect the

transition to the depressive position, and its working through is impeded by a

vacillation  between  persecutory  and  depressive  anxiety.  Throughout  this

early development a regression to the paranoid-schizoid stage may take place,

whereas a stronger ego and a greater capacity to bear suffering results in a

greater insight into his psychic reality and enables him to work through the

depressive position. This does not mean, as I have pointed out, that at this

stage  he  has  no  persecutory  anxiety.  In  fact,  persecutory  anxiety,  though

depressive feelings dominate, is part of the depressive position.

The experiences of suffering, depression and guilt, linked with the greater

love for the object, stir up the urge to make reparation. This urge diminishes

the persecutory anxiety relating to the object and therefore makes it more

trustworthy. All these changes, which express themselves in hopefulness, are

bound up with the diminished harshness of the super-ego.

If the depressive position is being successfully worked through—not only

during its climax in infancy but throughout childhood and in adulthood—the

super-ego is mainly felt to be guiding and restraining the destructive impulses

and some of its severity will have been mitigated. When the super-ego is not

excessively harsh, the individual is supported and helped by its influence, for

it  strengthens  the  loving  impulses  and  furthers  the  tendency  towards

reparation. A counterpart of this internal process is the encouragement by

parents when the child shows more creative and constructive tendencies andhis relation to his environment improves.

Before turning to the Oresteia and the conclusions I shall draw from it as

far as mental life is concerned, I should like to deal with the Hellenic concept

of hubris. In Gilbert Murray’s definition, ‘the typical sin which all things, so

far as they have life, commit is in poetry Hubris, a word generally translated

“insolence” or “pride” . . . Hubris grasps at more, bursts bounds and breaks

the order; it is followed by Dike, Justice, which re-establishes them. This

rhythm—Hubris-Dike,  Pride  and  its  fall,  Sin  and  Chastisement—is  the

commonest burden of those philosophical lyrics which are characteristic of

Greek tragedy. . . .’

In my view the reason why hubris appears to be so sinful is that it is based

on certain emotions which are felt to be dangerous to others and to the self.

One of the most important of these emotions is greed, first of all experienced

in  relation  to  the  mother;  it  is  accompanied  by  the  expectation  of  being

punished by the mother who has been exploited. Greed links with the concept

of moira, expounded in the Introduction by Gilbert Murray. Moira represents

the portion allotted to each man by the gods. When moira is overstepped,

punishment by the gods follows. The fear of such punishment goes back to

the fact that greed and envy are first of all experienced towards the mother

who is felt to be injured by these emotions and who by projection turns in the

child’s mind into a greedy and resentful figure. She is therefore feared as a

source of punishment, the prototype of God. Any overstepping of moira is

also felt to be closely bound up with envy of the possessions of others; as a

sequel, by projection, persecutory fear is aroused that others will envy and

destroy one’s own achievements or possessions.


    ‘. . . For not many men, the proverb saith,

    Can love a friend who fortune prospereth

    Unenvying; and about the envious brain

    Cold poison clings and doubles all the pain

    Life brings him. His own woundings he must nurse,

    And feels another’s gladness like a curse.’

 


  Triumph over everybody else, hate, the wish to destroy others, to humiliate

them, the pleasure in their destruction because they have been envied, all

these early emotions which are first experienced in connection with parentsand siblings form part of hubris. Every child at times has some envy and

wants to possess the attributes and capacities, first of all of the mother, and

then of the father. Envy is primarily directed towards the mother’s breast and

the  food  she  can  produce,  actually  towards  her  creativeness.  One  of  the

effects of strong envy is the wish to reverse the situation, to make the parents

helpless and infantile and to derive sadistic pleasure from this reversal. When

the infant feels dominated by these hostile impulses and in his mind destroys

the mother’s goodness and love, he feels not only persecuted by her, but also

guilty and bereft of good objects. One of the reasons why these phantasies

have such an impact on emotional life is that they are experienced in an

omnipotent way. In other words, in the infant’s mind, they have taken effect,

or might take effect, and he becomes responsible for all troubles or illness

which befall his parents. This leads to a constant fear of loss which increases

persecutory anxiety and underlies the fear of punishment for hubris.

  Later on, competitiveness and ambition, which are components of hubris,

may become deep causes of guilt, if envy and destructiveness predominate in

them. This guilt may be overlaid by denial, but behind denial the reproaches

which derive from the super-ego remain operative. I would suggest that the

processes I have described are the reason why hubris is felt to be so strongly

forbidden and punished according to Hellenic belief.

The  infantile  anxiety  lest  triumph  over  others  and  destruction  of  their

capacities make them envious and dangerous has important consequences in

later life. Some people deal with this anxiety by inhibiting their own gifts.

Freud (1916) has described a type of individual who cannot bear success

because it arouses guilt, and he connected this guilt in particular with the

Oedipus complex. In my view, such people originally meant to outshine and

destroy the mother’s fertility. Some of these feelings are transferred to the

father and to siblings, and later on to other people whose envy and hate are

then feared; guilt in this connection may lead to strong inhibitions of talent

and potentialities. There is a pertinent statement by Clytemnestra which sums

up this fear: ‘Who feareth envy, feareth to be great.’

I  shall  now  substantiate  my  conclusions  by  some  instances  from  the

analysis of young children. When a child in his play expresses his rivalry

with his father by making a small train move faster than a bigger one, or

makes the small train attack the larger one, the sequel is often a feeling of

persecution and guilt. In Narrative of a Child Analysis, I describe how every

session for some time ended with what the boy called a ‘disaster’ and whichconsisted in all the toys being knocked over. Symbolically this meant to the

child that he had been powerful enough to destroy his world. For a number of

sessions  there  was  usually  one  survivor—himself—and  the  sequel  to  the

‘disaster’ was a feeling of loneliness, anxiety and a longing for the return of

his good object.

  Another  instance  derives  from  the  analysis  of  an  adult.  A  patient  who

throughout life had restrained his ambition and his wish to be superior to

other people, and therefore had been unable adequately to develop his gifts,

dreamed  of  a  flag-staff  by  which  he  stood,  surrounded  by  children.  He

himself was the only adult. The children attempted in turn to climb to the top

of the flag-staff but failed. He thought in the dream that if he were to try to

climb but also failed that would amuse the children. Nevertheless, against his

will, he achieved the feat and found himself on top.

This dream confirmed and strengthened his insight, derived from former

material, that his ambition and competitiveness were much greater and more

destructive than he had formerly allowed himself to know. He had in the

dream  contemptuously  changed  his  parents,  the  analyst  and  all  potential

rivals into incompetent and helpless children. He alone was an adult. At the

same time he attempted to prevent himself from having success because his

success would mean hurting and humiliating people whom he also loved and

respected and who would turn into envious and dangerous persecutors—the

children  who  would  be  amused  by  his  failure.  However,  as  the  dream

showed, the attempt to inhibit his gifts failed. He reached the top and was

afraid of the consequences.

In  the Oresteia,  Agamemnon  displays hubris  in  full  measure.  He

experiences no sympathy with the people of Troy whom he has destroyed,

and seems to feel he had a right to destroy them. Only when speaking to

Clytemnestra about Cassandra does he refer to the precept that the conqueror

should have pity for the conquered. Since Cassandra, however, was obviously

his lover, it is not only compassion that he is expressing but also the wish to

preserve her for his own pleasure. Otherwise, it is clear that he is proud of the

terrible destruction he has wrought. But the prolonged war which he waged

has also meant suffering for the people of Argos, because many women have

been widowed and many mothers mourn their sons; his own family suffered

by being deserted for ten years. Thus ultimately some of the destruction of

which he is so proud when he returns, damaged the people towards whom he

can be assumed to have had some love. His destructiveness, involving thosenearest to him, could be interpreted as being directed against his early loved

objects. The ostensible reason for committing all those crimes was to avenge

the insult against his brother to help him to regain Helen. It is made clear,

however, by Aeschylus that Agamemnon was driven by ambition as well, and

being acclaimed ‘the King of Kings’ satisfied his hubris.

Yet his successes not only satisfied his hubris; they increased it and led to

a hardening and deterioration of his character. We learn that the Watchman

was devoted to him, that the members of his household and the Elders loved

him, and that his subjects were craving for his return. This would indicate

that  in  the  past  he  had  been  more  humane  than  after  his  victories.

Agamemnon reporting his triumphs and the destruction of Troy seems neither

lovable nor able to love. I shall again quote Aeschylus.


    ‘Sin lies that way.

    For visibly Pride doth breed its own return

    On prideful men, who, when their houses swell

    With happy wealth, breathe ever wrath and blood.’

 


His unrestrained destructiveness and glorying in power and cruelty point in

my view to a regression. At an early age the young child—in particular the

boy—admires not only goodness but also power and cruelty, and attributes

these qualities to the potent father with whom he identifies but whom at the

same time he fears. In an adult, regression can revive this infantile attitude

and diminish compassion.

  Considering  the  excessive hubris  which  Agamemnon  displays,

Clytemnestra in a sense is the tool of justice, dike. In a very telling passage in

the Agamemnon she describes to the Elders, before her husband arrives, her

vision of the sufferings of the people of Troy, and does so with sympathy and

without  any  expression  of  admiration  for  Agamemnon’s  achievements.  In

turn,  at  the  moment  when  she  has  murdered  him, hubris  dominates  her

feelings and there are no signs of remorse. When she again speaks to the

Elders, she is proud of the murder she has committed and triumphant about it.

She supports Aegisthus in usurping Agamemnon’s regal powers.

  Agamemnon’s hubris  was  thus  followed  by dike  and  in  turn  by

Clytemnestra’s hubris, which again was punished by dike, represented by

Orestes.I  should  like  to  put  forward  some  suggestions  about  the  change  in

Agamemnon’s attitude towards his subjects and his family as a result of his

successful campaigns. As I have mentioned earlier, his lack of sympathy with

the  sufferings  his  prolonged  war  has  inflicted  on  the  people  of  Troy  is

striking. Yet he is frightened of the gods and of the impending doom, and

therefore only unwillingly agrees to enter the house treading on beautiful

tapestries  which  Clytemnestra’s  maids  had  spread  out  for  him.  When  he

argues that one should be careful not to attract the wrath of the gods, he

expresses only his persecutory anxiety and no guilt. Perhaps the regression

which I mentioned earlier was possible because kindness and sympathy had

never been sufficiently established as part of his character.

By  contrast,  Orestes  is  subject  to  feelings  of  guilt  as  soon  as  he  has

committed the murder of his mother. This is the reason why I believe that in

the end Athena is able to help him. While he feels no guilt about his murder

of Aegisthus, he is in severe conflict about killing his mother. His motives for

doing  so  are  duty  and  also  love  for  his  dead  father  with  whom  he  is

identified. There is very little to show that he wanted to triumph over his

mother.  This  would  indicate  that hubris  and  its  concomitants  were  not

excessive in him. We know that it was partly Electra’s influence and Apollo’s

command which led him to commit the murder of his mother. Immediately

after he has killed her, remorse and horror of himself arise, symbolized by the

Furies who at once attack him. The leader of the slave women, who very

much encouraged the killing of his mother, and who cannot see the Furies,

tries to comfort him by pointing out that he was justified in what he has done

and that order has been restored. The fact that nobody but Orestes can see the

Furies shows that this persecutory situation is an internal one.

As we know, in killing his mother, Orestes follows Apollo’s command

given at Delphi. This too can be considered as part of his internal situation.

Apollo  in  one  aspect  here  represents  Orestes’  own  cruelty  and  vengeful

urges, and thus we discover Orestes’ feelings of destructiveness. However,

the  main  elements  which hubris  includes,  such  as  envy  and  the  need  to

triumph, appear not to be dominant in him.

It  is  significant  that  Orestes  sympathizes  strongly  with  the  neglected,

unhappy  and  mournful  Electra.  For  his  own  destructiveness  had  been

stimulated by his resentment of his neglect by his mother. She had sent him

away to strangers; in other words, she gave him too little love. The primary

motive  for  Electra’s  hate  is  that  apparently  she  had  not  been  lovedsufficiently by her mother and that her longing to be loved by her had been

frustrated.  Electra’s  hate  against  her  mother—although  intensified  by  the

murder of Agamemnon—contains also the rivalry of the daughter with the

mother, which focuses on not having had her sexual desires gratified by the

father. These early disturbances of the girl’s relation to her mother are an
                                                                        4
important factor in the development of her Oedipus complex.

  Another aspect of the Oedipus complex is shown by the hostility between

Cassandra  and  Clytemnestra.  Their  direct  rivalry  concerning  Agamemnon

illustrates  one  feature  of  the  daughter  and  mother  relation—the  rivalry

between two women for the sexual gratification by the same man. Because

Cassandra had been Agamemnon’s lover, she could also feel like a daughter

who had actually succeeded in taking away the father from the mother and

therefore expects punishment from her. It is part of the Oedipus situation that

the mother responds—or is felt to respond—with hatred to the oedipal desires

of the daughter.

If we consider Apollo’s attitude, there are indications that his complete

obedience to Zeus is bound up with hatred of women and with his inverted

Oedipus complex. The following passages are characteristic of his contempt

for women’s fertility:


    ‘No nursling of the darkness of the womb,

    But such a flower of life as goddess ne’er

    Hath borne. . . .’ (speaking of Athena)


    The mother to the child that men call hers

    Is not true life-begetter, but a nurse

    Of live seed. ’Tis the sower of the seed

    Alone begetteth. . . .’

 


His hatred of women also enters into his command that Orestes should kill

his  mother,  and  into  the  persistence  with  which  he  persecutes  Cassandra,

whatever  her  failing  towards  him  might  have  been.  The  fact  that  he  is

promiscuous  is  in  no  contradiction  to  his  inverted  Oedipus  complex.  By

contrast, he praises Athena who has hardly any feminine attributes and is

completely identified with her father. At the same time his admiration for the

older sister may also indicate a positive attitude towards the mother figure.That is to say, some signs of the direct Oedipus complex are not altogether

missing.

The good and helpful Athena has no mother, having been produced by

Zeus. She shows no hostility towards women, but I would suggest that this

lack of rivalry and hate has some connection with her having appropriated the

father; he returns her devotion, for she has a particular position among all the

gods and is known to be the favourite of Zeus. Her complete submission and

devotion to Zeus can be considered as an expression of her Oedipus complex.

Her apparent freedom from conflict may be explained by her having turned

her whole love towards one object only.

  Orestes’ Oedipus complex can also be gathered from various passages in

the  Trilogy.  He  reproaches  his  mother  for  having  neglected  him  and

expresses his resentment against her. Nevertheless, there are hints that his

relation  to  his  mother  was  not  entirely  negative.  The  libations  which

Clytemnestra offers to Agamemnon are obviously valued by Orestes because

he believes that they are reviving the father. When she tells him that she had

nourished and loved him as a baby, he wavers in his decision to kill her and

turns  to  his  friend  Pylades  for  advice.  There  are  also  indications  of  his

jealousy  which  point  at  a  positive  Oedipus  relation.  Clytemnestra’s  grief

about Aegisthus’ death and her love for him rouse Orestes to fury. It is a

frequent experience that the hate towards the father in the Oedipus situation

can be deflected towards another person; for instance, Hamlet’s hate for his
    5
uncle. Orestes idealizes his father, and it is often easier to restrain rivalry

and hate towards a dead father than towards a living one. His idealization of

the greatness of Agamemnon—an idealization which Electra also experiences

—leads him to deny that Agamemnon had sacrificed Iphigenia and showed

utter  ruthlessness  towards  the  sufferings  of  the  Trojans.  In  admiring

Agamemnon, Orestes also identifies with the idealized father, and this is the

way in which many a son overcomes his rivalry with the father’s greatness

and his envy of him. These attitudes, increased by his mother’s neglect as

well  as  by  her  murder  of  Agamemnon,  form  part  of  Orestes’  inverted

Oedipus complex.

I have mentioned above that Orestes was relatively free from hubris and, in

spite of his identification with his father, more liable to a sense of guilt. His

suffering  following  the  murder  of  Clytemnestra  represents,  in  my  view,

persecutory  anxiety  and  the  feelings  of  guilt  which  form  part  of  the

depressive position. The interpretation seems to suggest itself that Oresteswas suffering from manic-depressive illness—Gilbert Murray calls him mad

—because of his excessive feelings of guilt (represented by the Furies). On

the other hand, we may assume that Aeschylus shows in a magnified form an

aspect of normal development. For certain features which are the basis of

manic-depressive illness are not strongly operative in Orestes. In my view he

shows  the  mental  state  which  I  take  to  be  characteristic  of  the  transition

between the paranoid-schizoid and the depressive position, a stage when guilt

is essentially experienced as persecution. When the depressive position is

reached  and  worked  through—which  is  symbolized  in  the  Trilogy  by

Orestes’ changed demeanour at the Areopagus—guilt becomes predominant

and persecution diminishes.

The  play  suggests  to  me  that  Orestes  can  overcome  his  persecutory

anxieties and work through the depressive position because he never gives up

the urge to cleanse himself of his crime and to return to his people whom

presumably he wishes to govern in a benevolent way. These intentions point

to the drive for reparation which is characteristic of the overcoming of the

depressive position. His relation to Electra who stirs up his pity and love, the

fact that he never gives up hopefulness in spite of suffering and his whole

attitude towards the gods, in particular his gratitude towards Athena—all this

suggests that his internalization of a good object was relatively stable and a

basis for normal development had been laid. We can only guess that in the

earliest  stage  these  feelings  entered  in  some  way  into  the  relation  to  his

mother, because when Clytemnestra reminds him:


    ‘My child, dost thou not fear

    To strike this breast? Hast thou not slumbered here,

    Thy gums draining the milk that I did give?’

 


Orestes lowers his sword and hesitates. The warmth which the nurse shows

for him suggests love given and received in infancy. The nurse could have

been a mother substitute; but up to a point this loving relation may have

applied to the mother as well. Orestes’ mental and physical suffering when

being driven from place to place are a vivid picture of sufferings experienced

when guilt and persecution are at their height. The furies who persecute him

are the personification of bad conscience and make no allowance for the fact

that he was commanded to commit the murder. I have suggested above thatwhen Apollo gave that command he represented Orestes’ own cruelty, and

looking  at  it  from  this  angle  we  understand  why  the  Furies  make  no

allowance for the fact that Apollo ordered him to commit the murder; for it is

characteristic of a relentless super-ego that it will not forgive destructiveness.

The unforgiving nature of the super-ego, and the persecutory anxieties it

arouses, find expression, I believe, in the Hellenic myth that the power of the

Furies continues even after death. This is seen as a way of punishing the

sinner and is an element common to most religions. In the Eumenides Athena

says:


    ‘. . . Most potent hands

    Hath great Erinyes, in the lands

    Where dwell the deathless and the dead.’

 


The Furies also claim that


    ‘Mine until death He wandereth,

    And freedom never more shall win,

    Not when dead. . . .’

 


  Another point which is specific to the Hellenic beliefs is the need of the

dead  to  be  avenged  if  death  has  been  violent.  I  would  suggest  that  this

demand  for  revenge  derives  from  early  persecutory  anxieties  which  are

increased by the child’s death wishes against the parents and undermine his

security and contentment. The attacking enemy thus becomes an embodiment

of  all  the  evils  which  the  infant  expects  in  retaliation  for  his  destructive

impulses.
                              6
I  have  dealt  elsewhere  with  the  excessive  fear  of  death  in  people  for

whom death is a persecution by internal and external enemies as well as a

threat of destruction to the good internalized object. If this fear is particularly

intense, it may extend to terrors which threaten in after-life. In Hades revenge

for  the  harm  suffered  preceding  death  is  essential  for  peace  after  death.

Orestes and Electra are both convinced that their dead father supports them in

the task of revenge; and Orestes, in describing his conflict to the Areopagus,

points out that Apollo foretold punishment for him if he did not avenge his

father. Clytemnestra’s ghost urging the Erinnyes to resume their pursuit ofOrestes, complains of the contempt to which she is exposed in Hades because

her murderer has not been punished. She is obviously moved by continuing

hate against Orestes, and it could be concluded that hate continuing beyond

the grave underlies the need for revenge after death. It may also be that the

feeling attributed to the dead of being despised while their murderer remains

unpunished  derives  from  the  suspicion  that  their  descendants  do  not  care

enough for them.

  Another  reason  why  the  dead  call  for  revenge  is  hinted  at  in  the

Introduction where Gilbert Murray refers to the belief that Mother Earth is

polluted by the blood which is split on her and that she and the Chtonian

people (the dead) inside her call out for vengeance. I would interpret the

Chtonian people as the unborn babies inside the mother whom the child feels

he has destroyed in his jealous and hostile phantasies. Abundant material in

psycho-analysis shows the deep feelings of guilt about a miscarriage which

the  mother  had  or  the  fact  that  she  did  not  have  another  child  after  the
                    7
individual’s birth, and the fears that this injured mother will retaliate.

Yet  Gilbert  Murray  also  speaks  of  Mother  Earth  as  giving  life  and

fruitfulness to the innocent. In that aspect, she represents the kind, feeding

and loving mother. The splitting of the mother into a good and a bad one I

have taken for many years to be one of the earliest processes in relation to

her.

The Hellenic concept that the dead do not disappear but continue a kind of

shadowy existence in Hades and exert an influence on those who are left

alive  recalls  the  belief  in  ghosts  who  are  driven  to  persecute  the  living

because they can find no peace until they are avenged. We may also link this

belief of dead people influencing and controlling live ones, with the concept

that they continue as internalized objects who are simultaneously felt to be

dead and active within the self in good ways or in bad ways. The relation to

the good internal object—in the first place the good mother—implies that it is

felt to be helpful and guiding. It is particularly in grief and in the process of

mourning that the individual struggles to preserve the good relation which

previously  existed  and  to  feel  strength  and  comfort  through  this  internal

companionship. When mourning fails—and there may be many reasons for

this—it  is  because  this  internalization  cannot  succeed  and  helpful

identifications are interfered with. The appeal of Electra and Orestes for the

dead father under the mound to support and strengthen them corresponds to

the  wish  to  be  united  with  the  good  object  who  has  been  lost  externallythrough death and has to be established internally. This good object whose

help is implored, is part of the super-ego in its guiding and helping aspects.

This good relation to the internalized object is the basis for an identification

which proves of great importance for the stability of the individual.

The belief that libation can ‘open the parched lips’ of the dead, derives, I

think, from the fundamental feeling that milk given by the mother to the baby

is a means of keeping alive not only the baby but also his internal object.

Since the internalized mother (first of all the breast) becomes part of the

child’s ego, and he senses that his life is bound up with her life, the milk,

love, and care given by the external mother to the child are in one sense felt

to benefit the internal mother as well. This also applies to other internalized

objects. The libation given in the play by Clytemnestra is taken by Electra

and Orestes to be a sign that by feeding the internalized father she revives

him, in spite of her being a bad mother as well.

We find in psycho-analysis the feeling that the internal object participates

in  whatever  pleasure  the  individual  experiences.  This  is  also  a  means  of

reviving a loved dead object. The phantasy that the dead internalized object,

when it is loved, keeps a life of its own—helpful, comforting, guiding—is in

keeping with the conviction of Orestes and Electra that they will be helped by

the revived deadfather.

I suggested that the unavenged dead stand for internalized dead objects and

become  threatening  internalized  figures.  They  complain  about  the  harm

which  the  subject  in  his  hate  has  done  to  them.  With  ill  people  these

terrifying figures form part of the super-ego and are closely linked with the

belief in fate which drives to evil and then punishes the evildoer.


    ‘Wer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

    Der kennt euch nich, ihr himmlischen Mächte!


    Ihr führt in’s Leben uns hinein,

    Ihr lasst den Armen schuldig werden,

    Dann überlasst ihr ihn der Pein:

    Denn alle Schuld rächt sich auf Erden.’

    (Goethe, Mignon)

   These persecuting figures are also personified in the Erinnyes. In early

mental life, even normally, splitting never fully succeeds, and therefore the

frightening internal objects remain up to a point operative. That is to say, the

child  experiences  psychotic  anxieties  which  vary  individually  in  degree.

According to the talion principle, based on projection, the child is tortured by

the fear that what he in phantasy did to the parents is being done to him; and

this may be an incentive towards reinforcing the cruel impulses. Because he

feels  persecuted  internally  and  externally,  he  is  driven  to  project  the

punishment outwards and in doing so tests by external reality his internal

anxieties and fears of actual punishment. The more guilty and persecuted a

child feels—that is to say, the more ill he is—the more aggressive he often

may become. We have to believe that similar processes are operative in the

delinquent or criminal.

  Because the destructive impulses are primarily directed against the parents,

the sin which is felt to be most fundamental is the murder of the parents. That

is clearly expressed in the Eumenides when, following Athena’s intervention,

the Erinnyes describe the situation of chaos that would arise if they were no

longer to act as a deterrent against the sins of matricide and patricide and

punish them if they have taken place.


    ‘Yea, for parents hereafter there is guile

    That waiteth and great anguish; by a knife

    In a child’s hand their bosom shall be torn.’

 


I have said earlier that the cruel and destructive impulses of the infant

create the primitive and terrifying super-ego. There are various hints about

the way in which the Erinnyes carry out their attacks:


    ‘Living, from every vein,

    Thine own blood, rich and red,

    For our parched mouths to drain,

    Till my righteous heart be fed

    With thy blood and thy bitter pain;

    Till I waste thee like the dead,
                                              8
    And cast thee among the slain . . .’

 The  tortures  with  which  the  Erinnyes  threaten  Orestes  are  of  the  most

primitive oral- and anal-sadistic nature. We are told that their breath is ‘as a

fire  flung  far  and  wide’  and  that  from  their  bodies  poisonous  vapours

emanate. Some of the earliest means of destruction which in his mind the

baby uses are attacks by flatus and faeces by which he feels he poisons his

mother, as well as burning her with his urine—the fire. As a consequence the

early super-ego threatens him with the same destruction. When the Erinnyes

fear that their power will be taken away by Athena, they express their anger

and apprehension in the following words: ‘Shall not mine injury turn and

crush this people? Shall not poison rain upon them, even the poison of this

pain wherewith my heart doth burn?’ This reminds us of the way in which the

child’s resentment about frustration, and the pain caused by it, increases his

destructive impulses and drives him to intensify his aggressive phantasies.

The cruel Erinnyes, however, also link with that aspect of the super-ego

which is based on complaining injured figures. We are told that they have

blood dropping from their eyes and from their lips, which shows that they

themselves  are  tortured.  These  internalized  injured  figures  are  felt  by  the

infant to be revengeful and threatening and he tries to split them off. They

nevertheless enter into his early anxieties and nightmares and play a part in

all his phobias. Because Orestes has injured and killed his mother, she has

become one of those injured objects whose revenge the child fears. He speaks

of the Erinnyes as his mother’s ‘wrathful hounds’.

It would seem that Clytemnestra is not persecuted by the super-ego, for the

Erinnyes do not pursue her. However, after her triumphant and elated speech

following  her  killing  of  Agamemnon,  she  shows  signs  of  depression  and

guilt. Hence her words, ‘Let us not stain ourselves with blood.’ She also

experiences persecutory anxiety which clearly appears in her dream about the

monster she feeds at her breast; it bites her so violently that blood and milk

are mingled. As a result of the anxiety expressed by this dream she sends

libations to the tomb of Agamemnon. Therefore, although she is not pursued

by the Erinnyes, persecutory anxiety and guilt are not lacking.

  Another aspect of the Erinnyes is that they cling to their own mother—the

Night—as  their  only  protector,  and  they  repeatedly  appeal  to  her  against

Apollo, the sun god, the enemy of the night, who wants to deprive them of

their power and by whom they feel persecuted. From this angle we get an

insight into the part which the inverted Oedipus complex plays even in the

Erinnyes. I would suggest that the destructive impulses towards their motherare to some extent displaced on to the father—on to men in general—and that

the idealization of the mother and their inverted Oedipus complex can only

be maintained by this displacement. They are particularly concerned with any

harm done to a mother, and seem to avenge matricide only. This is the reason

why  they  do  not  persecute  Clytemnestra  who  has  murdered  her  husband.

They argue that she did not kill a blood relation and therefore her crime was

not important enough for them to persecute her. I think there is a great deal of

denial in this argument. What is denied is that any murder derives ultimately

from  the  destructive  feelings  against  the  parents  and  that  no  murder  is

permissible.

It is of interest that it is the influence of a woman—Athena—which brings

about  the  change  in  the  Erinnyes  from  relentless  hate  to  milder  feelings.

However, they have had no father; or rather, Zeus, who might have stood for

a father, had turned against them. They say that because of the terror which

they spread ‘and the world’s hate that we bear, God has cast us from his

Hall’. Apollo, full of contempt, tells them that they have never been kissed by

man or god.

I suggest that their inverted Oedipus complex was increased by the absence

of a father, or by his hating and neglecting them. Athena promises them that

they will be loved and honoured by the Athenians, that is to say, by men as

well as by women. The Areopagus, consisting of men, accompanies them to

the place they will inhabit in Athens. My speculation would be that Athena,

representing here the mother and now sharing with the daughters the love of

men, i.e.  of  father  figures,  brings  about  a  change  in  their  feelings  and

impulses and in their whole character.

  Taking the Trilogy as a whole, we find the super-ego represented by a

variety of figures. For instance, Agamemnon, who is felt to be revived and

supporting his children, is an aspect of the super-ego that is based on love and

admiration for the father. The Erinnyes are described as belonging to the

period of the old gods, the Titans who reigned in a barbarous and violent

way. In my view they link with the earliest and most relentless super-ego and

represent the terrifying figures which are predominantly the result of the child

projecting his destructive phantasies on to his objects. They are however,

counteracted—though in a split-off way—by the relation to the good object

or the idealized one. I have already suggested that the relation of the mother

to the child—and to a large extent the father’s relation towards him—has an

influence  on  the  development  of  the  super-ego  because  it  affects  theinternalization  of  the  parents.  In  Orestes  the  internalization  of  the  father,

which  is  based  on  admiration  and  on  love,  proves  to  be  of  greatest

significance for his further actions; the dead father is a very important part of

Orestes’ super-ego.

  When I first defined the concept of the depressive position, I suggested that

the  injured  internalized  objects  complain  and  contribute  thereby  to  guilt

feelings and thus to the super-ego. According to views which I developed

later  on,  such  guilt  feelings—though  evanescent  and  not  yet  forming  the

depressive  position—are  in  some  measure  operative  during  the  paranoid-

schizoid position. It can be observed that there are babies who refrain from

biting the breast, who even wean themselves at an age of about four to five

months for no external reasons, whereas others, by injuring the breast, make

it impossible for the mother to feed them. Such restraint, I think, indicates

that there is an unconscious awareness in the young baby of the desire to

inflict harm on his mother by his greed. As a result the infant feels that the

mother has been injured and emptied by his greedy sucking or biting and

therefore in his mind he contains the mother or her breast in an injured state.

There  is  much  evidence,  gained  retrospectively  in  the  psycho-analysis  of

children and even of adults, that the mother is very early on felt to be an
                                                    9
injured  object,  internalized  and  external.  I  would  suggest  that  this

complaining injured object is part of the super-ego.

The relation to this injured and loved object includes not only guilt but also

compassion, and is the fundamental source of all sympathy with others and

consideration  for  them.  In  the  Trilogy  this  aspect  of  the  super-ego  is

represented by the unhappy Cassandra. Agamemnon, who has wronged her

and  is  delivering  her  into  Clytemnestra’s  power,  feels  compassion  and

exhorts Clytemnestra to have pity on her. (It is the only occasion when he

shows compassion.) Cassandra’s part as the injured aspect of the super-ego

links with the fact that she is a renowned prophetess whose main task is to

issue warnings. The leader of the Elders is touched by her fate and tries to

comfort her, at the same time standing in awe of her prophecies.

  Cassandra as a super-ego, predicts ill to come and warns that punishment

will follow and grief arise. She knows in advance both her own fate and the

general disaster which will befall Agamemnon and his house; but nobody

heeds her warnings, and this disbelief is attributed to Apollo’s curse. The

Elders, who are very sympathetic towards Cassandra, partly believe her; yet

in  spite  of  realizing  the  validity  of  the  dangers  she  prophesizes  forAgamemnon,  for  herself  and  for  the  people  of  Argos,  they  deny  her

prophesies.  Their  refusal  to  believe  what  at  the  same  time  they  know

expresses the universal tendency towards denial. Denial is a potent defence

against  the  persecutory  anxiety  and  guilt  which  result  from  destructive

impulses never being completely controlled. Denial, which is always bound

up with persecutory anxiety, may stifle feelings of love and guilt, undermine

sympathy and consideration both with the internal and external objects, and

disturb the capacity for judgement and the sense of reality.

As we know, denial is a ubiquitous mechanism and is also very much used

for justification of destructiveness. Clytemnestra justifies her murder of her

husband by the fact that he had killed their daughter, and denies that she has

other motives for killing him. Agamemnon, who destroyed even the temples

of the gods in Troy, feels justified in his cruelty by his brother’s having lost

his  wife.  Orestes  has  every  reason,  he  feels,  to  kill  not  only  the  usurper

Aegisthus but even his mother. The justification which I referred to is part of

powerful denial of guilt and destructive impulses. People who have more

insight into their inner processes and therefore use much less denial are less

liable  to  give  in  to  their  destructive  impulses;  as  a  result  they  are  more

tolerant also towards others.

  There is another interesting angle from which Cassandra’s rôle as a super-

ego can be considered. In the Agamemnon she is in a dream state and at first

cannot collect herself. She overcomes that state and says clearly what she has

been trying to convey previously in a confused way. We may assume that the

unconscious  part  of  the  super-ego  has  become  conscious,  which  is  an

essential step before it can be felt as conscience.

  Another  aspect  of  the  super-ego  is  represented  by  Apollo  who,  as  I

suggested above, stands for Orestes’ destructive impulses projected on to the

super-ego.  This  aspect  of  the  super-ego  drives  Orestes  to  violence  and

threatens to punish him if he does not kill his mother. Since Agamemnon

would bitterly resent not being avenged, Apollo and the father both represent

the  cruel  super-ego.  This  demand  for  revenge  is  in  keeping  with  the

relentlessness with which Agamemnon has destroyed Troy, showing no pity

even  for  the  sufferings  of  his  own  people.  I  have  already  referred  to  the

connection  between  the  hellenic  belief  that  revenge  is  a  duty  laid  on  the

descendants  and  the  rôle  of  the  super-ego  as  driving  to  crime.  It  is

paradoxical that at the same time the super-ego treats revenge as a crime, and

therefore the descendants are punished for the murder they committed thoughit was a duty.

The  repeated  sequence  of  crime  and  punishment, hubris  and dike,  is

exemplified by the demon of the house, who, as we are told, lives on from

generation to generation until he comes to rest when Orestes is forgiven and

returns to Argos. The belief in the demon of the house springs from a vicious

circle which is the consequence of hate, envy and resentment directed against

the object; these emotions increase persecutory anxiety because the attacked

object is felt to be retaliatory, and then further attacks on it are provoked.

That  is  to  say,  destructiveness  is  increased  by  persecutory  anxiety,  and

feelings of persecution are increased by destructiveness.

It is of interest that the demon, who since Pelops’ time exerted a reign of

terror in the royal house of Argos, comes to rest—so the legend goes—when

Orestes has been forgiven and suffering no more, returns, as we may assume,

to a normal and useful life. My interpretation would be that guilt and the urge

to make reparation, the working through of the depressive position, breaks up

the  vicious  circle  because  destructive  impulses  and  their  sequel  of

persecutory anxiety have diminished and the relation to the loved object has

been re-established.

  Apollo, however, who reigns at Delphi, represents in the Trilogy more than

the  destructive  impulses  and  the  cruel  super-ego  of  Orestes.  Through  the

priestess at Delphi he is also, as Gilbert Murray puts it ‘god’s prophet’ as

well as being the sun god. In the Agamemnon Cassandra refers to him as

‘Light of the ways of men’ and ‘Light of all that is’. Nevertheless, not only

his  relentless  attitude  towards  Cassandra  but  also  the  words  used  by  the

Elders about him, ‘It is writ, He loves not grief nor lendeth ear to it,’ point to

the  fact  that  he  is  not  able  to  experience  compassion  and  sympathy  with

suffering, in spite of his saying that he represents Zeus’s thought. From this

angle Apollo, the Sun God, reminds one of the people who turn away from

any sadness as a defence against feelings of compassion, and make excessive

use of denial of depressive feelings. It is typical of such people that they have

no  sympathy  with  the  old  and  helpless  ones.  The  leader  of  the  Furies

describes Apollo in the following words:


    ‘Women are we, and old; and thou dost ride

    Above us, trampling, in thy youth and pride.’

 These lines can also be considered from another point of view; if we look at

their relation to Apollo, the Erinnyes appear as the old mother who is ill-

treated by the young and ungrateful son. This lack of compassion links with

the  rôle  of  Apollo  as  the  ruthless  and  unmitigated  part  of  the  super-ego,

which I have described above.

  There is another and very dominant aspect of the super-ego represented by

Zeus.  He  is  the  father  (the  Father  of  the  Gods)  who  has  learnt  through

suffering to be more tolerant towards his children. We are told that Zeus, who

had  sinned  against  his  own  father  and  suffered  guilt  because  of  this,  is

therefore kind towards the supplicant. Zeus stands for an important part of the

super-ego, the introjected mild father, and represents a stage in which the

depressive  position  has  been  worked  through.  To  have  recognized  and

understood one’s destructive tendencies directed against loved parents makes

for greater tolerance towards oneself and towards deficiencies in others, for a

better capacity for judgement and altogether greater wisdom.


As Aeschylus puts it,


    ‘Man by suffering shall learn.

    So the heart of him, again

    Aching with remembered pain,

    Bleeds and sleepeth not, until

    Wisdom comes against his will.’

 


Zeus also symbolizes the ideal and omnipotent part of the self, the ego-ideal,

a concept which Freud (1914) formulated before he fully developed his views

on  the  super-ego.  As  I  see  it  the  idealized  part  of  the  self  and  of  the

internalized object is split off from the bad part of the self and from the bad

part of the object, and the individual maintains this idealization in order to

deal with his anxieties.

  There is another aspect of the Trilogy which I wish to discuss, and that is

the relation between internal and external happenings. I have described the

Furies as symbolizing internal processes, and Aeschylus has shown this by

the following lines:


    ‘Times there be when Fear is good,

    And the Watcher in the breast    Needs must reign in masterhood.’

 


In the Trilogy, however, the Furies appear as external figures.

The personality of Clytemnestra as a whole illustrates how Aeschylus—

while penetrating deeply into the human mind—is also concerned with the

characters as external figures. He gives us several hints that Clytemnestra was

actually a bad mother. Orestes accuses her of lack of love, and we know that

she banished her little son and ill-treated Electra. Clytemnestra is driven by

her sexual desires towards Aegisthus and neglects her children. It is not said

in so many words in the Trilogy, but it is obvious that Clytemnestra has got

rid of Orestes because she saw in him the avenger of his father because of her

relation to Aegisthus. In fact, when she doubts Orestes’ story, she calls for

Aegisthus to come with his spearmen. As soon as she learns that Aegisthus is

killed she asks for her axe:


    ‘No, there, mine axe of battle! Let us try

    Who conquereth and who falleth, he or I. . . .’

 


and threatens to kill Orestes.

  There are, nevertheless, indications that Clytemnestra was not always a bad

mother.  She  fed  her  son  as  a  baby,  and  her  mourning  for  her  daughter

Iphigenia might have been sincere. But altered external situations brought

about  a  change  in  her  character.  I  would  conclude  that  early  hate  and

grievances, stirred up by external situations, reawaken destructive impulses;

they come to predominate over loving ones, and this involves a change in the

states of fusion between the life and death instincts.

The change from the Erinnyes to the Eumenides is also to some extent

influenced by an external situation. They are very worried lest they lose their

power and are reassured by Athena who tells them that in their modified rôle

they will exert an influence over Athens and help to preserve law and order.

Another  instance  of  the  effect  of  external  situations  is  the  change  in  the

character of Agamemnon because he has become the ‘King of Kings’ through

his successes in the expedition. Success, particularly if its greatest value lies

in an increase in prestige, is—as we can see in life in general general—often

dangerous because it reinforces ambition and competitiveness and interfereswith feelings of love and humility.

  Athena represents, as she so often says—the thoughts and feelings of Zeus.

She is the wise and mitigated super-ego in contrast to the early super-ego,

symbolized by the Erinnyes.

We have seen Athena in many rôles; she is the mouthpiece of Zeus and

expresses his thoughts and wishes; she is a mitigated super-ego; she is also

the daughter without a mother and in this way avoids the Oedipus complex.

But she also has another and very fundamental function; she makes for peace

and balance. She expresses the hope that the Athenians will avoid internal

strife, symbolically representing the avoidance of hostility within the family.

She achieves a change in the Furies towards forgiveness and peacefulness.

This attitude expresses the tendency towards reconciliation and integration.

  These features are characteristic of the internalized good object—primarily

the good mother—who becomes the carrier of the life instinct. In this way

Athena as the good mother is contrasted with Clytemnestra who represents

the bad aspect of the mother. This rôle enters also into Apollo’s relation to

her. She is the only woman figure he looks up to. He speaks of her with great

admiration and fully submits to her judgement. Although she seems only to

represent an older sister, particularly favoured by the father, I would suggest

that she also represents to him the good aspect of the mother.

If the good object is sufficiently established in the infant, the super-ego

becomes milder; the drive for integration, which I assume to work from the

beginning of life, and which leads to hate becoming mitigated by love, gains

in strength. But even the mild super-ego demands the control of destructive

impulses and aims at a balance between destructive and loving feelings. We

therefore find Athena representing a mature stage of the super-ego which

aims at reconciliation between contrasting impulses; this is bound up with

establishing  the  good  object  more  securely  and  forms  the  basis  for

integration. Athena expresses the need to control destructive impulses in the

following words:


    ‘And casting away Fear, yet cast not all;

    For who that hath no fear is safe from sin?

    That Fear which is both Rule and Law within

    Be yours, and round your city. . . .’

   Athena’s  attitude  as  guiding  but  not  dominating,  characteristic  of  the

mature super-ego built round the good object, is shown in her not assuming

the right to decide over the fate of Orestes. She calls together the Areopagus

and chooses the wisest men of Athens, gives them all the full freedom to

vote, and reserves for herself only the casting vote. If I consider this part of

the Trilogy again as representing internal processes, I would conclude that

the opposing votes show that the self is not easily united, that destructive

impulses drive one way, love and the capacity for reparation and compassion

in other ways. Internal peace is not easily established.

The integration of the ego is accomplished by the different parts of the ego

—represented in the Trilogy by the members of the Areopagus—being able

to come together in spite of their conflicting tendencies. This does not mean

that  they  can  ever  become  identical  with  each  other,  because  destructive

impulses on the one hand, and love and the need to make reparation on the

other, are contradictory. But the ego at its best is capable of acknowledging

these different aspects and bringing them closer together, whereas they had

been  strongly  split  off  in  infancy.  Nor  is  the  power  of  the  super-ego

eliminated; for even in its more mitigated form it can still produce feelings of

guilt.  Integration  and  balance  are  the  basis  of  a  fuller  and  richer  life.  In

Aeschylus this state of mind is shown by the songs of joy with which the

Trilogy ends.

  Aeschylus presents to us a picture of human development from its roots to

its most advanced levels. One of the ways in which his understanding of the

depths of human nature is expressed are the various symbolic rôles which in

particular the gods come to play. This variety corresponds to the diverse,

often conflicting, impulses and phantasies which exist in the unconscious and

which ultimately derive from the polarity of the life and death instincts in

their changing states of fusion.

In order to understand the part which symbolism plays in mental life, we

have  to  consider  the  many  ways  in  which  the  growing  ego  deals  with

conflicts and frustration. The means of expressing feelings of resentment and

satisfaction, and the whole gamut of infantile emotions, alter gradually. Since

phantasies pervade mental life from the beginning, there is a powerful drive

to  attach  them  to  various  objects—real  and  phantasied—which  become

symbols and provide an outlet for the infant’s emotions. These symbols first

represent part-objects and within a few months whole objects (that is to say,

people). The child puts his love and hate, his conflicts, his satisfactions andhis longing into the creation of these symbols, internal and external, which

become part of his world. The drive to create symbols is so strong because

even the most loving mother cannot satisfy the infant’s powerful emotional

needs. In fact no reality situation can fulfil the often contradictory urges and

wishes  of  the  child’s  phantasy  life.  It  is  only  if  in  childhood,  symbol

formation is able to develop in full strength and variety and is not impeded by

inhibitions, that the artist later can make use of the emotional forces which

underlie symbolism. In an early paper (1923b) I have discussed the pervading

importance of symbol formation in infantile mental life and implied that if

symbol formation is particularly rich, it contributes to the development of

talent or even of genius.

In the analysis of adults we find that symbol formation is still operative;

the adult, too, is surrounded by symbolic objects. At the same time, however,

he  is  more  able  to  differentiate  between  phantasy  and  reality  and  to  see

people and things in their own right.

The creative artist makes full use of symbols; and the more they serve to

express  the  conflicts  between  love  and  hate,  between  destructiveness  and

reparation, between life and death instincts, the more they approach universal

form. He thus condenses the variety of infantile symbols, while drawing on

the full force of emotions and phantasies which are expressed in them. The

dramatist’s  capacity  to  transfer  some  of  these  universal  symbols  into  the

creation of his characters, and at the same time to make them into real people,

is one of the aspects of his greatness. The connection between symbols and

artistic creation has often been discussed, but my main concern is to establish

the link between the earliest infantile processes and the later productions of

the artist.

  Aeschylus in his Trilogy makes the gods appear in a variety of symbolic

rôles and I have tried to show how this adds to the richness and meaning of

his plays. I shall conclude with the tentative suggestion that the greatness of

Aeschylus’s tragedies—and this might have a general application as far as

other great poets are concerned—derives from his intuitive understanding of

the  inexhaustible  depth  of  the  unconscious  and  the  ways  in  which  this

understanding influences the characters and situations he creates.                                          16

 

                    ON THE SENSE OF LONELINESS

 

                                        (1963)

 


IN the present paper an attempt will be made to investigate the source of the

sense  of  loneliness.  By  the  sense  of  loneliness  I  am  referring  not  to  the

objective  situation  of  being  deprived  of  external  companionship.  I  am

referring to the inner sense of loneliness—the sense of being alone regardless

of  external  circumstances,  of  feeling  lonely  even  when  among  friends  or

receiving love. This state of internal loneliness, I will suggest, is the result of

a  ubiquitous  yearning  for  an  unattainable  perfect  internal  state.  Such

loneliness, which is experienced to some extent by everyone, springs from

paranoid  and  depressive  anxieties  which  are  derivatives  of  the  infant’s

psychotic  anxieties.  These  anxieties  exist  in  some  measure  in  every

individual but are excessively strong in illness; therefore loneliness is also

part of illness, both of a schizophrenic and depressive nature.

In order to understand how the sense of loneliness arises we have—as with

other  attitudes  and  emotions—to  go  back  to  early  infancy  and  trace  its

influence on later stages of life. As I have frequently described, the ego exists

and operates from birth onwards. At first it is largely lacking in cohesion and

dominated by splitting mechanisms. The danger of being destroyed by the

death instinct directed against the self contributes to the splitting of impulses

into good and bad; owing to the projection of these impulses on to the primal

object, it too is split into good and bad. In consequence, in the earliest stages,

the good part of the ego and the good object are in some measure protected,

since aggression is directed away from them. These are the particular splitting

processes which I have described as the basis of relative security in the very

young infant, in so far as security can be achieved at this stage; whereas other

splitting processes, such as those leading to fragmentation, are detrimental to

the ego and its strength.

  Together with the urge to split there is from the beginning of life a drive

towards integration which increases with the growth of the ego. This process

of integration is based on the introjection of the good object, primarily a part

object—the mother’s breast, although other aspects of the mother also enterinto even the earliest relation. If the good internal object is established with

relative security, it becomes the core of the developing ego.

A satisfactory early relation to the mother (not necessarily based on breast

feeding since the bottle can also symbolically stand for the breast) implies a

close contact between the unconscious of the mother and of the child. This is

the foundation for the most complete experience of being understood and is

essentially linked with the preverbal stage. However gratifying it is in later

life to express thoughts and feelings to a congenial person, there remains an

unsatisfied longing for an understanding without words—ultimately for the

earliest relation with the mother. This longing contributes to the sense of

loneliness and derives from the depressive feeling of an irretrievable loss.

  Even at best, however, the happy relation with the mother and her breast is

never undisturbed, since persecutory anxiety is bound to arise. Persecutory

anxiety is at its height during the first three months of life—the period of the

paranoid-schizoid position; it emerges from the beginning of life as the result

of the conflict between the life and death instincts and the experience of birth

contributes to it. Whenever destructive impulses arise strongly, the mother

and her breast, owing to projection, are felt to be persecutory, and therefore

the infant inevitably experiences some insecurity. This paranoid insecurity is

one of the roots of loneliness.

  When the depressive position arises—ordinarily in the middle of the first

half  of  the  first  year  of  life—the  ego  is  already  more  integrated.  This  is

expressed in a stronger sense of wholeness so that the infant is better able to

relate itself to the mother, and later to other people, as a whole person. Then

paranoid  anxiety,  as  a  factor  in  loneliness,  increasingly  gives  way  to

depressive anxiety. But the actual process of integration brings in its train

new  problems,  and  I  shall  discuss  some  of  these  and  their  relation  to

loneliness.

One  of  the  factors  which  stimulates  integration  is  that  the  splitting

processes by which the early ego attempts to counteract insecurity are never

more than temporarily effective and the ego is driven to attempt to come to

terms with the destructive impulses. This drive contributes towards the need

for integration. For integration, if it could be achieved, would have the effect

of mitigating hate by love and in this way rendering destructive impulses less

powerful. The ego would then feel safer not only about its own survival but

also about the preservation of its good object. This is one of the reasons why

lack of integration is extremely painful.  However,  integration  is  difficult  to  accept.  The  coming  together  of

destructive  and  loving  impulses,  and  of  the  good  and  bad  aspects  of  the

object,  arouses  the  anxiety  that  destructive  feelings  may  overwhelm  the

loving feelings and endanger the good object. Thus, there is conflict between

seeking integration as a safeguard against destructive impulses and fearing

integration lest the destructive impulses endanger the good object and the

good  parts  of  the  self.  I  have  heard  patients  express  the  painfulness  of

integration in terms of feeling lonely and deserted, through being completely

alone with what to them was a bad part of the self. And the process becomes

all the more painful when a harsh super-ego has engendered a very strong

repression of destructive impulses and tries to maintain it.

It  is  only  step  by  step  that  integration  can  take  place  and  the  security

achieved by it is liable to be disturbed under internal and external pressure;

and this remains true throughout life. Full and permanent integration is never

possible for some polarity between the life and death instincts always persists

and remains the deepest source of conflict. Since full integration is never

achieved, complete understanding and acceptance of one’s own emotions,

phantasies and anxieties is not possible and this continues as an important

factor in loneliness. The longing to understand oneself is also bound up with

the need to be understood by the internalized good object. One expression of

this longing is the universal phantasy of having a twin—a phantasy to which

Bion  drew  attention  in  an  unpublished  paper.  This  twin  figure  as  he

suggested,  represents  those  un-understood  and  split  off  parts  which  the

individual  is  longing  to  regain,  in  the  hope  of  achieving  wholeness  and

complete understanding; they are sometimes felt to be the ideal parts. At

other times the twin also represents an entirely reliable, in fact, idealized

internal object.

  There is one further connection between loneliness and the problem of

integration that needs consideration at this point. It is generally supposed that

loneliness can derive from the conviction that there is no person or group to

which one belongs. This not belonging can be seen to have a much deeper

meaning. However much integration proceeds, it cannot do away with the

feeling that certain components of the self are not available because they are

split  off  and  cannot  be  regained.  Some  of  these  split-off  parts,  as  I  shall

discuss in more detail later, are projected into other people, contributing to

the feeling that one is not in full possession of one’s self, that one does not

fully belong to oneself or, therefore, to anybody else. The lost parts too, arefelt to be lonely.

I have already suggested that paranoid and depressive anxieties are never

entirely overcome, even in people who are not ill, and are the foundation for

some measure of loneliness. There are considerable individual differences in

the  way  in  which  loneliness  is  experienced.  When  paranoid  anxiety  is

relatively strong, though still within the range of normality, the relation to the

internal good object is liable to be disturbed and trust in the good part of the

self  is  impaired.  As  a  consequence,  there  is  an  increased  projection  of

paranoid  feelings  and  suspicions  on  others,  with  a  resulting  sense  of

loneliness.

In  actual  schizophrenic  illness  these  factors  are  necessarily  present  but

much exacerbated; the lack of integration which I have so far been discussing

within the normal range, is now seen in its pathological form—indeed, all the

features of the paranoid-schizoid position are present to an excessive degree.

Before going on to discuss loneliness in the schizophrenic it is important to

consider  in  more  detail  some  of  the  processes  of  the  paranoid-schizoid

position,  particularly  splitting  and  projective  identification.  Projective

identification is based on the splitting of the ego and the projection of parts of

the self, into other people; first of all the mother or her breast. This projection

derives  from  the  oral-anal-urethral  impulses,  the  parts  of  the  self  being

omnipotently expelled in the bodily substances into the mother in order to

control  and  take  possession  of  her.  She  is  not  then  felt  to  be  a  separate

individual but an aspect of the self. If these excrements are expelled in hatred

the mother is felt to be dangerous and hostile. But it is not only bad parts of

the self that are split off and projected, but also good parts. Ordinarily, as I

have discussed, as the ego develops, splitting and projection lessen and the

ego becomes more integrated. If, however, the ego is very weak, which I

consider to be an innate feature, and if there have been difficulties at birth

and the beginning of life, the capacity to integrate—to bring together the

split-off parts of the ego—is also weak, and there is in addition a greater

tendency  to  split  in  order  to  avoid  anxiety  aroused  by  the  destructive

impulses directed against the self and external world. This incapacity to bear

anxiety is thus of far-reaching importance. It not only increases the need to

split  the  ego  and  object  excessively,  which  can  lead  to  a  state  of

fragmentation,  but  also  makes  it  impossible  to  work  through  the  early

anxieties.

In the schizophrenic we see the result of these unresolved processes. Theschizophrenic feels that he is hopelessly in bits and that he will never be in

possession of his self. The very fact that he is so fragmented results in his

being unable to internalize his primal object (the mother) sufficiently as a

good object and therefore in his lacking the foundation of stability; he cannot

rely on an external and internal good object, nor can he rely on his own self.

This factor is bound up with loneliness, for it increases the feeling of the

schizophrenic that he is left alone, as it were, with his misery. The sense of

being surrounded by a hostile world, which is characteristic of the paranoid

aspect of schizophrenic illness, not only increases all his anxieties but vitally

influences his feelings of loneliness.

  Another factor which contributes to the loneliness of the schizophrenic is

confusion.  This  is  the  result  of  a  number  of  factors,  particularly  the

fragmentation of the ego, and the excessive use of projective identification,

so that he constantly feels himself not only to be in bits, but to be mixed up

with other people. He is then unable to distinguish between the good and bad

parts of the self, between the good and bad object, and between external and

internal reality. The schizophrenic thus, cannot understand himself or trust

himself. These factors allied with his paranoid distrust of others, result in a

state of withdrawal which destroys his ability to make object relations and to

gain from them the reassurance and pleasure which can counteract loneliness

by strengthening the ego. He longs to be able to make relationships with

people, but cannot.

It  is  important  not  to  underrate  the  schizophrenic’s  pain  and  suffering.

They  are  not  so  easily  detected  because  of  his  constant  defensive  use  of

withdrawal and the distraction of his emotions. Nevertheless, I and some of

my colleagues, of whom I shall only mention Dr Davidson, Dr Rosenfeld and

Dr Hanna Segal, who have treated or are treating schizophrenics, retain some

optimism about the outcome. This optimism is based on the fact that there is

an  urge  towards  integration,  even  in  such  ill  people,  and  that  there  is  a

relation, however undeveloped, to the good object and the good self.

I now wish to deal with the loneliness characteristic of a prevalence of

depressive anxiety, first of all within the range of normality. I have often

referred to the fact that early emotional life is characterized by the recurrent

experiences of losing and regaining. Whenever the mother is not present, she

may be felt by the infant to be lost, either because she is injured or because

she has turned into a persecutor. The feeling that she is lost is equivalent to

the fear of her death. Owing to introjection, the death of the external mothermeans the loss of the internal good object as well, and this reinforces the

infant’s fear of his own death. These anxieties and emotions are heightened at

the stage of the depressive position, but throughout life the fear of death plays

a part in loneliness.

I have already suggested that the pain which accompanies processes of

integration  also  contributes  to  loneliness.  For  it  means  facing  one’s

destructive  impulses  and  hated  parts  of  the  self,  which  at  times  appear

uncontrollable  and  which  therefore  endanger  the  good  object.  With

integration  and  a  growing  sense  of  reality,  omnipotence  is  bound  to  be

lessened, and this again contributes to the pain of integration, for it means a

diminished capacity for hope. While there are other sources of hopefulness

which  derive  from  the  strength  of  the  ego  and  from  trust  in  oneself  and

others, an element of omnipotence is always part of it.

  Integration also means losing some of the idealization—both of the object

and of a part of the self—which has from the beginning coloured the relation

to  the  good  object.  The  realization  that  the  good  object  can  never

approximate to the perfection expected from the ideal one brings about de-

idealization: and even more painful is the realization that no really ideal part

of the self exists. In my experience, the need for idealization is never fully

given  up,  even  though  in  normal  development  the  facing  of  internal  and

external reality tends to diminish it. As a patient put it to me, while admitting

the relief obtained from some steps in integration, ‘the glamour has gone’.

The analysis showed that the glamour which had gone was the idealization of

the self and of the object, and the loss of it led to feelings of loneliness.

  Some of these factors enter in a greater degree into the mental processes

characteristic of manic-depressive illness. The manic-depressive patient has

already made some steps towards the depressive position, that is to say, he

experiences the object more as a whole, and his feelings of guilt, though still

bound up with paranoid mechanisms, are stronger and less evanescent. More,

therefore, than the schizophrenic, he feels the longing to have the good object

safely inside to preserve it and protect it. But this he feels unable to do since,

at  the  same  time,  he  has  not  sufficiently  worked  through  the  depressive

position, so that his capacity for making reparation, for synthesizing the good

object, and achieving integration of the ego, have not sufficiently progressed.

In so far as, in his relation to his good object, there is still a great deal of

hatred and, therefore, fear, he is unable sufficiently to make reparation to it,

therefore his relation to it brings no relief but only a feeling of being unloved,and  hated,  and  again  and  again  he  feels  that  it  is  endangered  by  his

destructive impulses. The longing to be able to overcome all these difficulties

in relation to the good object is part of the feeling of loneliness. In extreme

cases this expresses itself in the tendency towards suicide.

In external relations similar processes are at work. The manic-depressive

can only at times, and very temporarily, get relief from a relation with a well-

meaning person, since, as he quickly projects his own hate, resentment, envy

and  fear,  he  is  constantly  full  of  distrust.  In  other  words,  his  paranoid

anxieties  are  still  very  strong.  The  feeling  of  loneliness  of  the  manic-

depressive centres, therefore, more on his incapacity to keep an inner and

external companionship with a good object and less on his being in bits.

I  shall  discuss  some  further  difficulties  in  integration  and  shall  deal

particularly  with  the  conflict  between  male  and  female  elements  in  both

sexes. We know that there is a biological factor in bi-sexuality, but I am

concerned here with the psychological aspect. In women there is universally

the wish to be a man, expressed perhaps most clearly in terms of penis envy;

similarly,  one  finds  in  men  the  feminine  position,  the  longing  to  possess

breasts  and  to  give  birth  to  children.  Such  wishes  are  bound  up  with  an

identification  with  both  parents  and  are  accompanied  by  feelings  of

competitiveness and envy, as well as admiration of the coveted possessions.

These  identifications  vary  in  strength  and  also  in  quality,  depending  on

whether  admiration  or  envy  is  the  more  prevalent.  Part  of  the  desire  for

integration in the young child is the urge to integrate these different aspects

of the personality. In addition, the super-ego makes the conflicting demand

for identification with both parents, prompted by the need to make reparation

for early desires to rob each of them and expressing the wish to keep them

alive internally. If the element of guilt is predominant it will hamper the

integration  of  these  identifications.  If,  however,  these  identifications  are

satisfactorily achieved they become a source of enrichment and a basis for the

development of a variety of gifts and capacities.

In order to illustrate the difficulties of this particular aspect of integration

and its relation to loneliness, I shall quote the dream of a male patient. A little

girl  was  playing  with  a  lioness  and  holding  out  a  hoop  for  her  to  jump

through,  but  on  the  other  side  of  the  hoop  was  a  precipice.  The  lioness

obeyed and was killed in the process. At the same time, a little boy was

killing a snake. The patient himself recognized, since similar material had

come up previously, that the little girl stood for his feminine part and the littleboy for his masculine part. The lioness had a strong link with myself in the

transference, of which I shall only give one instance. The little girl had a cat

with her and this led to associations to my cat, which often stood for me. It

was  extremely  painful  to  the  patient  to  become  aware  that,  being  in

competition with my femininity, he wanted to destroy me, and in the past, his

mother. This recognition that one part of himself wanted to kill the loved

lioness-analyst, which would thus deprive him of his good object, led to a

feeling not only of misery and guilt but also of loneliness in the transference.

It was also very distressing for him to recognize that the competition with his

father led him to destroy the father’s potency and penis, represented by the

snake.

This material led to further and very painful work about integration. The

dream of the lioness which I have mentioned was preceded by a dream in

which a woman committed suicide by throwing herself from a very high

building, and the patient, contrary to his usual attitude, experienced no horror.

The analysis which was, at that time, very much occupied with his difficulty

over the feminine position, which was then at its height, showed that the

woman  represented  his  feminine  part  and  that  he  really  wished  it  to  be

destroyed. He felt that not only would it injure his relation to women, but

would  also  damage  his  masculinity  and  all  its  constructive  tendencies,

including reparation to the mother, which became clear in relation to myself.

This attitude of putting all his envy and competitiveness into his feminine

part turned out to be one way of splitting, and at the same time seemed to

overshadow his very great admiration and regard for femininity. Moreover, it

became clear that while he felt masculine aggression to be comparatively

open and, therefore, more honest, he attributed to the feminine side envy and

deception, and since he very much loathed all insincerity and dishonesty, this

contributed to his difficulties in integration.

The analysis of these attitudes, going back to his earliest feelings of envy

towards the mother led to a much better integration of both the feminine and

masculine parts of his personality and to the diminution of envy in both the

masculine  and  feminine  rôle.  This  increased  his  competence  in  his

relationships and thus helped to combat a sense of loneliness.

I shall now give another instance, from the analysis of a patient, a man

who was not unhappy or ill, and who was successful in his work and in his

relationships. He was aware that he had always felt lonely as a child and that

this feeling of loneliness had never entirely gone. Love of nature had been asignificant feature in this patient’s sublimations. Even from earliest childhood

he found comfort and satisfaction in being out of doors. In one session he

described his enjoyment of a journey which led him through hilly country

and then the revulsion he felt when he entered the town. I interpreted as I had

done previously, that to him nature represented not only beauty, but also

goodness, actually the good object that he had taken into himself. He replied

after a pause that he felt that was true, but that nature was not only good

because there is always much aggression in it. In the same way, he added, his

own relation to the countryside was also not wholly good, instancing how as

a boy, he used to rob nests, while at the same time he had always wanted to

grow things. He said that in loving nature he had actually, as he put it, ‘taken

in an integrated object’.

In  order  to  understand  how  the  patient  had  overcome  his  loneliness  in

relation to the countryside, while still experiencing it in connection with the

town, we have to follow up some of his associations referring both to his

childhood and to nature. He had told me that he was supposed to have been a

happy baby, well fed by his mother; and much material—particularly in the

transference  situation—supported  this  assumption.  He  had  soon  become

aware of his worries about his mother’s health, and also his resentment about

her rather disciplinarian attitude. In spite of this his relation to her was in

many ways happy, and he remained fond of her; but he felt himself hemmed

in at home and was aware of an urgent longing to be out of doors. He seemed

to have developed a very early admiration for the beauties of nature; and as

soon  as  he  could  get  more  freedom  to  be  out  of  doors,  this  became  his

greatest pleasure. He described how he, together with other boys, used to

spend his free time wandering in the woods and fields. He confessed to some

aggression in connection with nature, such as robbing nests and damaging

hedges. At the same time he was convinced that such damage would not be

lasting because nature always repaired itself. Nature he regarded as rich and

invulnerable,  in  striking  contrast  to  his  attitude  towards  his  mother.  The

relation  to  nature  seemed  to  be  relatively  free  from  guilt,  whereas  in  his

relation to his mother for whose frailty he felt responsible for unconscious

reasons, there was a great deal of guilt.

  From  his  material  I  was  able  to  conclude  that  he  had  to  some  extent

introjected  the  mother  as  a  good  object  and  had  been  able  to  achieve  a

measure of synthesis between his loving and hostile feelings towards her. He

also reached a fair level of integration but this was disturbed by persecutoryand depressive anxiety in relation to his parents. The relation to the father had

been  very  important  for  his  development,  but  it  does  not  enter  into  this

particular piece of material.

I have referred to this patient’s obsessional need to be out of doors, and

this was linked with his claustrophobia. Claustrophobia, as I have elsewhere

suggested, derives from two main sources: projective identification into the

mother leading to an anxiety of imprisonment inside her; and reintrojection

resulting  in  a  feeling  that  inside  oneself  one  is  hemmed  in  by  resentful

internal objects. With regard to this patient, I would conclude that his flight

into nature was a defence against both these anxiety-situations. In a sense his

love  for  nature  was  split  off  from  his  relation  to  his  mother;  his  de-

idealization of the latter having led to his transferring his idealization on to

nature. In connection with home and mother he felt very lonely, and it was

this sense of loneliness which was at the root of his revulsion against town.

The freedom and enjoyment which nature gave him were not only a source of

pleasure, derived from a strong sense of beauty and linked with appreciation

of art, but also a means of counteracting the fundamental loneliness which

had never entirely gone.

In another session the patient reported a feeling of guilt that on a trip into

the country he had caught a field-mouse and put it in a box in the boot of his

car, as a present for his young child who, he thought, would enjoy having this

creature as a pet. The patient forgot about the mouse, remembering it only a

day later. He made unsuccessful efforts to find it because it had eaten its way

out of the box and hidden itself in the farthest corner of the boot where it was

out of reach. Eventually, after renewed efforts to get hold of it, he found that

it had died. The patient’s guilt about having forgotten the field-mouse and

thus caused its death led in the course of subsequent sessions to associations

about dead people for whose death he felt to some extent responsible though

not for rational reasons.

In the subsequent sessions there was a wealth of associations to the field-

mouse which appeared to play a number of rôles; it stood for a split-off part

of himself, lonely and deprived. By identification with his child he moreover

felt deprived of a potential companion. A number of associations showed that

throughout childhood the patient had longed for a playmate of his own age—

a longing that went beyond the actual need for external companions and was

the result of feeling that split-off parts of his self could not be regained. The

field-mouse also stood for his good object, which he had enclosed in hisinside—represented  by  the  car—and  about  which  he  felt  guilty  and  also

feared that it might turn retaliatory. One of his other associations, referring to

neglect, was that the field-mouse also stood for a neglected woman. This

association came after a holiday and implied that not only had he been left

alone by the analyst but that the analyst had been neglected and lonely. The

link with similar feelings towards his mother became clear in the material, as

did the conclusion that he contained a dead or lonely object, which increased

his loneliness.

This patient’s material supports my contention that there is a link between

loneliness and the incapacity sufficiently to integrate the good object as well

as parts of the self which are felt to be inaccessible.

I shall now go on to examine more closely the factors which normally

mitigate loneliness. The relatively secure internalization of the good breast is

characteristic of some innate strength of the ego. A strong ego is less liable to

fragmentation  and  therefore  more  capable  of  achieving  a  measure  of

integration  and  a  good  early  relation  to  the  primal  object.  Further,  a

successful internalization of the good object is the root of an identification

with it which strengthens the feeling of goodness and trust both in the object

and  in  the  self.  This  identification  with  the  good  object  mitigates  the

destructive impulses and in this way also diminishes the harshness of the

super-ego. A milder super-ego makes less stringent demands on the ego; this

leads  to  tolerance  and  to  the  ability  to  bear  deficiencies  in  loved  objects

without impairing the relation to them,

A  decrease  in  omnipotence,  which  comes  about  with  progress  in

integration  and  leads  to  some  loss  of  hopefulness,  yet  makes  possible  a

distinction  between  the  destructive  impulses  and  their  effects;  therefore

aggressiveness and hate are felt to be less dangerous. This greater adaptation

to  reality  leads  to  an  acceptance  of  one’s  own  shortcomings  and  in

consequence lessens the sense of resentment about past frustrations. It also

opens up sources of enjoyment emanating from the external world and is thus

another factor which diminishes loneliness.

A happy relation to the first object and a successful internalization of it

means  that  love  can  be  given  and  received.  As  a  result  the  infant  can

experience enjoyment not only at times of feeding but also in response to the

mother’s presence and affection. Memories of such happy experiences are a

stand-by for the young child when he feels frustrated, because they are bound

up  with  the  hope  of  further  happy  times.  Moreover,  there  is  a  close  linkbetween enjoyment and the feeling of understanding and being understood.

At the moment of enjoyment anxiety is assuaged and the closeness to the

mother  and  trust  in  her  are  uppermost.  Introjective  and  projective

identification, when not excessive, play an important part in this feeling of

closeness, for they underlie the capacity to understand and contribute to the

experience of being understood.

  Enjoyment is always bound up with gratitude; if this gratitude is deeply

felt it includes the wish to return goodness received and is thus the basis of

generosity. There is always a close connection between being able to accept

and to give, and both are part of the relation to the good object and therefore

counteract  loneliness.  Furthermore,  the  feeling  of  generosity  underlies

creativeness,  and  this  applies  to  the  infant’s  most  primitive  constructive

activities as well as to the creativeness of the adult.

The  capacity  for  enjoyment  is  also  the  precondition  for  a  measure  of

resignation which allows for pleasure in what is available without too much

greed for inaccessible gratifications and without excessive resentment about

frustration. Such adaptation can already be observed in some young infants.

Resignation is bound up with tolerance and with the feeling that destructive

impulses will not overwhelm love, and that therefore goodness and life may

be preserved.

A child who, in spite of some envy and jealousy, can identify himself with

the pleasures and gratifications of members of his family circle, will be able

to do so in relation to other people in later life. In old age he will then be able

to reverse the early situation and identify himself with the satisfactions of

youth. This is only possible if there is gratitude for past pleasures without too

much resentment because they are no longer available.

All the factors in development which I have touched upon, though they

mitigate the sense of loneliness, never entirely eliminate it; therefore they are

liable to be used as defences. When these defences are very powerful and

dovetail successfully, loneliness may often not be consciously experienced.

Some infants use extreme dependence on the mother as a defence against

loneliness, and the need for dependence remains as a pattern throughout life.

On the other hand, the flight to the internal object, which can be expressed in

early infancy in hallucinatory gratification, is often used defensively in an

attempt to counteract dependence on the external object. In some adults this

attitude leads to a rejection of any companionship, which in extreme cases is

a symptom of illness.The urge towards independence, which is part of maturation, can be used

defensively  for  the  purpose  of  overcoming  loneliness.  A  lessening  of

dependence  on  the  object  makes  the  individual  less  vulnerable  and  also

counteracts the need for excessive internal and external closeness to loved

people.

  Another defence, particularly in old age, is the preoccupation with the past

in order to avoid the frustrations of the present. Some idealization of the past

is bound to enter into these memories and is put into the service of defence.

In young people, idealization of the future serves a similar purpose. Some

measure of idealization of people and causes is a normal defence and is part

of the search for idealized inner objects which is projected on to the external

world.

  Appreciation by others and success—originally the infantile need to be

appreciated by the mother—can be used defensively against loneliness. But

this method becomes very insecure if it is used excessively since trust in

oneself is then not sufficiently established. Another defence, bound up with

omnipotence and part of manic defence, is a particular use of the capacity to

wait for what is desired; this may lead to over-optimism and a lack of drive

and may be linked with a defective sense of reality.

The denial of loneliness, which is frequently used as a defence, is likely to

interfere  with  good  object  relations,  in  contrast  to  an  attitude  in  which

loneliness  is  actually  experienced  and  becomes  a  stimulus  towards  object

relations.

  Finally, I want to indicate why it is so difficult to evaluate the balance

between internal and external influences in the causation of loneliness. I have

so far in this paper dealt mainly with internal aspects—but these do not exist

in vacuo. There is a constant interaction between internal and external factors

in mental life, based on the processes of projection and introjection which

initiate object relations.

The first powerful impact of the external world on the young infant is the

discomfort of various kinds which accompanies birth and which is attributed

by him to hostile persecutory forces. These paranoid anxieties become part of

his internal situation. Internal factors also operate from the beginning; the

conflict between life and death instincts engenders the deflection of the death

instinct  outwards  and  this,  according  to  Freud,  initiates  the  projection  of

destructive impulses. I hold, however, that at the same time the urge of the

life instinct to find a good object in the external world leads to the projectionof loving impulses as well. In this way the picture of the external world—

represented first by the mother, and particularly by her breast, and based on

actual good and bad experiences in relation to her—is coloured by internal

factors. By introjection this picture of the external world affects the internal

one. However, it is not only that the infant’s feelings about the external world

are coloured by his projection, but the mother’s actual relation to her child is

in indirect and subtle ways, influenced by the infant’s response to her. A

contented baby who sucks with enjoyment, allays his mother’s anxiety; and

her happiness expresses itself in her way of handling and feeding him, thus

diminishing his persecutory anxiety and affecting his ability to internalize the

good  breast.  In  constrast,  a  child  who  has  difficulties  over  feeding  may

arouse the mother’s anxiety and guilt and thus unfavourably influence her

relation to him. In these varying ways there is constant interaction between

the internal and external world persisting throughout life.

The interplay of external and internal factors has an important bearing on

increasing  or  diminishing  loneliness.  The  internalization  of  a  good  breast

which  can  only  result  from  a  favourable  interplay  between  internal  and

external elements, is a foundation for integration which I have mentioned as

one of the most important factors in diminishing the sense of loneliness. In

addition, it is well recognized that in normal development, when feelings of

loneliness are strongly experienced there is a great need to turn to external

objects, since loneliness is partially allayed by external relations. External

influences, particularly the attitude of people important to the individual, can

in  other  ways,  diminish  loneliness.  For  example,  a  fundamentally  good

relation to the parents makes the loss of idealization and the lessening of the

feeling  of  omnipotence  more  bearable.  The  parents,  by  accepting  the

existence  of  the  child’s  destructive  impulses  and  showing  that  they  can

protect themselves against his aggressiveness, can diminish his anxiety about

the effects of his hostile wishes. As a result, the internal object is felt to be

less vulnerable and the self less destructive.

I can here only touch on the importance of the super-ego in connection

with  all  these  processes.  A  harsh  super-ego  can  never  be  felt  to  forgive

destructive impulses; in fact, it demands that they should not exist. Although

the super-ego is built up largely from a split-off part of the ego on to which

impulses are projected, it is also inevitably influenced by the introjection of

the personalities of the actual parents and of their relation to the child. The

harsher  the  super-ego,  the  greater  will  be  loneliness,  because  its  severedemands increase depressive and paranoid anxieties.

In conclusion I wish to restate my hypothesis that although loneliness can

be diminished or increased by external influences, it can never be completely

eliminated,  because  the  urge  towards  integration,  as  well  as  the  pain

experienced in the process of integration, spring from internal sources which

remain powerful throughout life.                      SHORT CONTRIBUTIONS

 



              The Importance of Words in Early Analysis (1927)


I pointed out in my papers and lectures that the child differs in its mode of

expression from the adult by the fact that it acts and dramatizes its thoughts

and  phantasies.  But  that  does  not  mean  that  the  word  is  not  of  great

importance in so far as the child commands it. I will give an example. A little

boy of five with very great repression about his phantasies has already gone

through a certain part of analysis. He has brought forward a lot of material

mostly  through  play,  but  he  shows  the  tendency  not  to  realize  this.  One

morning he asked me to play shop and that I should be the one who sells.

Now I used a technical measure which is important for the small child who is

often not prepared to tell his associations. I asked him who I should be, a lady

or a gentleman, as he would have to speak my name on coming into the shop.

He told me I was to be ‘Mr Cookey-Caker’, and we found very soon that he

meant someone who cooks cakes. I had to sell engines, which represented for

him the new penis. He called himself ‘Mr Kicker’, which he quickly realized

as kicking somebody. I asked him where Mr Cookey-Caker had gone. He

answered:  ‘He  has  gone  away  somewhere.’  He  soon  realized  that  Mr

Cookey-Caker  had  been  killed  by  his  kicking  him.  ‘Cooking  cakes’

represented for him making children in an oral and anal way. He realized

after this interpretation his aggression against his father and this phantasy

opened the way to others in which the person he was fighting against was

always Mr Cookey-Caker. The word ‘Cookey-Caker’ is the bridge to reality

which  the  child  avoids  as  long  as  he  brings  forth  his  phantasies  only  by

playing. It always means progress when the child has to acknowledge the

reality of the objects through his own words.



                Note on ‘A Dream of Forensic Interest’ (1928)


IN order to support my remarks on the dream communicated by Dr Bryan I

must refer to certain theoretical propositions which I brought forward in my
                              1
paper for the last Congress, and which I accounted for in greater detail in thelectures which I delivered here last autumn. In one of the early stages of the

Oedipus conflict the desire to have intercourse with the mother and to engage

in a contest with the father expresses itself in terms of the oral- and anal-

sadistic  instinctual  impulses,  which  are  predominant  in  this  phase  of

development. The idea is that the boy, by penetrating the mother’s womb,

destroys it and gets rid of the father’s penis which, according to a typical

infantile sexual theory, is assumed to be permanently present in the womb

(the father’s penis at this stage being the complete embodiment of the father),

and the way he destroys it is by devouring it. Mingling with this tendency,

and yet recognizable as one distinct in itself, is another tendency, whose aim

is the same, namely, to destroy the mother’s womb and to devour the penis,

but whose basis is an oral- and anal-sadistic identification with the mother.

From  this  proceeds  the  boy’s  desire  to  rob  the  mother’s  body  of  faeces,

children and the father’s penis. The anxiety which ensues on this level is

extraordinarily acute, for it has reference to the union of father and mother,

represented by the womb and the father’s penis, and I pointed out that this

anxiety is the essential foundation of severe mental diseases.

  From  the  analyses  of  little  children  I  have  learnt  that  the  dread  of  the

woman with the penis (which has so marked an influence in disturbances of

potency in the male) is really dread of the mother, whose body is assumed

always to contain the father’s penis. The dread of the father (or of his penis),

who is thus located within the mother, is here displaced on to dread of the

mother herself. By this displacement the anxiety which really has reference to

her and which proceeds from the destructive tendencies directed against her

body receives an overwhelming reinforcement.

In the exceedingly interesting case reported by Dr Bryan this anxiety finds

clear  expression.  The  mother  who  in  the  dream  over-powers  the  patient

demands back the money which he has stolen from her, and the fact that it

was only from women that he took money shows plainly the compulsion to

steal the contents of the womb. Of special significance, too, is the use to

which he put the stolen money. It seems evident that the patient took the

money  for  the  purpose  of  throwing  it  down  the  lavatory  pan,  and  he

obsessional nature of this behaviour is to be explained by his anxiety to make

reparation,  to  restore  to  the  mother  (or  the  womb),  represented  by  the

lavatory-pan, that which he had stolen.

One of my female patients, whose grave neurosis proved to be due to her

anxiety  lest  her  own  body  should  be  destroyed  by  her  mother,  had  thefollowing dream: ‘She was in a bathroom, and hearing steps, she threw the

contents of a basket (representing, as we discovered, faeces, children and the

penis) quickly into the lavatory pan. She succeeded in getting the pan flushed

before her mother came in. Her mother had injured her anus and she was

helping her with dressing the wound’. In this case the destructive impulses

against the mother had mainly found expression in phantasy in the form of

injury done to the anus.

  Not only, then, were the thefts of the money a repetition of the early anal-

sadistic desires to rob the mother, but they were also brought about by the

compulsion, motivated by anxiety, to make reparation for these early thefts

and to restore that which had been stolen. This latter desire is expressed by

throwing away the money into the lavatory pan.

The part played by the father in the patient’s anxiety is less immediately

obvious, but it can, nevertheless, be demonstrated. As I have said, the dread

which appears to have reference only to the mother implies also dread of the

father  (penis).  Moreover,  the  thefts  followed  on  a  conversation  with  the

patient’s employer on the subject of embezzlement in general, in which the

chief expressed his very special reprobation of misdemeanours of this class.

This shows clearly how largely the very need for punishment by the father

contributed to the patient’s committing these offences. Further, what led to

his making reparation at the last moment was the fact that he was faced with

detection by another man, a new clerk; this man again represented the father,

and what prevented the patient from forcibly bringing about a struggle with

(punishment by) the father, to which his intolerable anxiety was impelling

him, was thus precisely his anxiety of him.

To  these  remarks,  which  I  made  at  the  meeting  when  the  dream  was

reported, I should like to add a few more relating to the history of this patient

which  I  have  since  learnt.  The  boy’s  infantile  dread  of  the  witch  on  the

broomstick, who he thought would injure his body with some instrument and

make him blind, deaf and dumb, represents his dread of the mother with the

penis. In his fugue he travelled to Scotland to the witch, ostensibly because

his now unbearable anxiety impelled him to try to set matters right with her.

How largely, however, this attempt at reconciliation really had reference to

the father within the mother is clear from the fact that, before the journey, he

had the phantasy of defending a girl against sexual assault by a man. The real

object of his journey was in fact to reach the witch’s ‘hat’ (the penis). But,

just as later on the occasion of the thefts he was at the last moment restrainedby his dread of the other man, so on this journey he did not reach his ultimate

goal: a contest with the father’s penis. On reaching Edinburgh he fell ill. His

associations showed that this city stood for the witch’s genitals: the meaning

was, then, that he might not penetrate further. This anxiety is in accordance

also with the patient’s impotence.

As Dr Bryan pointed out, the anxiety-dream which followed on the visit to

the dentist was based on an identification with the mother. Here the dread of

some terrible destruction, of an explosion, was due to the anal-sadistic nature

of this identification. Since the patient assumed that the incapacity to bear

children himself involved his destroying and robbing his mother’s womb, he

anticipated similar destruction for his own body. Castration by the father,

which is bound up with this identification with the mother, is represented by

the dentist’s actions. It shows also in the recollection which emerged when

the patient related his dream. The place where he saw himself standing was a

certain spot in a park, against which his mother had particularly warned him.

She told him that bad men might attack him and, he himself concluded, they

might steal his watch.

The patient’s doubt about whether and how he could or ought to leave the

park is related, as Dr Bryan in conclusion points out, to his anxiety lest he

should be attacked by the father during coitus with the mother—attacked, that

is, within as well as outside the mother’s body.



    Theoretical Deductions from an Analysis of Dementia Praecox in Early
                                                    2
                                    Infancy (1929)


THE  case  of  a  four-year-old  boy  who  was  demented  is  the  basis  of  my

investigation which showed that the premature and excessive defence of the

ego against sadism under certain conditions prevents the development of the

ego and the establishment of reality relations.



                                                                                1
        Review of Woman’s Periodicity by Mary Chadwick (1933)


To  begin  with,  the  author  takes  the  reader  back  to  prehistoric  times  and

shows the rôle which menstruation plays for man and woman, for the closer

and the extended family, for the smaller and also for the wider communities.

Menstruation has always been looked upon by men as a dangerous eventagainst  which  they  reacted  with  fear,  anxiety  and  disdain.  The  belief

prevailed that contact with a menstruating woman is dangerous and therefore

severe restrictions were imposed in order to separate the ‘impure’ woman

from the community for several days. The form in which the woman was

excluded varied with the character of the tribes. The exile of the menstruating

woman is a short repetition of the exclusion of adolescent girls from the

community in connection with the puberty rites which may last from several

months to years, and this is found even nowadays among primitive peoples.

  Chadwick  showed  very  convincingly  that  the  primitives’  fear  of  the

menstruating  woman  is  fear  of  the  revenge  of  certain  demons  which

ultimately is identical with castration anxiety. In addition she showed how

other group phenomena in later periods have similar roots, for instance fear

of witches which even led to their being burned. Even today certain religious

demands and prohibitions have the same motivation. This anxiety also finds

expression  in  certain  superstitions,  such  as  the  commonly  held  idea  that

flowers touched by a menstruating woman will fade.

  After this introduction the author turns to the present generation and to

single individuals and again she shows that everyone has to cope with similar

anxieties. These are based on the recognition of the difference between the

sexes and the ‘threatening’ signs of the female cycle of regular haemorrhages.

Sooner or later every child discovers the fact that the sexes differ and women

menstruate. Consciously or unconsciously this knowledge works in the child

and provokes anxious ideas about the wholesomeness of its own genitals.

Everyone reacts to this knowledge according to his own constitution, state of

development and possible neurosis.

  Chadwick describes in detail what occurs in women, in men, in children

and in employees—manifestly or latently—in regular cycles, either before,

during or after the period of the woman. She emphasizes quarrels between the

various members of the family caused by the tendency to depression and by

the general nervous tension of the menstruating woman. This book describes

very dramatically how the common and neurotic attitudes of man and woman

to menstruation is transmitted to children and in turn, how they again show

the  same  kind  of  disturbances  when  they  are  grown  up—mechanisms  of

identification play the main part in this phenomenon—and how they transmit

the  same  problems  again  to  the  new  generation:  in  this  way  neurosis  is

transmitted from generation to generation. This book can provide parents and

educators with much interesting information and can help them towards abetter understanding of this problem and change their attitudes, which may

prevent further damage to the coming generation.



          Some Psychological Considerations: A Comment (1942)


Dr  Karin  Stephen  has  stated  lucidly  some  aspects  of  the  psycho-analytic

position. There are, however, sides of this problem which she did not cover,

and which seem to me pertinent both to the understanding of the origin of the

super-ego and to Dr Waddington’s thesis.

Here in brief outline are some of the facts which have become clear to me

in my psycho-analytic work with young children, and which I wish to bring

to your notice. The feeling of ‘good’, in the baby’s mind, first arises from the

experience  of pleasurable  sensations,  or,  at  least,  freedom  from  painful

internal and external stimuli. (Food is therefore particularly good, producing,

as it does, gratification and relief from discomfort.) Evil is that which causes

the baby pain and tension, and fails to satisfy his needs and desires. Since the

differentiation  between  ‘me’  and  ‘not-me’  hardly  exists  at  the  beginning,

goodness within and goodness without, badness within and badness without,

are almost identical to the child. Soon, however, the conception (though this

abstract word does not fit these largely unconscious and highly emotional

processes) of ‘good’ and ‘evil’ extends to the actual people around him. The

parents also become embued with goodness and badness according to the

child’s feelings about them, and then are retaken into the ego, and, within the

mind, their influence determines the individual conception of good and evil.

This movement to and fro between projection and introjection is a continuous

process, by which, in the first years of childhood, relationships with actual

people are established and the various aspects of the super-ego are at the

same time built up within the mind.

The  child’s  mental  capacity  to  establish  people,  in  the  first  place  his

parents, within his own mind, as if they were part of himself, is determined

by two facts: on the one hand, stimuli from without and from within, being at

first almost undifferentiated become interchangeable; and on the other, the

baby’s  greed,  his  wish  to  take  in  external  good,  enhances  the  process  of

introjection  in  such  a  way  that  certain  experiences  of  the  external  world

become almost simultaneously part of his inner world.

The baby’s inherent feelings of love as well as of hatred are in the firstplace focused on his mother. Love develops in response to her love and care;

hatred and aggression are stimulated by frustrations and discomfort. At the

same time she becomes the object upon whom he projects his own emotions.

By attributing to his parents his own sadistic tendencies he develops the cruel

aspect of his super-ego (as Dr Stephen has already pointed out); but he also

projects on to the people around him his feelings of love, and by these means

develops the image of kind and helpful parents. From the first day of life,

these processes are influenced by the actual attitudes of the people who look

after him, and experiences of the actual outer world and inner experiences

constantly interact. In endowing his parents with his feelings of love and thus

building up the later ego-ideal, the child is driven by imperative physical and

mental needs; he would perish without his mother’s food and care, and his

whole mental wellbeing and development depend on his establishing securely

in his mind the existence of kind and protective figures.

The  various  aspects  of  the  super-ego  derive  from  the  way  in  which,

throughout  successive  stages  of  development,  the  child  conceives  of  his

parents. Another powerful element in the formation of the super-ego is the

child’s own feelings of revulsion against his own aggressive tendencies—a

revulsion which he experiences unconsciously as early as in the first few

months of life. How are we to explain this early turning of one part of the

mind against the other—this inherent tendency to self-condemnation, which

is  the  root  of  conscience?  One  imperative  motive  can  be  found  in  the

unconscious  fear  of  the  child,  in  whose  mind  desires  and  feelings  are

omnipotent, that should his violent impulses prevail, they would bring about

the destruction both of his parents and of himself, since the parents in his

mind have become an integral part of his self (super-ego).

The child’s overwhelming fear of losing the people he loves and most

needs initiates in his mind not only the impulse to restrain his aggression but

also a drive to preserve the very objects whom he attacks in phantasy, to put

them right and to make amends for the injuries he may have inflicted on

them.  This  drive  to  make  reparation  adds  impetus  and  direction  to  the

creative impulse and to all constructive activities. Something is now added to

the  early  conception  of  good  and  evil:  ‘Good’  becomes  the  preserving,

repairing or re-creating of those objects which are endangered by his hatred

or have been injured by it; ‘Evil’ becomes his own dangerous hatred.

  Constructive and creative activities, social and co-operative feelings, are

then felt to be morally good, and they are therefore the most important meansof keeping at bay or overcoming the sense of guilt. When the various aspects

of the super-ego have become unified (which is the case with mature and

well-balanced people), the feeling of guilt has not been put out of action, but

has become, together with the means of counteracting it, integrated in the

personality. If guilt is too strong and cannot be dealt with adequately, it may

lead to actions which create more guilt still (as in the criminal) and become

the cause for abnormal development of all kinds.

  When the imperatives: ‘Thou shalt not kill’ (primarily the loved object),

and ‘Thou shalt save from destruction’ (again the loved objects, and in the

first place from the infant’s own aggression) have taken root in the mind, an

ethical pattern is set up which is universal and the rudiment of all ethical

systems, notwithstanding the fact that it is capable of manifold variations and

distortions, and even of complete reversal. The originally loved object may

be replaced by anything in the wide field of human interests: an abstract

principle, or even a single problem, can come to stand for it, and this interest

may seem to be remote from ethical feelings. (A collector, an inventor or a

scientist might even feel capable of committing murder in order to further his

purpose.) Yet this particular problem or interest represents in his unconscious

mind the original loved person, and must therefore be saved or re-created;

anything which stands in the way of his objective is then evil to him.

An instance of distortion, or rather reversal, of the primary pattern which at

once presents itself to the mind is the Nazi attitude. Here the aggressor and

aggression have become loved and admired objects, and the attacked objects

have turned into evil and must therefore be exterminated. The explanation of

such a reversal can be found in the early unconscious relation towards the

first persons attacked or injured in phantasy. The object then turns into a

potential persecutor, because retaliation by the same means by which it had

been harmed is feared. The injured person is, however, also identical with the

loved person, who should be protected and restored. Excessive early fears

tend to increase the conception of the injured object as an enemy, and if this

is the outcome, hatred will prevail in its struggle against love; moreover, the

remaining love may be distributed in the particular ways which lead to the

depravation of the super-ego.

  There is one more step in the evolution of good and evil in the individual

mind which should be mentioned. Maturity and mental health are ‘good’, as

Dr  Stephen  pointed  out.  (Harmonious  maturity,  however,  though  a  great

‘good’ in itself, is by no means the only condition for the feeling of adult‘goodness’, for there are various kinds and orders of goodness, even among

people  whose  balance  is  at  times  badly  disturbed.)  Harmony  and  mental

balance—furthermore happiness and contentment—imply that the super-ego

has  been  integrated  by  the  ego;  which  in  turn  means  that  the  conflicts

between super-ego and ego have greatly diminished, and that we are at peace

with the super-ego. This amounts to our having achieved harmony with the

people  whom  we  first  loved  and  hated,  and  from  whom  the  super-ego

derives. We have travelled a long way from our early conflicts and emotions,

and  the  objects  of  our  interest  and  our  goals  have  changed  many  times,

becoming  more  and  more  elaborated  and  transformed  in  the  process.

However far we feel removed from our original dependencies, however much

satisfaction we derive from the fulfilment of our adult ethical demands, in the

depths of our minds our first longings to preserve and save our loved parents,

and  to  reconcile  ourselves  with  them,  persist.  There  are  many  ways  of

gaining  ethical  satisfaction;  but  whether  this  be  through  social  and  co-

operative feelings and pursuits, or even through interests which are further

removed from the external world—whenever we have the feeling of moral

goodness, in our unconscious minds this primary longing for reconciliation

with the original objects of our love and hatred is fulfilled.                                                              1
                            EXPLANATORY NOTES

 




                    NOTES ON SOME SCHIZOID MECHANISMS (1946)


THIS is one of Melanie Klein’s most important works. It presents for the first

time a detailed account of the psychic processes that occur in the first three

months of life. This first period, called formerly the paranoid position, and

here renamed the paranoid-schizoid position (see her note on p. 2), had been

only  broadly  outlined  in  ‘A  Contribution  to  the  Psychogenesis  of  Manic-

Depressive States’ (1935) as a contrast to the depressive position. Melanie

Klein now sets out the characteristics of the early ego, the form of its object

relations and anxieties, and thereby illuminates the nature of—to name the

most  important—schizoid  states,  idealization,  ego  disintegration,  and

projective processes connected with splitting, for which she introduces the

term ‘projective identification’, a concept discussed below. Furthermore, a

new era is opened in the understanding, of schizophrenia. The paper provides

the first detailed account of the mental processes, particularly the schizoid

mechanisms,  which  result  in  states  of  schizophrenic  dissociation  and

depersonalization. It also includes a valuable discussion on the technique of

analysing schizoid states, a subject she returns to in a later work, Envy and

Gratitude.

In this account of the paranoid-schizoid position, splitting is a key concept.

It may be of interest to trace the development over the years of Melanie

Klein’s  ideas  on  splitting.  Splitting  occurs  in  various  forms.  In  her  first

published  paper  ‘The  Development  of  a  Child’  she  remarked  on  the

phenomenon of splitting off a bad aspect of an object in order to preserve it

as  a  good  object;  she  observed  of  a  small  boy  that  his  witch  figure  is

‘obtained  by  division  of  the  mother  imago’  which  is  ‘split  off  from  his

beloved mother, in order to maintain her as she is’ (Writings, I, p. 42). In The

Psycho-Analysis  of  Children  (1932)  this  type  of  splitting  is  seen  as  a

relatively  mature  process  which  occurs  as  sadism  declines.  It  enables  the

child  to  make  restitution  to  his  good  object  and  turn  away  from  bad

frightening  objects.  In  1935  Melanie  Klein  placed  this  type  of  splitting,

occurring on increasingly realistic planes, among the processes that belong to

the normal working through of the depressive position (Writings, I, p. 288).  There is a second main stream of ideas from her early writings. In ‘Early

Stages of the Oedipus Conflict’ (1928) she drew attention to the existence of

early phantasies of intrusion into the mother’s body. She also described in

‘Personification in the Play of Children’ (1929) how anxiety may lead to a

splitting or splitting up of the super-ego into its component figures followed

by  the  projection  of  particular  figures  in  order  to  reduce  anxiety.  The

following year, in ‘The Importance of Symbol Formation in the Development

of the Ego’, she took this idea further, and, without using the word ‘splitting’

or ‘projection’ described the expulsion of parts of the self. She suggested that

the ego’s first defence against anxiety is not repression, which comes later,

but expulsion—a violent expulsion of sadism both to relieve the ego and to

attack the persecuting objects. These earlier ideas all form part of the broader

concept of projective identification which Melanie Klein introduces in the

present paper. Projective identification is an overall name for a number of

distinct yet related processes connected with splitting and projection. Melanie

Klein shows that the leading defence against anxiety in the paranoid-schizoid

position is projective identification, and further, that projective identification

constructs  the  narcissistic  object  relations  characteristic  of  this  period,  in

which objects become equated with split-off and projected parts of the self.

She also describes the anxieties attendant on phantasies of forceful entry and

control of the object, as well as the impoverishing effect on the ego of the

excessive use of projective identification. In ‘On Identification’ (1955) she

studies at length another form of projective identification in which a pseudo-

identity is acquired.

To  continue  the  review  of  splitting.  Melanie  Klein  first  described  the

primal splitting of both emotions and the first object relations, which is the

foundation of the paranoid-schizoid position, in 1935 in ‘A Contribution to

the Psychogenesis of Manic-Depressive States’. Love and hate are split, and

object relations are correspondingly split into good and bad. In the present

paper the details of this primal splitting are elaborated. Melanie Klein also

draws attention for the first time to two further forms of splitting which affect

the state of the ego. Under fear of annihilation the ego splits itself into minute

parts,  a  mechanism  which  she  thinks  underlies  states  of  disintegration  in

schizophrenia. She also suggests that when the object is taken sadistically it

will be split in pieces and that this will result in an ego which is split; indeed,

in  this  paper  she  underlines  the  fact  that  the  ego  cannot  split  the  object

without itself being split, again a fact of significance for schizophrenia.In  her  subsequent  work  she  made  one  or  two  additions  to  these  basic

findings  on  splitting.  In  ‘Some  Theoretical  Conclusions  Regarding  the

Emotional  Life  of  the  Infant’  (1952)  she  describes  the  splitting  which  is

characteristic  of  the  depressive  position.  As  a  defence  against  depressive

anxiety the ego makes a split between an uninjured live object and an injured

dying or dead object. In the same paper she discusses the general effects of

splitting  on  processes  of  integration.  In  ‘On  the  Development  of  Mental

Functioning’ (1958) there is a sudden change in Melanie Klein’s thinking: in

addition to the split between ego and super-ego, she posits another structural

split in the mind, a split-off area in the deep unconscious for the earliest and

most terrifying figures.

The present paper is like the first map of a region before known only in

general outline, and much remains to be filled in. Above all, the pathology of

the  paranoid-schizoid  position  is  not  delineated.  Although  Melanie  Klein

describes the detrimental effects of excessive splitting and states of persistent

withdrawal in infancy, it is only later, in Envy and Gratitude, from the study

of the effects of pronounced envy on development, that she was able to begin

effectively  to  differentiate  the  normal  from  the  abnormal  form  of  the

paranoid-schizoid position. She made two later modifications to her present

account: in ‘Anxiety and Guilt’ (1948) and ‘Depression in the Schizophrenic’

(1960) she described very early forms of guilt and depression which antedate

the depressive position and belong to the paranoid-schizoid position.

Taken  together  with  ‘A  Contribution  to  the  Psychogenesis  of  Manic-

Depressive  States’  and  ‘Mourning  and  its  Relation  to  Manic-Depressive

States’ which contain the account of the infantile depressive position, this

paper  completes  the  introduction  into  psycho-analysis  of  a  new  theory  of

development. It is a theory in which the nodal notion is development as a task

for an active ego in relation to an object through two main positions, and the

theory brings into psycho-analysis new concepts and hypotheses in terms of

which Melanie Klein formulated and explained a wide range of psychological

phenomena.



                    ON THE THEORY OF ANXIETY AND GUILT (1948)


A  series  of  Controversial  Discussions  on  Melanie  Klein’s  work  was

organized in the British Psycho-Analytical Society during 1943 and 1944.

Her views were represented by four papers; one given by herself on ‘TheEmotional Life and Ego Development of the Infant with Special Reference to

the Depressive Position’, and three others given by two colleagues—‘The

Nature and Function of Phantasy’ by Susan Isaacs, ‘Some Aspects of the

Rôle  of  Introjection  and  Projection’  by  Paula  Heimann,  and  a  paper  on

‘Regression’ given jointly by Susan Isaacs and Paula Heimann. From the

paper that Melanie Klein delivered on that occasion three papers eventually

emerged: this one, ‘On the Theory of Anxiety and Guilt’ and also ‘Some

Theoretical Conclusions Regarding the Emotional Life of the Infant’ and ‘On

Observing the Behaviour of Young Infants’. These three together with ‘Notes

on  Some  Schizoid  Mechanisms’,  which  Melanie  Klein  delivered  to  the

British Society in 1946, were published in 1952 in Developments in Psycho-

Analysis, which included also expanded versions of the papers given in the

Controversial Discussions by Susan Isaacs and Paula Heimann as well as two

papers by Joan Riviere. The book is therefore a permanent record of Kleinian

theory at that time.

The interest of the present paper is not new views, since aside from one

emendation, noted below, all views stated here come from earlier writings

which Melanie Klein herself refers to in the text. Rather, it is the fact that

although for twenty-five years she saw anxiety as a crucial psychological

factor and gave much thought and work to understanding it, this is her first

and  only  paper  entirely  on  the  subject.  This  makes  the  present  paper  a

welcome assembling of all her theories about anxiety and guilt, including

points of derivation, agreement and difference with Freud. A full discussion

of the fear of death occurs here in which she maintains against Freud that the

fear of death is the most fundamental anxiety of all.

  There is an emendation—the first of a series—to the account of guilt given

in ‘A Contribution to the Psychogenesis of Manic-Depressive States’ (1935)

where  she  maintains  that  guilt  occurs  first  in  the  depressive  position  in

relation to whole objects. Her new view is that guilt is experienced before this

in transient states of integration in relation to part objects. Later, in Envy and

Gratitude, she suggests that excessive envy leads to a premature sense of

guilt, which confuses the working through of the anxieties of the paranoid-

schizoid position, and in ‘A Note on Depression in the Schizophrenic’ (1960)

she describes a form of early guilt and depression specific for schizophrenia.

Thus,  her  final  conception  of  the  paranoid-schizoid  position  includes

subsidiary depressive anxieties, the analogue of her view that the depressive

position involves also paranoid anxieties.    ON THE CRITERIA FOR THE TERMINATION OF A PSYCHO-ANALYSIS (1950)


Already  in  1923  Melanie  Klein  noted  that  ‘every  time  the  anxiety  was

resolved, the analysis made a big step forward’ (‘Early Analysis’, 1, p. 78),

and from then on it was her view that the key to analytic progress was the

analysis of anxiety. Here this view is expressed with formality and precision

in terms of her theory of early development. Her thesis is that the termination

of  a  psycho-analysis,  which  in  itself  reactivates  anxiety,  is  reached  when

persecutory  and  depressive  anxieties  are  sufficiently  reduced  by  working

through the infantile paranoid-schizoid and depressive positions. Her further

contention is that this criterion is connected to, and underlies, other generally

accepted indications for termination.

This paper has two versions, a short and a long.



                      THE ORIGINS OF TRANSFERENCE (1952)


This is Melanie Klein’s only paper on the subject of transference and it brings

together several ideas which she frequently stated and clinically illustrated in

her writings. Her conception of transference is a rich one, involving what she

calls ‘total situations’. In her view, interpretations should cover both early

object relations which are relived and evolve further in the transference, as

well as the unconscious elements in experiences in the patient’s current life.

In Envy and Gratitude (1957) she records (p. 18on) her use of the expression

‘memories in feelings’ for the occurrence in the transference of preverbal

emotions and phantasies.

For many years now Melanie Klein had held the view that object relations

begin at birth, a view which implies that narcissism and auto-erotism are not

states prior to object relations, but rather are states contemporaneous with the

first object relations. The present paper contains her only—and even here it is

brief—discussion of primary narcissism, including an account of the relation

of her views to Freud’s. The reader will notice that in this discussion Melanie

Klein is describing narcissistic states, which are states of withdrawal into

internal  objects.  In  her  terminology  narcissistic  states  are  distinct  from

narcissistic object relations, which result from projective identification in the

way described in ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’, p. 13.    THE MUTUAL INFLUENCES IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF EGO AND ID (1952)


This short paper was Melanie Klein’s contribution to a symposium on the

subject. Another and far more important discussion of metapsychology will

be found in ‘The Development of Mental Functioning’ (1958).



  SOME THEORETICAL CONCLUSIONS REGARDING THE EMOTIONAL LIFE OF THE

                                    INFANT (1952)


As explained in the Explanatory Note to ‘Anxiety and Guilt’, this paper is

one of three which had its origin in a paper Melanie Klein contributed to the

Controversial Discussions of 1943–44.

On the completion of her early work twenty years before, Melanie Klein

had attempted a detailed account of development in Part II of The Psycho-

Analysis of Children. In the time intervening she formulated the theory of the

infantile  paranoid-schizoid  and  depressive  positions.  The  considerable

interest of the present paper is that it is the first, and a very full, survey of the

period from birth to latency in the light of this new theory. Compared with

her  earlier  account,  there  is  here  an  impressive  advance  in  scientific

organization, understanding and consistency. Except for primary envy, which

she described in Envy and Gratitude  in  1957,  it  is  Melanie  Klein’s  final

picture of early development.

  Among the points of more specific interest in the present paper, is the

account of splitting which adds to what she said before in two ways. (A

general discussion of splitting is in the Explanatory Note to ‘Notes on Some

Schizoid  Mechanisms’.)  First  she  clarifies  (pp.  86–7)  the  relationship

between  splitting  and  repression,  and  secondly  she  describes  (p.  74)  the

particular form in which splitting occurs in the depressive position, a matter

left unspecified in 1946. In this paper there is also the first explicit reference

(p. 79, note 2) to separate internal parents related to one another in a happy

way as the satisfactory evolution of the primitive figure of combined hostile

parents.  Lastly,  one  assumption  in  her  earlier  work,  rejected  by  her

subsequent theory, was that a phase of maximal sadism occurs in the middle

of the first year. This is discussed in Chapter Note 4, p. 92, where Melanie

Klein states her revised chronology of infantile aggression. This correction of

her earlier view is also in her Preface to the Third Edition of The Psycho-

Analysis of Children.            ON OBSERVING THE BEHAVIOUR OF YOUNG INFANTS (1952)


This  paper,  which  developed  out  of  Melanie  Klein’s  contribution  to  the

1943–44  Controversial  Discussions,  forms  with  the  preceding  paper  an

important pair. ‘Some Theoretical Conclusions Regarding the Emotional Life

of the Infant’ sets out Melanie Klein’s final theory of early development,

except for her work on primary envy which she added in 1957. In the present

paper the feelings and the details of behaviour observed in young infants and

small children are explained and illuminated by means of this theory.

A point of theoretical interest is the explicit statement in the first of the

Notes appended to the paper of an hypothesis long presupposed in Melanie

Klein’s work, viz., that the infant has innate unconscious knowledge of a

unique and good object, the mother’s breast.



    THE PSYCHO-ANALYTIC PLAY TECHNIQUE: ITS HISTORY AND SIGNIFICANCE

                                      (1955[1953])


This  is  the  closest  Melanie  Klein  came  to  writing  a  professional

autobiography and it puts on record the history of her early days as a child

analyst. There are two versions of this paper. The first version contained

examples of the interpretation of children’s play, which were replaced in the

second and longer version by an account of child cases; the latter version is

the one in this volume. Some further historical information will be found in

the Preface to the First Edition of The Psycho-Analysis of Children. Most

interesting  of  all  in  the  present  paper  is  Melanie  Klein’s  account  of  the

particular discovery each early child case enabled her to make.



                              ON IDENTIFICATION (1955)


This is the second of Melanie Klein’s three papers on literary material, the

others being ‘Infantile Anxiety Situations Reflected in a Work of Art and in

the Creative Impulse’ (1929) and ‘Some Reflections on The Oresteia’ (1963).

The present work treats Fabian, the main character in a novel by Julian

Green—in Melanie Klein’s words—‘almost as if he were a patient’, and the

chief  and  very  considerable  interest  of  this  paper  is  that  it  explores  new

aspects of projective identification. Formulated in ‘Notes on Some SchizoidMechanisms’ (1946) the concept of projective identification embraces several

distinct but related processes. In 1946 Melanie Klein described the type of

object  relations  formed  by  projective  identification  in  which  the  object

becomes equated with split-off parts of the self. Here she studies not the

change  in  the  object  brought  about  by  projective  identification,  but  the

change in the identity of the subject; by intrusion into the object the subject

takes possession of, and acquires the identity of, the object. Melanie Klein

uses the story of Fabian, who enters and becomes a succession of different

people to discuss the motives for the acquisition of a pseudo-identity in this

way. She also discusses the question of the choice of object for projective

identification, and the ego’s states and anxieties which result, including the

fate  of  parts  of  the  personality  which  are  felt  to  remain  outside  the  new

identity. She also describes briefly (p. 144) the beneficial governing effect

that an intact good internal object has on splitting and projection.



                            ENVY AND GRATITUDE (1957)


This is Melanie Klein’s last major theoretical work. Before its appearance,

envy  was  sporadically  recognized  by  psycho-analysts  as  an  important

emotion—but only in situations of deprivation, and only one of its forms,

penis  envy,  had  been  studied  in  detail.  Melanie  Klein’s  own  previous

references to envy begin with her description of the deep effect of envy on

the development of Erna, an early case reported in an unpublished paper read

to the First Conference of German Psycho-Analysts in 1924, which became

the  basis  of  Chapter  III  of The  Psycho-Analysis  of  Children.  In  the

intervening years, she noted envy as a factor of importance; she lists her past

references  in  a  footnote  on  pages  180–81,  forgetting,  however,  her  own

anticipation of the present work in ‘Some Theoretical Conclusions Regarding

the Emotional Life of the Infant’ (1952), where she says ‘envy appears to be

inherent  in  oral  greed  .  .  .  envy  (alternating  with  feelings  of  love  and

gratification) is first directed towards the feeding breast . . .’ (p. 79).

In this monograph Melanie Klein charts an extensive area of which only a

small sector had been known before. She posits that envy and gratitude are

opposite and interacting feelings normally operative from birth and that the

first object of envy, as of gratitude, is the feeding breast. She describes the

influence  of  both  envy  and  gratitude  on  the  earliest  object  relations  andstudies the operation of envy not only in situations of deprivation, but also in

situations  of  gratification  where  it  interferes  with  normal  gratitude.  The

effects of envy, particularly unconscious envy, on character formation are

studied,  including—and  these  are  of  prime  importance—the  nature  of  the

defences erected against envy. The technique of analysing splitting processes

is also discussed; this forms an important supplement to the discussion in

‘Notes on Some Schizoid Mechanisms’.

  Melanie Klein also examines abnormally pronounced envy. In ‘Notes on

Some Schizoid Mechanisms’, though she noted several abnormalities of early

functioning, for example, the introjection of objects fragmented by hate, the

excessive  use  of  splitting  mechanisms  and  the  persistence  of  narcissistic

states, the psychopathology of the paranoid-schizoid position stayed largely

unknown. Here she sets out in detail the abnormal formation of the paranoid-

schizoid position which results from excessive envy; among other things she

describes the confusion which comes from a failure in splitting, and shows

the significance of an absence of idealization. She also outlines the abnormal

structure  of  the  depressive  position  and  the  Oedipus  complex  that  then

follows. She also posits that the feeding breast is perceived by the infant as a

source of creativity and describes the damaging effects of undue envy on the

capacity for creativeness. Throughout, her contentions both theoretical and

clinical are illustrated by case material which is of particular interest in that it

shows how she worked in this late period.

This work throws new light on the negative therapeutic reaction, studied as

the effect of envy. Melanie Klein considers that although envy can to some

extent be analysed, it sets a limit to analytic success. This fact, therefore,

places  the  final  curb  on  the  high  optimism  of  her  early  papers  of  the

’twenties.



              ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF MENTAL FUNCTIONING (1958)


Melanie Klein discusses two basic metapsychological principles that she has

accepted from Freud: his structural theory and his theory of the life and death

instincts. She states her additions to the theory of the life and death instincts

and  also  her  disagreements  with  Freud  over  certain  particulars.  She

emphasizes  that  she  employs  the  life  and  death  instincts  not  as  general

concepts of the behaviour of the biological organism, but as the basis of loveand hate, which are mental rather than biological phenomena. Her emphasis

on the mental, however, is not just a particularized view of the theory of the

instincts.  It  is  her  distinctive  orientation  in  psycho-analysis.  Her  general

approach, and her theory of the paranoid-schizoid and depressive positions,

forms  a  theory  of mental  functioning.  Note,  for  instance,  the  tide  of  this

paper.

  While her discussion of the life and death instincts assembles long-held

views,  this  is  not  the  case  with  the  discussion  of  mental  structure,  more

specifically the super-ego. Here Melanie Klein has a sudden change of view.

In contrast to emphatic earlier views (see the Explanatory Note to ‘The Early

Development of Conscience in the Child’) that the hallmark of the normal

early super-ego is its extreme and terrifying nature, she here suggests that the

super-ego develops with the two instincts predominantly in a state of fusion,

and  that  the  terrifying  internal  figures  which  result  from  intense

destructiveness do not form part of the super-ego. These exist in a separate

area of the mind in the deep unconscious, split off both from the ego and the

super-ego,  where  they  remain  unintegrated  and  unmodified  by  normal

processes of growth; if an abnormal situation arises and there is a failure to

maintain a split these terrifying objects become a source of acute anxiety and

a threat to mental stability. She also suggests, as against earlier views, that

there is a close accord between the ego and the super-ego from the beginning.

  While her contention that the most terrifying figures in the psyche persist

unchanged  is  at  variance  with  many  previous  passages—for  example,  in

‘Some Theoretical Conclusions Regarding the Emotional Life of the Infant’

(1952),  p.  87,  she  describes  the  modifying  and  integrative  effects  of  the

depressive position on the extreme severity of the early super-ego figures—it

is nonetheless also a return to an old idea. In ‘Symposium on Child Analysis’

(1927) Melanie Klein wrote (p. 155) ‘I am led to believe from the analysis of

children  that  their  super-ego  is  a  highly  resistant  product,  at  heart

unalterable . . .’ and again in the same paper (p. 157) she refers to the super-

ego ‘whose nature is immutable’.

As was often her habit in such matters, Melanie Klein did not comment on

or formally work out the implication of her changed views. Did her radical

reclassification of the most terrifying figures out of the super-ego alter her

view of their impact on the infant in the paranoid-schizoid position? The

present paper and subsequent accounts of the infant’s experiences in the first

months  of  life  in  ‘Our  Adult  World  and  Its  Roots  in  Infancy’  and  ‘TheOresteia’ would seem to indicate that her conception of their impact on the

infant remains the same, since the splitting off (see p. 241) of these terrifying

figures would in the beginning often fail. On the other hand, her account of

the super-ego development in, for example, schizophrenia would now seem

to  be  different;  before  (see e.g.  ‘Personification  in  the  Play  of  Children’

(1929)) she considered that schizophrenia was characterized by the abnormal

persistence and ascendency of the normal early severe super-ego; now her

view is that (see p. 243) part of the schizophrenic process is an abnormal

development of the super-ego itself in which it becomes indistinguishable

from the most terrifying objects.



              OUR ADULT WORLD AND ITS ROOTS IN INFANCY (1959)


This is the last of Melanie Klein’s papers for a wide rather than a specifically

analytic audience, the others being ‘On Weaning’ (1936) and ‘Love, Guilt

and  Reparation’  (1937).  With  a  minimum  of  technical  terms  she  gives  a

broad survey of her findings and theories, stressing the continuing influence

of early development on adult life, individual and social.



              A NOTE ON DEPRESSION IN THE SCHIZOPHRENIC (1960)


The  last  International  Congress  of  Psycho-Analysis  that  Melanie  Klein

attended was the Twenty-First Congress in Copenhagen in 1959. She made

two contributions: this short paper and ‘On the Sense of Loneliness’. This

paper  was  part  of  a  symposium  on  depressive  illness  and  deals  with

depression in schizophrenia. Melanie Klein here modifies some of her earlier

views.

Before describing the paper, it may be useful to assemble her work on the

subject, as schizophrenia, indeed the psychoses, interested her all her working

life. Several ideas were present from the start. She thought that psychotic

processes occur at a much younger age than commonly supposed, and in two

separate ways: in normal infants as part of normal development, and, in a

proliferated and abnormal form, in psychoses even in childhood itself. Also,

she thought that psychotic processes are connected with sadism, and that they

arise  from  acute  anxiety  which  brings  an  excessive  and  damaging  use  of

certain otherwise normal defences.  These ideas had their first rough-hewn expression in a group of papers

published  between  1927  and  1929.  In  ‘Criminal  Tendencies  in  Normal

Children’ (1927) she drew attention to the fact that a flight from reality is

both one of the normal defences of childhood and also, if it pervades the

personality, a basis of childhood psychosis. In ‘Early Stages of the Oedipus

Conflict’ (1928) she described the interior world of horror and psychosis that

results from phantasy attacks on the mother’s inside. In ‘Personification in

the  Play  of  Children’  (1929)  she  listed  signs  of  childhood  schizophrenia,

specifying the characteristic type of play, and concluded from her work on

the early super-ego in which she was engaged at the time, that a central factor

in psychosis is the acute anxiety caused by the early super-ego formed in the

image of the child’s sadistic phantasies. The next paper ‘The Importance of

Symbol Formation in the Development of the Ego’ (1930) records both the

first  analysis  of  a  psychotic  child  and  also  the  existence  of  a  defence

mechanism prior to and distinct from repression. Melanie Klein describes

how the ego uses this early mechanism to expel its own sadism and attack

hostile objects, and the devastating effect on development if this mechanism

(which as yet had no name) is used to excess to eliminate all sadism and

anxiety—the ego then lacks the means for further development and remains

in a psychotic condition. In these ideas there are the precursors of the concept

of  projective  identification  formulated  in  ‘Notes  on  Some  Schizoid

Mechanisms’ (1946).

By  1930,  summarized  in  a  brief  paper,  ‘The  Psychotherapy  of  the

Psychoses’ the lineaments of the psychotic’s reality as a reflection of his

hostile instinctual life had been drawn, as well as the general nature of his

anxieties and defences. In The Psycho-Analysis of Children (1932) Melanie

Klein  expounds  these  views  more  fully.  Her  discovery  that  the  earliest

anxieties are psychotic rather than neurotic led her in this work to redefine

the  infantile  neurosis  as  a  composite  of  psychotic  and  neurotic  trends,  a

statement not far short of her ultimate definition of the infantile neurosis

given in ‘Some Theoretical Conclusions Regarding the Emotional Life of the

Infant’ (1952): ‘the infantile neurosis can be regarded as a combination of

processes  by  which  anxieties  of  a  psychotic  nature  are  bound,  worked

through and modified’ (p. 81).

  These early ideas became, in a more developed and more exact form, part

of her theory of the paranoid-schizoid and depressive positions, expounded in

three main papers, ‘A Contribution to the Psychogenesis of Manic-depressiveStates’  (1935),  ‘Mourning  and  Its  Relation  to  Manic-Depressive  States’

(1940)  and  ‘Notes  on  Some  Schizoid  Mechanisms’  (1946).  In  1935  she

distinguished for the first time the two forms of anxiety, persecutory and

depressive, a fundamental distinction which in itself illuminates the nature of

psychotic anxiety. In the same paper she connects schizophrenia with the

psychotic persecutory anxieties of the first three months of life, and gives

also  a  detailed  account,  completed  in  her  1940  paper,  of  the  connection

between  manic-depressive  illness  and  the  unresolved  persecutory  and

depressive anxieties of the infantile depressive position which begins at four

to five months. In 1946 she described in detail the many splitting mechanisms

by which the ego defends itself against persecutory anxiety, and which form

the basis of the dissociated and disintegrated condition of the schizophrenic.

The  connection  between  oral  sadism  and  the  fragmentation  of  the

schizophrenic’s mind is explained: when the object is introjected sadistically,

the ego has at its call not an intact object but an object reduced to bits in the

process of incorporation, and so would be itself in bits. As the dominant

mechanisms  of  this  period  she  posited  projective  identification,  a  new

concept, which, as remarked before, formalized and extended her ideas about

the existence of an early mechanism of defence, distinct from and antedating

repression. Other aspects of psychoses were clarified in these papers of 1935,

1940 and 1946, including the well-known clinical fact of the existence of

combinations of schizophrenia, mania and depression, which Melanie Klein

explained in terms of the interaction both by development and regression

between the infantile paranoid-schizoid and depressive positions.

The technique of analysing dissociated states was discussed in 1946 and

again in Envy  and  Gratitude  (1957).  The  main  contribution  of Envy and

Gratitude, however, to the understanding of psychosis was the uncovering of

excessive envy as a determinant of severe pathology in the paranoid-schizoid

position. Lastly, in ‘The Development of Mental Functioning’ (1958) there

was a reclassification. Until then Melanie Klein had always ascribed to the

super-ego  the  terrifying  figures  whose  dominance  over  the  psyche  is

characteristic of psychosis. In 1958, however, she suggested that the earliest

and most terrifying figures do not belong to the super-ego but are split off

into  an  area  in  the  deep  unconscious,  which  remains  apart  from  normal

developmental processes, and which, in situations of stress, may infiltrate the

ego and overwhelm it.

To come now to the background of the present paper. In 1935 MelanieKlein characterized the difference between the anxieties and feelings of the

schizophrenic  and  the  depressive  in  the  following  way:  the  schizophrenic

suffers from persecutory anxiety over the preservation of his ego, while the

depressive suffers from a mixture of anxieties, persecution, depression and

guilt, over the preservation not only of the self, but of the good object with

which it is identified. This accorded with her contention at that time that guilt

begins  in  relation  to  whole  objects  in  the  depressive  position.  In  ‘A

Contribution to the Theory of Anxiety and Guilt’ (1948) her ideas about guilt

changed; she considered that guilt occurs transiently before the depressive

position in relation to part objects. In the present short paper she modifies her

account of the difference between schizophrenia and depression. She states

that the paranoid-schizophrenic, in addition to persecutory anxiety, suffers

also depression and guilt about destroying the good parts of his ego and the

good object it is felt to contain, and she describes the specific nature of his

depression  which  differs  in  content,  form  and  manifestation  from  the

depression of the manic-depressive.

In her last paper ‘On the Sense of Loneliness’ (1963) Melanie Klein draws

attention to the loneliness of the mentally ill. This is another aspect of the

schizophrenic’s sufferings, which she had commented on before in ‘Notes on

Some Schizoid Mechanisms’.



                            ON MENTAL HEALTH (1960)


Melanie Klein died in London on 22 September 1960, as this paper went to

press, and a short obituary was printed at its end. Melanie Klein had written

the paper not long before, and perhaps for this reason, although she gives a

general survey of the topic, the paper lacks her usual vigour.



                  SOME REFLECTIONS ON ‘THE ORESTEIA’ (1963)


This was published posthumously from a manuscript that was an early draft

and not yet corrected. Her two other papers on literary material had been

written  under  the  impress  of  new  ideas—‘Infantile  Anxiety  Situations

Reflected in a Work of Art and in the Creative Impulse’ (1929) expounded

her new picture of early anxieties, and ‘On Identification’ (1955) illustrated

her new concept of projective identification. Here her aim is different. Shesets out to discuss the symbolic rôles of the characters in the Oresteia, but the

paper, in its still unrevised form, leaves a confused impression.



                        ON THE SENSE OF LONELINESS (1963)


In this, her last paper, Melanie Klein opens a new topic: the inner sense of

loneliness, which, she suggests, is part of the human condition. Linking it to

her theory of development she describes how paranoid insecurity as well as

processes  of  integration  lead  in  the  normal  course  of  development  to

inevitable loneliness. She also describes the loneliness of schizophrenia and

manic-depressive illness, adding to her former account of the sufferings of

the  psychotic  in  ‘Notes  on  Some  Schizoid  Mechanisms’  (1946).  She

discusses  the  factors  which  mitigate  loneliness,  and  the  need  also  for  an

acceptance  of  loneliness.  In  the  general  atmosphere  of  the  paper,  though

nowhere is it specified, there is a premonition of approaching death.

It must be remembered that Melanie Klein had not offered this paper for

publication  before  she  died—the  present  version  was  published

posthumously after some slight editorial work—presumably because she did

not consider it ready, and indeed it would have benefited from further work;

it seems in places incomplete and its thought is not altogether resolved.



                                SHORT CONTRIBUTIONS


Though they fall within its time span Melanie Klein did not include these five

short pieces when she collected her writings for Contributions to Psycho-

Analysis 1921–1945; whether she forgot them or thought them unsuitable is

not known. The first, ‘The Importance of Words in Early Analysis’ is a short

illustration of a point of technique in child analysis. The second, ‘Note on the

Preceding Communication’, is a comment on ‘A Dream of Forensic Interest’

by  Douglas  Bryan,  which  appeared  in  the Int.  J.  Psycho-Anal.,  9,  1928.

Melanie Klein discusses the combined parents in the dream; she had first

described the figure of combined parents the year before in ‘Early Stages of

the Oedipus Conflict’ (1928). The third is a four-line report to the Int. Z. f.

Psychoanal., 15, of her findings on ‘The Importance of Symbol Formation in

the  Development  of  the  Ego’  (1930).  The  fourth  is  a  review  of  a  book,

Women’s Periodicity by Mary Chadwick. Of most interest is the last, ‘SomePsychological Considerations: A comment’, which appeared in Science and

Ethics.  This  was  a  small  volume  edited  by  C.  H.  Waddington  containing

contributions from several well-known figures of the day. Melanie Klein, in a

short and non-technical account, describes the formation and development of

the super-ego.                                      APPENDIX

 

    INTRODUCTORY NOTES BY ERNEST JONES TO PREVIOUS EDITIONS OF MELANIE
                                    KLEIN’S WORKS

 



      Introduction to Contributions to Psycho-Analysis, 1921–45 (1948)


WHEN, more than twenty years ago, I invited Melanie Klein first to give a

course of lectures and subsequently to settle in London I knew I was securing

an extremely valuable recruit to the British Psycho-Analytical Society. But I

had no perception at that time of what commotion this simple act would
        1
result in. Until then, and for a while afterwards, our Society had been a

model of co-operative harmony. For a time Mrs Klein was given an attentive

hearing and aroused great interest. Soon—perhaps, I like to think, aided a

little by my influence which was manifestly exerted in her favour—she began

to win adherents and devoted followers. Before long, however, cries began to

be raised that in the views she rather vehemently presented she was ‘going

too far’, which I think simply meant she was going too fast. Not that it was

easy at first to detect anything radically new in these views or methods of

work. The trouble was that she was pursuing them with a novel rigour and

consistent recklessness that evoked in some members of the Society at first

uneasiness  and  gradually  an  intense  opposition.  Other  members  who

championed  her  work  with  a  certain  degree  of  fanaticism  found  this

opposition  hard  to  bear,  and  in  the  course  of  time  two  extreme  groups

developed who between them vociferously, and therefore easily, restricted

the quieter scientific endeavours of cooler members.

The  division  in  the  British  Society  will,  presently,  I  doubt  not,  be

reproduced  in  all  other  psycho-analytical  societies,  and  in  the  absence  of

colleagues with first-hand experience of Mrs Klein’s work she must expect

adverse  critics  to  be  in  the  majority.  In  England  itself  the  storm  was

heightened  by  the  advent  of  our  Viennese  colleagues  whose  life  in  their

homeland had become literally impossible. They added to the other criticisms

the opinion that Mrs Klein’s conclusions not only diverged from but were

incompatible  with  Freud’s.  This  I  find  myself  a  grossly  exaggerated

statement.  Not  that  it  should  be  in  any  event  a  decisive  consideration,  ifexperience showed that her conclusions were nearer the truth; I yield to no

one in my admiration of Freud’s genius, but on several occasions I have not

hesitated to put forward reasons for thinking that certain of his inferences

were imperfect. We had, however, become so accustomed to regard on good

grounds, various analysts who had separated from Freud, such as Adler, Jung,

Stekel  and  Rank,  as  being  influenced  by  subjective  motives—a

rationalization of inner resistances—rather than by a profounder insight, that

it seemed to many less presumptuous, and certainly easier, to place Mrs Klein

in the same class. Yet, if psycho-analysis is to remain a branch of science it is

evident that, now that Freud’s ability to continue his magnificent impetus has

been extinguished, advance beyond the limits he reached is inevitable.

Now what is all this storm about? Will the opposition to Mrs Klein’s work

be  evanescent  or  has  she  raised  winds  that  will  rage  with  increasing

reverberations?  Her  writings,  displayed  in  the  present  volume  as  in  her

previous momentous work The Psycho-Analysis of Children, must of course

speak for themselves, but perhaps it would not be out of place for me to take

this opportunity of summarizing some of the most striking of them, and of

commenting on them, as I see them.

  Freud’s investigation of the unconscious mind, which is essentially that of

the young infant, had revealed unexpected aspects of childhood, but before

Mrs Klein there had been little attempt to confirm these discoveries by the

direct study of childhood. To her, therefore, is due the credit of carrying

psycho-analysis to where it principally belongs—the heart of the child. There

were  stupendous  difficulties  to  be  overcome:  the  elaboration  of  special

techniques, the overcoming of parental prejudices and fears of the unknown

effects on the child’s development, and so on. Dr Hug-Hellmuth in Vienna

had suggested that the spontaneous play of young children might be used to

supplement, or even replace, the material provided by adults in the form of

free associations, but she evidently had not the ability to put the idea into

effective  practice.  Mrs  Klein,  with  the  high  psychological  gifts  and  the

amazing moral courage that so distinguish her, was not to be deterred by any

difficulties.  She  developed  fearlessly  the  play-technique  of  interpretation,

using it in combination with various other devices, and was soon in a position

to  confirm  at  first  hand  all  that  Freud  had  inferred  from  adult  material

concerning the hitherto unknown unconscious mind of the child. Encouraged

by this she exploited to the full the favourable opportunity she had created for

herself and determined to pursue her investigations to their uttermost limit.Now Freud had shown that the child’s mind contained in its depths much

besides the innocence and freshness that so entrance us. There were dark

fears  of  possibilities  that  the  most  gruesome  fairy  tale  had  not  dared  to

explore,  cruel  impulses  where  hate  and  murder  rage  freely,  irrational

phantasies that mock at reality in their extravagance: in short a world that

reminds us of Belsen or of Walt Disney at his most grotesque. Of the world

outcry at this derogation of smiling infancy this is not the place to speak; Mrs

Klein is still experiencing much of the aftermath. I am reminded here of a

patient who in a moment of sudden illumination exclaimed: ‘I knew that

Freud’s theories were true, but I did not know that they were so true.’ Mrs

Klein’s  unsparing  presentation  of  the  cutting,  tearing,  gouging,  devouring

phantasies  of  infants  is  apt  to  make  most  people  recoil  with  a  similar

exclamation. She went further than this by maintaining that the Cimmerian

picture Freud had drawn of the unconscious mind of a three-year-old was at

least as valid of an infant of the first months of life. Thus, for example, it had

been surmised that the oral erotism of such an infant could be divided into

two stages: first a sucking one, then a biting one; and the name oral-sadistic

or cannibalistic had been given to the latter one. Devouring or cannibalistic

phantasies had been observed and traced to perhaps the age of three. But Mrs

Klein ruthlessly maintains that they occur during the so-called cannibalistic

stage of infancy itself, which after all seems what one would have expected.

  Again,  we  had  long  been  familiar  with  the  concept  of  introjection

formulated by Ferenczi in 1909, and with the much older psychiatric one of

projection. But Mrs Klein has taught us much more about these mechanisms

than was previously known. Not only do they apparently operate from the

beginning  of  life,  as  was  indeed  implicit  in  Freud’s  description  of  the

‘pleasure-ego’, but they alternate and are interwoven with each other to such

an extraordinary extent that the greater part of early infantile development

can  be  described  in  terms  of  them.  It  is  indeed  becoming  increasingly

difficult  to  distinguish  clearly  between  the  processes  of  introjection,

incorporation  and  identification.  The  whole  theory  of  ‘internal  objects’,

‘good’ and ‘bad’, has thus been enormously extended, with important results

both for our understanding of early development and for our daily therapeutic

practice.

  Mrs Klein’s boldness did not stop at the study of normal and neurotic

infantile development. She has extended it into the field of insanity itself, no

doubt somewhat to the dismay of those psychiatrists who regard this field asthe  last  preserve  of  the  medical  profession.  But  the  extension  was

unescapable. The resemblance between certain infantile processes and those

so blatant in paranoia, schizophrenia and manic-depressive insanity could not

be  overlooked  by  someone  of  Mrs  Klein’s  perspicacity,  and  she  did  not

hesitate to appropriate terms from those fields and apply them, in of course a

modified  form,  to  various  phases  of  infantile  development, e.g. paranoid,

depressive, and so on. Furthermore, the resemblance cannot be merely an

external one. There must be an inner relation between these psychotic-like

reactions and phases in the infant and the efflorescence of them in actual

insanity. I am confident that Mrs Klein’s work will prove as fruitful in this

field as it has already shown itself to be in the more familiar one of neurotic

and normal development.

  Although I have not concealed my cordial agreement with the lines of Mrs

Klein’s investigations and the soundness of the principles on which they are

based, I shall not be expected to underwrite every one of her conclusions and

formulations: they will stand on their own merits without any support being

needed from me. It would, it is true, be tempting to explain all criticisms of

her work as a flinching from the rigorous and uncompromising penetration of

psycho-analysis into the utmost depths of the child’s mind, and indeed some

of  them  often  remind  me  of  the  very  same  phrases  that  were  applied  to

Freud’s  own  work  in  its  inception:  words  like  ‘far-fetched’,  ‘one-sided’,

‘arbitrary’, have a familiar ring to me. But, however much truth there may

actually be in this suggeston, it is not only a consideration that has to be

excluded from scientific discussion but would certainly be unfair to most of

the critics in question. They have adduced a number of arguments that have

to be dealt with very seriously, and indeed already have been by Dr Heimann,

Mrs Isaacs, Mrs Riviere and others besides Mrs Klein. Nevertheless some of

Mrs Klein’s more  abstract formulations will no doubt be modified in the

future theoretic structure of psycho-analysis. What seems to me a probable

example  of  this  is  her  literal  application  to  clinical  findings  of  Freud’s

philosophical  concept  of  a  ‘death-impulse’,  about  which  I  have  serious

misgivings. I quote it not for this reason, however, but because I find it a little

odd that I should be criticizing her for a too faithful adherence to Freud’s

views, and odder still that certain Viennese analysts see in it a divergence

from  his  views.  All  of  which  shows  that  psycho-analytical  theorizing

continues to be a very lively activity. And in this activity Mrs Klein’s work is

playing, and is likely to play, a very central part.                                                                            ERNEST JONES



              Preface to Developments in Psycho-Analysis (1952)


Stupendous as was his output, both in quantity and in quality, so productive

was Freud in original ideas and discoveries that it was not possible for even

such a worker as he was to explore all their potential ramifications. Many

collaborators  have  assisted  in  this  gigantic  task.  A  footnote  of  his  was

expanded into a book on Hamlet, and many light hints have been developed

into essays or even books. This work will continue for many years to come,

so  fruitful  were  his  inspirations.  Furthermore,  the  use  of  the  methods  he

devised must in the nature of things lead to fresh discoveries beyond those he

made  himself  and  to  hypotheses  that  extend  or  even  rectify  his  own—a

procedure he unhesitatingly applies himself.

  There comes a point, however, where such endeavours raise a difficult

problem.  Bitter  experience  has  taught  us  that  resistance  against  the

unconscious can be so subtle that it may distort the analytic findings and

reinterpret  them  in  support  of  some  personal  defence.  How  can  this

disturbing  state  of  affairs  be  distinguished  from  a  true  development,  a

deepening of our knowledge of the unconscious? The sole criterion that can

legitimately  be  employed  is  that  valid  for  all  science,  a  consensus  of

conclusions reached by adequately qualified workers using the same method

in  similar  conditions.  What  is  certainly  illegitimate  is  the  Procrustean

principle of assessing all conclusions with those reached by Freud, however

great our respect for the latter may and should be.

  Mrs Klein’s work of the past thirty years, which is the theme of the present

volume, illustrates the problem just stated. It has been attacked and defended

with  almost  equal  vehemence,  but  in  the  long  run  its  value  can  be

satisfactorily  estimated  only  by  those  who  themselves  make  comparable

investigations.  Mrs  Riviere  in  her  introductory  chapter  has  dealt  very

faithfully with the various criticisms and objections that have been expressed

by those disagreeing with Mrs Klein’s work, and it would be out of place for

me to discuss them further here. I will venture only one personal comment.

As is well known, I have from the beginning viewed Mrs Klein’s work with

the greatest sympathy, especially as many of the conclusions coincided with

those I reached myself; and I have all along been struck by the observationthat many of the criticisms have been close echoes of those with which I had

been made familiar in the earliest days of psycho-analysis. A good many of

her findings and conclusions had been adumbrated in quite early days, by

Freud, Rank and others, but what is so distinctive and admirable in her work

is the courage and unshakable integrity with which she has quite unsparingly

worked out the implications and consequences of those earlier hints, thereby

making important fresh discoveries in her course. Her mind is very alien from

those who accept the findings of psycho-analysis provided they are not taken

too seriously.

                                                                            ERNEST JONES



            Preface to New Directions in Psycho-Analysis (1955)


Mrs Klein’s work of the past thirty years has been attacked and defended

with  almost  equal  vehemence,  but  in  the  long  run  its  value  can  be

satisfactorily  estimated  only  by  those  who  themselves  make  comparable

investigations.  As  is  well  known,  I  have  from  the  beginning  viewed  Mrs

Klein’s  work  with  the  greatest  sympathy,  especially  as  many  of  the

conclusions coincided with those I reached myself; and I have all along been

struck by the observation that many of the criticisms have been close echoes

of those with which I had been made familiar in the earliest days of psycho-

analysis. A good many of her findings and conclusions had been adumbrated

in quite early days by Freud, Rank and others, but what is so distinctive and

admirable in her work is the courage and unshakable integrity with which she

has quite unsparingly worked out the implications and consequences of those

earlier hints, thereby making important fresh discoveries in her course.

It is a matter for wide satisfaction as well as for personal congratulation

that Mrs Klein has lived to see her work firmly established. So long as it was

simply deposited in what she herself had published there was always the

hope, but by no means the certainty, that it would be taken up by future

students. The situation has now moved beyond that stage; her work is firmly

established. As a result of her personal instruction, combined with the insight

of  those  who  decided  to  accept  it,  she  has  a  considerable  number  of

colleagues and pupils who follow her lead in exploring the deepest depths. To

the papers that many of them have contributed to New Directions in Psycho-

Analysis I have the pleasure of adding this envoi.                                                                            ERNEST JONES                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY

 

    Abraham, K. (1911). ‘Notes on the Psycho-Analytical Investigation and

        Treatment of Manic-Depressive Insanity and Allied Conditions.’ In:

        Selected Papers on Psycho-Analysis (London: Hogarth, 1927).

    ⎯ (1921). ‘Contribution to the Theory of the Anal Character.’ ibid.

    ⎯ (1924a). ‘The Influence of Oral Erotism on Character Formation’ ibid.

    ⎯ (1924b). ‘A Short Study of the Development of the Libido, Viewed in

      the Light of Mental Disorders.’ ibid.

    ⎯  (1925).  ‘Character-Formation  on  the  Genital  Level  of  the  Libido.’

      ibid.

    Balint,  M.  (1937).  ‘Early  Developmental  States  of  the  Ego.  Primary

        Object-Love.’  In: Primary  Love  and  Psycho-Analytic  Technique

        (London: Hogarth, 1952).

    Bernfeld, S. (1929). Psychology of the Infant (London: Kegan Paul).

    Bion,  W.  R.  (1954).  ‘Notes  on  the  Theory  of  Schizophrenia.’ Int. J.

        Psycho-Anal., 35.

    ⎯  (1958).  ‘Differentiation  of  the  Psychotic  from  the  Non-Psychotic

        Personalities.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 39.

    Chadwick, Mary (1933). Woman’s Periodicity (London: Noel Douglas)

    Fairbairn,  W.  R.  D.  (1941).  ‘A  Revised  Psychopathology  of  the

        Psychoses and Psychoneuroses.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 22.

    ⎯  (1944).  ‘Endopsychic  Structure  Considered  in  Terms  of  Object

        Relationships.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 25.

    Ferenczi,  S.  (1925).  ‘Psycho-Analysis  of  Sexual  Habits.’  In: Further

        Contributions  to  the  Theory  and  Technique  of  Psycho-Analysis

        (London: Hogarth, 1926).

    ⎯  (1930).  ‘Notes  and  Fragments.’  In: Final  Contributions  to  the

        Problems and Methods of Psycho-Analysis (London: Hogarth).

    Freud,  A.  (1927). The  Psycho-Analytical  Treatment  of  Children

        (London: Imago, 1946).

    ⎯ (1937). The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defence (London: Hogarth).

    Freud, S. (1905). Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality. S.E. 7.

    ⎯ (1908). ‘Character and Anal Erotism.’ S.E. 9.

    ⎯ (1911). ‘Psycho-Analytic Notes on an Autobiographical Account of a

        Case of Paranoia (Dementia Paranoides).’ S.E. 12.

    ⎯ (1912). ‘On the Universal Tendency to Debasement in the Sphere of        Love.’ S.E. 11.

    ⎯ (1914). ‘Narcissism: An Introduction.’ S.E. 14.

    Freud S. (1916). ‘Some Character-Types Met with in Psycho-Analytic

        Work.’ S.E. 14.

    ⎯ (1917). ‘Mourning and Melancholia.’ S.E. 14.

    ⎯ (1920). Beyond the Pleasure Principle. S.E. 18.

    ⎯ (1921). Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego. S.E. 18.

    ⎯ (1923). The Ego and the Id. S.E. 23.

    ⎯ (1924). ‘The Economic Problem of Masochism.’ S.E. 19.

    ⎯ (1926), Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety. S.E. 20.

    ⎯ (1928). ‘Humour.’ S.E. 21.

    ⎯ (1930). Civilization and its Discontents. S.E. 21.

    ⎯ (1931). ‘Female Sexuality.’ S.E. 21.

    ⎯(1933). New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis. S.E. 22.

    ⎯ (1937). ‘Analysis Terminable and Interminable.’ S.E. 23.

    ⎯ (1938). ‘Constructions in Analysis.’ S.E. 23.

    ⎯ (1940). An Outline of Psycho-Analysis. S.E. 23.

    Heimann,  P.  (1942).  ‘Sublimation  and  its  Relation  to  Processes  of

        Internalization.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 23.

    ⎯ (1952a). ‘Certain Functions of Introjection and Projection in Early

        Infancy.’  In: Developments  in  Psycho-Analysis  by  Klein  et  al.

        (London: Hogarth).

    ⎯ (1952b). ‘Notes on the Theory of the Life and Death Instincts.’ ibid.

    ⎯  (1955).  ‘A  Contribution  to  the  Re-evaluation  of  the  Oedipus

        Complex.’  In: New  Directions  in  Psycho-Analysis  ed.  Klein et  al.

        (London: Tavistock).

    Heimann, P. and Isaacs, S. (1952). ‘Regression.’ In: Developments in

        Psycho-Analysis by Klein et al. (London: Hogarth).

      Hug-Helmuth, H. von (1921). ‘On the Technique of Child Analysis.’ Int.

      J. Psycho-Anal., 2.

    Isaacs,  S.  (1933). Social  Development  of  Young  Children  (London:

        Routledge).

    ⎯ (1952). ‘The Nature and Function of Phantasy.’ In: Developments in

        Psychoanalysis by Klein et al. (London: Hogarth).

    Jaques, E. (1955). ‘Social Systems as a Defence against Persecutory and

        Depressive Anxiety.’ In: New Directions in Psycho-Analysis ed. Klein

      et al. (London: Tavistock).    Jones, E. (1913). ‘Hate and Anal Erotism in the Obsessional Neuroses.’

        Papers on Psycho-Analysis (London: Baillière).

    ⎯ (1916). ‘The Theory of Symbolism.’ ibid.,— 2nd edn–5th edn.

    ⎯ (1918). ‘Anal Erotic Character Traits.’ ibid.

    ⎯ (1929). ‘Fear, Guilt and Hate.’ ibid.,—4th and 5th edns.

    ⎯ (1949). Hamlet and Oedipus (London: Gollancz).

    Klein, M. [details of first publication of each paper/book are given here;

      the number of the volume in which they appear in The Writings of

        Melanie Klein is indicated in square brackets]

    Klein, M. (1921). ‘The Development of a Child’ Imago, 7. [I]

      —–(1922).  ‘Inhibitions  and  Difficulties  in  Puberty.’ Die  neue

        Erziehung, 4. [I]

    ⎯ (1923a). ‘The Rôle of the School in the Libidinal Development of the

        Child.’ Int. Z. f. Psychoanal., 9. [I]

    ⎯ (1923b). ‘Early Analysis.’ Imago, 9. [I]

    ⎯  (1925).  ‘A  Contribution  to  the  Psychogenesis  of  Tics.’ Int.  Z.  f.

        Psychoanal., 11. [I]

    ⎯  (1926).  ‘The  Psychological  Principles  of  Early  Analysis.’ Int.  J.

        Psycho-Anal., 7. [I]

    ⎯ (1927a). ‘Symposium on Child Analysis.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 8. [I]

    ⎯  (1927b).  ‘Criminal  Tendencies  in  Normal  Children.’ Brit.  J.  med.

        Psychol., 7. [I]

    ⎯ (1928). ‘Early Stages of the Oedipus Conflict.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 9.

      [I]

    ⎯ (1929a). ‘Personification in the Play of Children.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal,

      10, [I]

    ⎯ (1929b). ‘Infantile Anxiety Situations Reflected in a Work of Art and

      in the Creative Impulse.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 10. [I]

    ⎯ (1930a). ‘The Importance of Symbol-Formation in the Development

      of the Ego.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 11. [I]

    ⎯ (1930b). ‘The Psychotherapy of the Psychoses.’ Brit. J. med. Psychol.,

      10. [I]

    ⎯ (1931). ‘A Contribution to the Theory of Intellectual Inhibition.’ Int.

      J. Psycho-Anal., 12. [I]

    ⎯ (1932). The Psycho-Analysis of Children (London: Hogarth). [II]

    ⎯  (1933).  ‘The  Early  Development  of  Conscience  in  the  Child.’  In:

        Psychoanalysis Today ed. Lorand (New York: Covici-Friede). [I]    ⎯ (1934). ‘On Criminality.’ Brit. J. med. Psychol., 14. [I]

    ⎯ (1935). ‘A Contribution to the Psychogenesis of Manic-Depressive

        States.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 16. [I]

    ⎯ (1936). ‘Weaning.’ In: On the Bringing Up of Children ed. Rickman

        (London: Kegan Paul). [I]

    ⎯ (1937). ‘Love, Guilt and Reparation.’ In: Love, Hate and Reparation

      with Riviere (London: Hogarth). [I]

    ⎯ (1940). ‘Mourning and its Relation to Manic-Depressive States.’ Int.

      J. Psycho-Anal., 21. [I]

    ⎯ (1945). ‘The Oedipus Complex in the Light of Early Anxieties.’ Int. J.

        Psycho-Anal., 26. [I]

    ⎯ (1946). ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal.,

      27. [III]

    Klein,  M.  (1948a). Contributions  to  Psycho-Analysis  1921–1945

        (London: Hogarth). [I]

    ⎯ (1948b). ‘On the Theory of Anxiety and Guilt.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal.,

      29. [III]

    ⎯ (1950). ‘On the Criteria for the Termination of a Psycho-Analysis.’

      Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 31. [III]

    ⎯ (1952a). ‘The Origins of Transference.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 33. [III]

    ⎯ (1952b). ‘The Mutual Influences in the Development of Ego and Id.’

        Psychoanal. Study Child, 7. [III]

    ⎯ (1952c). ‘Some Theoretical Conclusions regarding the Emotional Life

      of the Infant.’ In: Developments in Psycho-Analysis with Heimann,

      Isaacs and Riviere (London: Hogarth). [III]

    ⎯ (1952d). ‘On Observing the Behaviour of Young Infants.’ ibid. [III]

    ⎯  (1955a).  ‘The  Psycho-Analytic  Play  Technique:  Its  History  and

        Significance.’  In: New  Directions  in  Psycho-Analysis  (London:

        Tavistock). [III]

    ⎯ (1955b). ‘On Identification.’ ibid. [III]

    ⎯ (1957). Envy and Gratitude (London: Tavistock) [III]

    (1958). ‘On the Development of Mental Functioning.’ Int. J. Psycho-

      Anal., 29. [III]

    ⎯ (1959). ‘Our Adult World and its Roots in Infancy.’ Hum. Relations,

      J. 12. [III]

    ⎯ (1960a). ‘A note on Depression in the Schizophrenic.’ Int. J. Psycho-

      Anal., 41. [III]    ⎯ (1960b). ‘On Mental Health.’ Brit. J. med. Psychol., 33. [III]

    ⎯ (1961). Narrative of a Child Psycho-Analysis (London: Hogarth). [IV]

    ⎯ (1963a). ‘Some Reflections on The Oresteia.’ In: Our Adult World

        and Other Essays (London: Heinemann Medical). [III]

    ⎯ (1963b). ‘On the Sense of Loneliness.’ ibid. [III]

    Middlemore,  M.  P.  (1941). The  Nursing  Couple  (London:  Hamish

        Hamilton).

    Money-Kyrle,  R.  E.  (1945).  ‘Towards  a  Common  Aim:  a  Psycho-

        Analytical Contribution to Ethics.’ Brit. J. med. Psychol., 20.

    Ribble,  M.  A.  (1944).  ‘Infantile  experience  in  relation  to  personality

        development.’ In: Personality  and  the  Behavior  Disorders, Vol. II

        (Ronald Press).

    Riviere,  J.  (1952a).  ‘On  the  Genesis  of  Psychical  Conflict  in  Early

        Infancy.’  In: Developments  in  Psycho-Analysis  by  Klein et  al.

        (London: Hogarth).

    ⎯ (1952b). ‘The Unconscious Phantasy of an Inner World Reflected in

        Examples from Literature.’ In: New Directions in Psycho-Analysis by

      Klein et al. (London: Tavistock, 1955).

    Rosenfeld,  H.  (1947).  ‘Analysis  of  a  Schizophrenic  State  with

        Depersonalization.’ In: Psychotic States (London: Hogarth, 1965).

    ⎯ (1949). ‘Remarks on the Relation of Male Homosexuality to Paranoia,

        Paranoid Anxiety, and Narcissism.’ ibid.

    ⎯  (1950).  ‘Notes  on  the  Psychopathology  of  Confusional  States  in

        Chronic Schizophrenias.’ ibid.

    ⎯ (1952a). ‘Notes on the Psycho-Analysis of the Super-ego Conflict in

      an Acute Schizophrenic Patient.’ ibid.

    ⎯ (1952b). ‘Transference-Phenomena and Transference-Analysis in an

      Acute Catatonic Schizophrenic Patient.’ ibid.

    ⎯  (1955).  ‘The  Investigation  of  the  Need  of  Neurotic  and  Psychotic

        Patients to Act out during Analysis.’ ibid.

    Segal, H. (1950). ‘Some Aspects of the Analysis of a Schizophrenic.’

      Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 31.

    ⎯ (1956). ‘Depression in the Schizophrenic.’ Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 37.

    Winnicott,  D.  W.  (1931). Disorders  of  Childhood  (London:

        Heinemann).

    ⎯  (1945).  ‘Primitive  Emotional  Development.’  In: Collected  Papers

        (London: Hogarth).    ⎯ (1953). ‘Psychoses and Child Care.’ ibid.                                      Footnotes

 



“To  return  to  the  corresponding  text.  click  on  the  asterisk  and  reference

number”


Chapter 1


1
 [footnote to 1952 version:] This paper was read before the British Psycho-Analytical Society on
December 4, 1946, and has been left unchanged and then published, apart from a few slight alterations
(in particular the addition of one paragraph and some footnotes).

2
 Before completing this paper I discussed its main aspects with Paula Heimann and am much indebted
to her for stimulating suggestions in working out and formulating a number of the concepts presented
here.

3
 Cf. my Psycho-Analysis of Children (1932), and ‘A Contribution to the Psychogenesis of Manic-
Depressive States’ (1935).

4
 When this paper was first published in 1946, I was using my term ‘paranoid position’ synonymously
with W. R. D. Fairbairn’s ‘schizoid position’. On further deliberation I decided to combine Fairbairn’s
term with mine and throughout the present book [Developments in Psycho-Analysis, 1952, in which this
paper was first published] I am using the expression ‘paranoid-schizoid position’.

5
 Cf. ‘A Revised Psychopathology of the Psychoses and Neuroses’, ‘Endopsychic Structure Considered
in Terms of Object-Relationships’ and ‘Object-Relationships and Dynamic Structure’.

6
 Cf. ‘A Revised Psychopathology’ (1941).

7
  Cf.  D.  W.  Winnicott,  ‘Primitive  Emotional  Development’  (1945).  In  this  paper  Winnicott  also
described the pathological outcome of states of unintegration, for instance the case of a woman patient
who could not distinguish between her twin sister and herself.

8
 The greater or lesser cohesiveness of the ego at the beginning of postnatal life should be considered in
connection with the greater or lesser capacity of the ego to tolerate anxiety which, as I have previously
contended (Psycho-Analysis of Children, particularly p. 49), is a constitutional factor.

9
 Ferenczi in ‘Notes and Fragments’ (1930) suggests that most likely every living organism reacts to
unpleasant stimuli by fragmentation, which might be an expression of the death instinct. Possibly,
complicated mechanisms (living organisms) are only kept as an entity through the impact of external
conditions. When these conditions become unfavourable the organism falls to pieces.10
 D. W. Winnicott (loc. cit.) referred to the same process from another angle: he described how
integration and adaptation to reality depend essentially on the infant’s experience of the mother’s love
and care.

11
 In the discussion following the reading of this paper, Dr W. C. M. Scott referred to another aspect of
splitting. He stressed the importance of the breaks in continuity of experiences, which imply a splitting
in time rather than in space. He referred as an instance to the alternation between states of being asleep
and states of being awake. I fully agree with his point of view.

12
 The description of such primitive processes suffers from a great handicap, for these phantasies arise
at a time when the infant has not yet begun to think in words. In this context, for instance, I am using
the expression ‘to project into another person’ because this seems to me the only way of conveying the
unconscious process I am trying to describe.

13
 M. G. Evans, in a short unpublished communication (read to the British Psycho-Analytical Society,
January, 1946) gave some instances of patients in whom the following phenomena were marked: lack
of sense of reality, a feeling of being divided and parts of the personality having entered the mother’s
body in order to rob and control her; as a consequence the mother and other people similarly attacked
came  to  represent  the  patient.  M.  G.  Evans  related  these  processes  to  a  very  primitive  stage  of
development.

14
 W. C. M. Scott in an unpublished paper, read to the British Psycho-Analytical Society a few years
ago, described three interconnected features which he came upon in a schizophrenic patient: a strong
disturbance  of  her  sense  of  reality,  her  feeling  that  the  world  round  her  was  a  cemetery,  and  the
mechanism of putting all good parts of herself into another person—Greta Garbo—who came to stand
for the patient.

15
  Cf.  ‘A  Contribution  to  the  Problem  of  Sublimation  and  its  Relation  to  the  Processes  of
Internalization’ (1942) where Paula Heimann described a condition in which the internal objects act as
foreign bodies embedded in the self. Whilst this is more obvious with regard to the bad objects, it is
true even for the good ones, if the ego is compulsively subordinated to their preservation. When the ego
serves its good internal objects excessively, they are felt as a source of danger to the self and come
close to exerting a persecuting influence. Paula Heimann introduced the concept of the assimilation of
the internal objects and applied it specifically to sublimation. As regards ego-development, she pointed
out  that  such  assimilation  is  essential  for  the  successful  exercise  of  ego-functions  and  for  the
achievement of independence.

16
 Looked at in this light, the mother’s love and understanding of the infant can be seen as the infant’s
greatest stand-by in overcoming states of disintegration and anxieties of a psychotic nature.

17
  Herbert  Rosenfeld,  in  ‘Analysis  of  a  Schizophrenic  State  with  Depersonalization’  (1947),  has
presented case-material to illustrate how the splitting mechanisms which are bound up with projective
identification were responsible both for a schizophrenic state and depersonalization. In his paper ‘A
Note on the Psychopathology of Confusional States in Chronic Schizophrenias’ (1950) he also pointed
out that a confusional state comes about if the subject loses the capacity to differentiate between good
and bad objects, between aggressive and libidinal impulses, and so on. He suggested that in such statesof confusion splitting mechanisms are frequently reinforced for defensive purposes.

18
 Herbert Rosenfeld, in ‘Analysis of a Schizophrenic State with Depersonalization’ and ‘Remarks on
the Relation of Male Homosexuality to Paranoia’ (1949), discussed the clinical importance of those
paranoid anxieties which are connected with projective identification in psychotic patients. In the two
schizophrenic cases he described, it became evident that the patients were dominated by the fear that
the  analyst  was  trying  to  force  himself  into  the  patient.  When  these  fears  were  analysed  in  the
transference-situation,  improvement  could  take  place.  Rosenfeld  has  further  connected  projective
identification (and the corresponding persecutory fears) with female sexual frigidity on the one hand
and on the other with the frequent combination of homosexuality and paranoia in men.

19
 Psycho-Analysis of Children, Chapter 8, particularly p. 131, and Chapter 12, particularly p. 242.

20
 Joan Riviere, in an unpublished paper ‘Paranoid Attitudes seen in Everyday Life and in Analysis’
(read before the British Psycho-Analytical Society in 1948), reported a great deal of clinical material in
which projective identification became apparent. Unconscious phantasies of forcing the whole self into
the inside of the object (to obtain control and possession) led, through the fear of retaliation, to a variety
of persecutory anxieties such as claustrophobia, or to such common phobias as of burglars, spiders,
invasion in wartime. These fears are connected with the unconscious ‘catastrophic’ phantasies of being
dismembered, disembowelled, torn to pieces and of total internal disruption of the body and personality
and loss of identity—fears which are an elaboration of the fear of annihilation (death) and have the
effect of reinforcing the mechanisms of splitting and the process of ego-disintegration as found in
psychotics.

21
 I may mention that the analysis was resumed after a break.

22
 The feeling of hunger indicated that the process of introjection had been set going again under the
dominance of the libido. While to my first interpretation of his fear of destroying me by his aggression
he had responded at once with the violent splitting off and annihilation of parts of his personality, he
now experienced more fully the emotions of grief, guilt and fear of loss, as well as some relief of these
depressive anxieties. The relief of anxiety resulted in the analyst again coming to stand for a good
object which he could trust. Therefore the desire to introject me as a good object could come to the
fore. If he could build up again the good breast inside himself, he would strengthen and integrate his
ego, would be less afraid of his destructive impulses; in fact he could then preserve himself and the
analyst.

23
  ‘Psycho-Analytic  Notes  upon  an  Autobiographical  Account  of  a  Case  of  Paranoia  (Dementia
Paranoides)’ (S.E. 12).

24
 ‘The Psycho-Sexual Differences between Hysteria and Dementia Praecox’ (1908).


Chapter 2


1
 Civilization and its Discontents, S.E. 21, pp. 132, 133.2
 Loc. cit., p. 138. In the same book (on p. 130) Freud accepted my hypothesis (expressed in my papers
‘Early  Stages  of  the  Oedipus  Conflict’,  1928,  and  ‘The  Importance  of  Symbol-Formation  in  the
Development of the Ego’, 1930) that the severity of the super-ego to some extent results from the
child’s aggression which is projected on to the super-ego.

3
 ‘A Short Study of the Development of the Libido, viewed in the Light of Mental Disorders.’

4
 Loc. cit., p. 496.

5
 Loc. cit., pp. 495–6.

6
 Cf. my paper, ‘Early Stages of the Oedipus Conflict’ (1928).

7
 ‘The Importance of Symbol-Formation in the Development of the Ego’ (1930a).

8
 I have dealt with this problem more fully and from various angles in my book, The Psycho-Analysis
of Children, Chapters 8 and 9.

9
 The Ego and the Id (1923), S.E. 19, p. 54.

10
 Cf. The Psycho-Analysis of Children, pp. 126–27.

11
  ‘The  Economic  Problem  in  Masochism’  (1924).  In  this  paper  Freud  first  applied  the  new
classification of instincts to clinical problems. ‘Moral masochism thus becomes a classical piece of
evidence for the existence of fusion of instincts’ (S.E. 19) p. 170.

12
 Loc. cit., p. 164.

13
 See ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’. In 1946 I arrived at the conclusion that this primary
anxiety-situation plays an important part in schizophrenic illness.

14
 S.E. 19, p. 165.

15
 Cf. examples given in Isaacs’s (1952) paper: the boy who said his mother’s breast had bitten him
and the girl who thought her mother’s shoe would eat her up.

16
 Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety (S.E. 20) p. 140.

17
 For a detailed discussion of the sources of anxiety which interact with the fear of castration, see my
paper ‘The Oedipus Complex in the Light of Early Anxieties’, Writings, 1.

18
 In my Psycho-Analysis of Children (pp. 124 ff.) I suggested that the earliest feeding difficulties ofinfants are a manifestation of persecutory fears. (I was referring to those feeding difficulties which
appear even though the mother’s milk is plentiful and no external factors would seem to prevent a
satisfactory feeding-situation.) I concluded that these persecutory fears, when excessive, lead to a far-
reaching inhibition of libidinal desires. Cf. also my paper on ‘The Emotional Life of the Infant’.

19
 A significant reference to the connection between anxiety and guilt is contained in the following
passage: ‘Here perhaps we may be glad to have it pointed out that the sense of guilt is at bottom
nothing else but a topographical variety of anxiety’ (Civilization and its Discontents, S.E. 21, p. 135).
On  the  other  hand,  Freud  definitely  distinguishes  between  anxiety  and  guilt.  In  discussing  the
development of the sense of guilt, he says in reference to the use of the term ‘guilt’ in regard to early
manifestations of ‘bad conscience’: ‘This state of mind is called a “bad conscience”; but actually it does
not deserve this name, for at this stage the sense of guilt is clearly only a fear of loss of love, “social”
anxiety. In small children it can never be anything else, but in many adults, too, it has only changed to
the extent that the place of the father or the two parents is taken by the larger human community. . . . A
great change takes place only when the authority is internalized through the establishment of a super-
ego. The phenomena of conscience then reach a higher stage. Actually, it is not until now that we
should speak of conscience or a sense of guilt.’ (S.E. 21, pp. 124–5).

20
 Ferenczi, ‘Psycho-Analysis of Sexual Habits’ (1925), p. 267.

21
 ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’.

22
 We must remember, though, that even during this stage the mother’s face and hands, and her whole
bodily presence, increasingly enter into the gradual building up of the child’s relation to her as a person.

23
 The concept of the manic defence and its wider application to mental life has been dealt with in
some  detail  in  my  papers  ‘A  Contribution  to  the  Psychogenesis  of  Manic-Depressive  States’  and
‘Mourning and its Relation to Manic-Depressive States’, both in Writings, 1.

24
 In his paper, ‘Towards a Common Aim—a Psycho-Analytical Contribution to Ethics’, R. E. Money-
Kyrle applied the distinction between persecutory and depressive anxieties to attitudes towards ethics in
general and towards political beliefs in particular, and has since expanded these views in his book
Psycho-Analysis and Politics.

25
 Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, S.E., 20, p. 165.

26
 Loc. cit., p. 167.

27
 This interaction between anxiety derived from external and internal causes is referred to by Freud
with regard to some cases of neurotic anxiety. ‘The danger is known but the anxiety in regard to it is
over-great, greater than seems proper . . . analysis shows that to the known real danger an unknown
instinctual one is attached’ (Loc. cit., pp. 165–6).

28
 Loc. cit., p. 136.29
 Loc. cit., p. 163.

30
 New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (1932), S.E. 22, p. 87.

31
 As I pointed out in my Psycho-Analysis of Children, p. 192: ‘If a normal person is put under a
severe internal or external strain, or if he falls ill or fails in some other way, we may observe in him the
full  and  direct  operation  of  his  deepest  anxiety-situations.  Since,  then,  every  healthy  person may
succumb to a neurotic illness, it follows that he can never have entirely given up his old anxiety-
situations.’

32
 Cf. Paula Heimann’s (1952) paper in which she discusses this theoretical bias in favour of the libido
and its influence on the development of theory.

33
 This strong emphasis on anxiety entered already into my first publications.

34
 Cf. the bibliography appended to Riviere’s (1952) paper.


Chapter 4


1
 It is an essential feature of this earliest of all object-relations that it is the prototype of a relation
between two people into which no other object enters. This is of vital importance for later object-
relations, though in that exclusive form it possibly does not last longer than a very few months, for the
phantasies relating to the father and his penis—phantasies which initiate the early stages of the Oedipus
complex—introduce the relation to more than one object. In the analysis of adults and children the
patient sometimes comes to experience feelings of blissful happiness through the revival of this early
exclusive  relation  with  the  mother  and  her  breast.  Such  experiences  often  follow  the  analysis  of
jealousy and rivalry situations in which a third object, ultimately the father, is involved.

2
 p. 31. On the same page Freud suggests—still referring to these first identifications—that they are a
direct and immediate identification which takes place earlier than any object cathexis. This suggestion
seems to imply that introjection even precedes object-relations.

3
 This was largely due to the undervaluation of the importance of aggression.

4
 This technique is illustrated by H. Segal’s paper, ‘Some Aspects of the Analysis of a Schizophrenic’
(1950), and H. Rosenfeld’s papers, ‘Notes on the Psycho-Analysis of the Super-ego Conflict of an
Acute Schizophrenic Patient’ (1952a) and ‘Transference Phenomena and Transference Analysis in an
Acute Catatonic Schizophrenic Patient’ (1952b).

5
 See The Psycho-Analysis of Children, particularly Chapters 8 and 11.

6
 The patient may at times try to escape from the present into the past rather than realize that his
emotions, anxieties, and phantasies are at the time operative in full strength and focused on the analyst.At  other  times,  as  we  know,  the  defences  are  mainly  directed  against  re-experiencing  the  past  in
relation to the original objects.


Chapter 5


1
 ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’ (1946).

2
 (1923) The Ego and the Id. S.E. 19, p. 45.

3
 The most up-to-date presentation of these early processes is contained in my papers.

4
 The question arises: How far and under what conditions does the internalized object form part of the
ego, how far of the super ego? This question, I think, raises problems which are still obscure and
awaiting further elucidation. Paula Heimann (1952) has put forward some suggestions in this direction.


Chapter 6


1
 have received valuable assistance in my contributions to this volume (i.e. Developments in Psycho-
Analysis—see Explanatory Note to ‘Anxiety and Guilt’ p. 326 below.] from my friend, Lola Brook,
who went carefully over my manuscripts and made a number of helpful suggestions, both as regards
formulations and the arrangement of the material. I am much indebted to her for her unfailing interest
in my work.

2
 In ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’, which deals in more detail with this subject, I mention that
I have adopted Fairbairn’s term ‘schizoid’ in addition to my own term ‘paranoid position’.

3
 In Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, Freud states that ‘there is more continuity between intra-
uterine life and earliest infancy than the impressive caesura of the act of birth would have us believe.’
(S.E. 20, p. 138).

4
 I have suggested that the struggle between the life and death instincts already enters into the painful
experience of birth and adds to the persecutory anxiety aroused by it. Cf. The ‘Theory of Anxiety and
Guilt’.

5
 [Melanie Klein is here referring to Isaacs (1952), Heimann (1952) and her own ‘On Observing the
Behaviour of Young Infants’, which were published in the same volume, Developments in Psycho-
Analysis.]

6
 These first introjected objects form the core of the super-ego. In my view the super-ego starts with the
earliest introjection processes and builds itself up from the good and bad figures which are internalized
in love and hatred in various stages of development and are gradually assimilated and integrated by the
ego. Cf. Heimann (1952).7
 The anxiety relating to attacks by internalized objects—first of all partobjects—is in my view the
basis of hypochondria. I put forward this hypothesis in my book The Psycho-Analysis of Children, pp.
144, 264, 273, and also expounded there my view that the early infantile anxieties are psychotic in
nature and the basis for later psychoses.

8
  In  my  paper  ‘A  Contribution  to  the  Psychogenesis  of  Manic-Depressive  States’  (Writings, 1), I
suggested that ambivalence is first experienced in relation to the complete object during the depressive
position. In keeping with the modification of my view regarding the onset of depressive anxiety (cf.
‘On the Theory of Anxiety and Guilt’) I now consider that ambivalence, too, is already experienced in
relation to part-objects.

9
 This form of interaction between libido and aggression would correspond to a particular state of
fusion between the two instincts.

10
 Cf. ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’.

11
 I found that with patients of a schizoid type, the strength of their infantile schizoid mechanisms
ultimately accounts for the difficulty of getting access to the unconscious. In such patients, the progress
towards synthesis is hampered by the fact that under the pressure of anxiety they become again and
again unable to maintain the links, which have been strengthened in the course of the analysis, between
different  parts  of  the  self.  In  patients  of  a  depressive  type,  the  division  between  unconscious  and
conscious is less pronounced and therefore such patients are much more capable of insight. In my view
they have overcome more successfully their schizoid mechanisms in early infancy.

12
 Cf. The Psycho-Analysis of Children, Chapter 3, p. 49 n.

13
 It is implicit in my argument (as presented here and in former writings) that I do not agree with
Abraham’s concept of a pre-ambivalent stage in so far as it implies that destructive (oral-sadistic)
impulses first arise with the onset of teething. We have to remember, though, that Abraham has also
pointed out the sadism inherent in ‘vampire-like’ sucking. There is no doubt that the onset of teething
and the physiological processes which affect the gums are a strong stimulus for cannibalistic impulses
and phantasies; but aggression forms part of the infant’s earliest relation to the breast, though it is not
usually expressed in biting at this stage.

14
 Cf. The Psycho-Analysis of Children, p. 128.

15
 ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’.

16
  Abraham  refers  to  instinctual  inhibition  appearing  first  at  ‘.  .  .  the  stage  of  narcissism  with  a
cannibalistic sexual aim’ (‘A Short Study of the Development of the Libido’, p. 496). Since inhibition
of  aggressive  impulses  and  of  greed  tends  to  involve  libidinal  desires  as  well,  depressive  anxiety
becomes the cause of those difficulties in accepting food which occur in infants at a few months of age
and increase at weaning time. As regards the earliest feeding difficulties, which arise with some infants
from the first few days onwards, they are caused, in my view, by persecutory anxiety. (Cf. The Psycho-
Analysis of Children, pp. 156–57.)17
 Such difficulties, which can be frequently observed in infants particularly at weaning (i.e. during the
change-over from breast- to bottle-feeding or when new foods are added to bottle-feeding, etc.) can be
regarded as a depressive symptom well known in the symptomatology of depressive states. This point
is dealt with in some detail in ‘On Observing the Behaviour of Young Infants Cf. also footnote on p. 70
above.

18
 This early regression may cause severe disturbances in early development, e.g. mental deficiency
(‘Notes  on  some  Schizoid  Mechanisms’);  it  may  become  the  foundation  for  some  form  of
schizophrenic  illness.  Another  possible  outcome  of  the  failure  in  working  through  the  infantile
depressive position is manic-depressive illness; or a severe neurosis may ensue. I therefore hold that the
infantile depressive position is of central importance in the development of the first year.

19
 It can be observed in the analyses both of adults and children that, together with a full experience of
depression, feelings of hope emerge. In early development, this is one of the factors which help the
infant to overcome the depressive position.

20
 As we know, splitting under the stress of ambivalence to some extent persists throughout life and
plays an important part in normal mental economy.

21
 For the relation of the infantile depressive position to manic-depressive states on the one hand and to
normal grief on the other, cf. my ‘A Contribution to the Psychogenesis of Manic-Depressive States’ and
‘Mourning and its Relation to Manic-Depressive States’ (both in Writings, 1).

22
 See Heimann (1952), Part 2. I have given detailed accounts of the Oedipus development in my
Psycho-Analysis of Children (particularly Chapter 8); also in my papers ‘Early Stages of the Oedipus
Conflict’ and ‘The Oedipus Complex in the Light of Early Anxieties’ (Writings, x).

23
 Abraham writes, in ‘A Short Study of the Development of the Libido’ (1924), p. 490: ‘Another point
to be noted in regard to the part of the body that has been introjected is that the penis is regularly
assimilated to the female breast, and that other parts of the body, such as the finger, the foot, hair,
faeces and buttocks, can be made to stand for those two organs in a secondary way. . . .’

24
 Cf. the concept of the combined parent figure in The Psycho-Analysis of Children, particularly
Chapter 8.

25
 The infant’s capacity to enjoy at the same time the relation to both parents, which is an important
feature in his mental life and conflicts with his desires, prompted by jealousy and anxiety, to separate
them, depends on his feeling that they are separate individuals. This more integrated relation to the
parents (which is distinct from the compulsive need to keep the parents apart from one another and to
prevent their sexual intercourse) implies a greater understanding of their relation to one another and is a
precondition for the infant’s hope that he can bring them together and unite them in a happy way.

26
 Nevertheless, signs of recurrent depressive feelings can, with close observation, be detected in
normal  infants.  Severe  symptoms  of  depression  occur  quite  strikingly  in  young  infants  in  certain
circumstances, such as illness, sudden separation from the mother or nurse, or change of food.27
 The interrelation between persecutory and depressive anxieties on the one hand and castration fear
on the other is discussed in detail in my paper ‘The Oedipus Complex in the Light of Early Anxieties’
(Writings, 1).

28
 Heimann and Isaacs (1952).

29
 I have to refrain here from describing in detail the ways in which symbol-formation from the
beginning is inextricably bound up with the phantasy-life of the child and with the vicissitudes of
anxiety. I refer here to Isaacs (1952) and my ‘On The Behaviour of Young Infants’ (this volume); also
to some of my former writings, ‘Early Analysis’ (1926) and ‘The Importance of Symbol-Formation in
the Development of the Ego’ (1930).

30
 Cf. The Psycho-Analysis of Children, pp. 125, 156–61.

31
 My experience has shown me that those anxieties which underlie hypochondriasis are also at the
root of hysterical conversion symptoms. The fundamental factor common to both is the fear relating to
persecution within the body (attacks by internalized persecutory objects, or to the harm done to internal
objects by the subject’s sadism, such as attacks by his dangerous excrements)—all of which is felt as
physical damage inflicted on the ego. The elucidation of the processes underlying the transformation of
these  persecutory  anxieties  into  physical  symptoms  might  throw  further  light  on  the  problems  of
hysteria.

32
  If  these  defences  persist  excessively  beyond  the  early  stage  to  which  they  are  appropriate,
development may suffer in various ways; integration is impeded, phantasy-life and libidinal desires are
hampered; in consequence the reparative tendency, sublimations, object-relations and the relation to
reality may be impaired.

33
 The recognition that there is a need in the child to acquire habits of cleanliness, a need which is
bound up with anxiety and guilt and the defences against it, leads to the following conclusion. Training
in cleanliness, if applied without pressure and at a stage when the urge for it becomes apparent (which
is usually in the course of the second year) is helpful for the child’s development. If imposed on the
child  at  an  earlier  stage,  it  may  be  harmful.  Furthermore,  at  any  stage  the  child  should  only  be
encouraged  but  not  forced  to  acquire  habits  of  cleanliness.  This  is  necessarily  a  very  incomplete
reference to an important problem of upbringing.

34
 Freud’s view on reaction-formations and ‘undoing’ in the process of obsessional neurosis underlies
my concept of reparation, which in addition embraces the various processes by which the ego feels it
undoes harm done in phantasy, restores, preserves and revives the object.

35
 Cf. Freud. ‘. . . we shall bear in mind for future consideration the possibility that repression is a
process which has a special relation to the genital organization of the libido and that the ego resorts to
other methods of defence when it has to secure itself against the libido on other levels of organization.’
(Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, S.E., 20, p. 125).

36
 Cf. ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’.37
 Cf. ‘The Theory of Anxiety and Guilt’ (this volume).


Chapter 7


1
 The analysis of adults, too, if carried to deep layers of the mind, affords similar material and provides
convincing proof regarding the earliest as well as later stages of development.

2
  As  regards  the  fundamental  importance  of  oral  traits  for  character-formation,  cf.  Abraham,
‘Character-formation on the Genital Level of the Libido’ (1925).

3
 Michael Balint (in ‘Individual Differences in Early Infancy’, pp. 57–79, 81–117) concluded from
observations of 100 infants ranging in age from five days to eight months that the sucking rhythm
varies from one infant to another, each infant having his individual rhythm or rhythms.

4
 We must keep in mind, though, that however important these first influences are, the impact of the
environment is of major importance at every stage of the child’s development. Even the good effect of
the  earliest  upbringing  can  be  to  some  extent  undone  through  later  harmful  experiences,  just  as
difficulties arising in early life may be diminished through subsequent beneficial influences. At the
same time we have to remember that some children seem to bear unsatisfactory external conditions
without severe harm to their character and mental stability, whereas with others, in spite of favourable
surroundings, serious difficulties arise and persist.

5
 The Nursing Couple, pp. 49–50.

6
 Middlemore suggests that impulses to bite enter into the infant’s aggressive behaviour towards the
nipple long before he has any teeth and even though he rarely grips the breast with his gums. In this
connection (loc. cit., pp. 58–9) she refers to Waller (section ‘Breast Feeding’ in The Practitioner’s
Encyclopaedia of Midwifery and the Diseases of Women), who ‘speaks of excited babies biting angrily
at the breast, and attacking it with painful vigour’.

7
 Loc. cit., pp. 47–8.

8
 Cf. ‘A Contribution to the Psychogenesis of Manic-Depressive States’ (Writings, 1).

9
 In my view, as stated in the preceding chapter, depressive anxiety already operates to some extent
during the first three months of life and comes to a head during the second quarter of the first year.

10
 See Heimann (1952), Part 2, section (b), ‘Auto-Erotism, Narcissism and the Earliest Relations to
Objects’.

11
 Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, pp. 169, 170.

12
 See ‘The Emotional life of the Infant’ and ‘The Theory of Anxiety and Guilt’ (this volume).13
 With somewhat older infants it can easily be observed that if they are not given the particular signs
of  affection  expected  by  them  at  bedtime  their  sleep  is  likely  to  be  disturbed;  and  that  this
intensification of the need for love at the moment of parting is bound up with feelings of guilt and the
wish to be forgiven and to be reconciled with the mother.

14
 S. Bernfeld in his Psychology of the Infant (1929) came to the important conclusion that weaning is
bound up with depressive feelings. He describes the varied behaviour of infants at the time of weaning,
ranging  from  hardly  noticeable  longing  and  sorrow  to  actual  apathy  and  complete  refusal  of
nourishment, and compares the states of anxiety and restlessness, irritability and a certain apathy which
may  take  possession  of  an  adult  with  a  similar  condition  in  the  infant.  Among  the  methods  of
overcoming the frustration of weaning he mentions the withdrawal of the libido from the disappointing
object through projection and repression. He qualifies the use of the term ‘repression’ as borrowed from
the developed state of the adult’. But he nevertheless concludes that ‘. . . its essential properties exist in
these processes’ (in the infant) (p. 296). Bernfeld suggests that weaning is the first obvious cause from
which pathological mental development branches off and that the nutritional neuroses of infants are
contributory factors to the predisposition to neurosis. One of his conclusions is that, since some of the
processes by which the infant overcomes his sorrow and feeling of loss at weaning work noiselessly, a
conclusion about ‘the effects of weaning will have to be drawn from an intimate knowledge of the
child’s reaction to its world and its activities, which are the expression of its phantasy-life, or at least
are the nucleus of it’. (Loc. cit., p. 259, my italics.)

15
 In her Social Development in Young Children, particularly Chapter 3, Section II.A.i., Susan Isaacs
gave instances of feeding difficulties and discussed them in connection with anxieties arising from oral
sadism. There are also some interesting observations in D. W. Winnicott’s Disorders of Childhood,
particularly pp. 16 and 17.

16
  I  suggested  formerly  that  the  young  infant’s  phantasies  of  attacking  the  mother’s  body  with
poisonous (explosive and burning) excrements are a fundamental cause of his fear of being poisoned by
her and lie at the root of paranoia; similarly, that the impulses to devour the mother (and her breast)
turn  her  in  the  young  infant’s  mind  into  a  devouring  and  dangerous  object.  (‘Early  Stages  of  the
Oedipus Conflict’; ‘The Importance of Symbol-Formation in the Development of the Ego’; also The
Psycho-Analysis of Children, particularly Chapter 8.)
  Freud, too, refers to the little girl’s fear of being murdered or poisoned by her mother; a fear of
which he says ‘may later form the core of a paranoic illness’ (New Introductory Lectures, S.E. 22, p.
120). Further: ‘The fear of being poisoned is also probably connected with the withdrawal of the breast.
Poison is nourishment that makes one ill’ (ibid., p. 122). In his earlier paper, ‘Female Sexuality’, Freud
also refers to the girl’s dread in the pre-oedipal stage ‘of being killed (devoured?) by the mother’. He
suggests that ‘this fear corresponds to a hostility which develops in the child towards her mother in
consequence of the manifold restrictions imposed by the latter in the course of training and bodily care
and that the mechanism of projection is favoured by the early age of the child’s psychical organization.’
He  also  concludes  ‘that  in  this  dependence  on  the  mother  we  have  the  germ  of  later  paranoia  in
women.’ In this context he refers to the case reported in 1928 by Ruth Mack Brunswick (‘The Analysis
of a Case of Paranoia’), in which the direct source of the disorder was the patient’s Oedipus fixation to
her sister’ (S.E. 21, p. 227).

17
 We may draw a comparison here with the attitude of manic-depressive patients towards food. As we
know, some patients refuse food; others show temporarily an increase of greed; again others oscillate
between these two responses.18
 Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920). Cf. Chapter III where a description of this game is given.

19
 In ‘The Observation of Infants in a Set Situation’, D. W. Winnicott discussed in detail the game with
the cotton-reel.

20
 ‘Mourning and Melancholia’ (1917).

21
 As I have pointed out in the previous paper, although the crucial experiences of depressive feelings
and the defences against them arise during the first year of life, it takes years for the child to overcome
his persecutory and depressive anxieties. They are again and again activated and overcome in the
course of the infantile neurosis. But these anxieties are never eradicated, and therefore are liable to be
revived, though to a lesser extent, throughout life.

22
 As regards the importance of symbol-formation for mental life cf. Isaacs (1952), also my papers
‘Early Analysis’ and ‘The Importance of Symbol-Formation in the Development of the Ego’.

23
 Recent studies of pre-natal modes of behaviour, particularly as described and summarized by A.
Gesell (The Embryology of Behaviour) provide food for thought about a rudimentary ego and the extent
to which constitutional factors are already at work in the foetus. It is also an open question whether or
not the mother’s mental and physical state influences the foetus as regards the constitutional factors
mentioned above.


Chapter 8


1
 This growing conviction about the fundamental importance of Abraham’s discoveries was also the
result of my analysis with him, which began in 1924 and was cut short fourteen months later through
his illness and death.

2
 New Directions in Psycho-Analysis.

3
 A description of this early approach is given in Anna Freud’s book The Psycho-Analytical Treatment
of Children (1927).

4
 ‘The Development of a Child’, (1923); ‘The Rôle of the School in the Libidinal Development of the
Child’, (1924); and ‘Early Analysis’, (1926).

5
 See also On the Bringing up of Children ed. Rickman (1936), and ‘The Oedipus Complex in the Light
of Early Anxieties’ (1945).

6
 They are mainly: little wooden men and women, usually in two sizes, cars, wheelbarrows, swings,
trains, aeroplanes, animals, trees, bricks, houses, fences, paper, scissors, a knife, pencils, chalks or
paints, glue, balls and marbles, plasticine and string.7
 It has a washable floor, running water, a table, a few chairs, a little sofa, some cushions and a chest of
drawers.

8
 Instances both of play with toys and of the games described above can be found in The Psycho-
Analysis of Children (particularly in Chapters II, III and IV). See also ‘Personification in the Play of
Children’ (1929).

9
 This child, whose analysis was begun in 1924, was another of the cases that helped to develop my
play technique.

10
 Cf. The Psycho-Analysis of Children.

11
 Rita had eighty-three sessions, Trude eighty-two sessions.

12
 See ‘The Oedipus Complex in the Light of Early Anxieties’ (1945), Writings, 1, p. 404.

13
 Cf. ‘A Short History of the Development of the Libido, Viewed in the Light of Mental Disorders’
(1924).

14
 Ruth had 190 sessions, Peter 278 sessions.

15
 Described under the name ‘Erna’ in The Psycho-Analysis of Children, Chapter III.

16
 Cf. ‘Early Stages of the Oedipus Conflict’ (1928).

17
 Cf. ‘The Importance of Symbol-Formation in the Development of the Ego’ (1930).

18
 These and other conclusions are contained in the two papers I have already mentioned, ‘Early Stages
of the Oedipus Conflict’ and ‘The Importance of Symbol-Formation in the Development of the Ego’.
See also ‘Personification in the Play of Children’ (1929).

19
 It is possible that the understanding of the contents of psychotic anxieties and of the urgency to
interpret them was brought home to me in the analysis of a paranoic schizophrenic man who came to
me for one month only. In 1922 a colleague who was going on holiday asked me to take over for a
month a schizophrenic patient of his. I found from the first hour onwards that I must not allow the
patient to remain silent for any length of time. I felt that his silence implied danger, and in every such
instance I interpreted his suspicions of me, e.g. that I was plotting with his uncle and would have him
certified  again  (he  had  recently  been  de-certified)—material  which  on  other  occasions  he  verbally
expressed. Once when I had interpreted his silence in this way, connecting it with former material, the
patient, sitting up, asked me in a threatening tone: ‘Are you going to send me back to the asylum?’ But
he soon became quieter and began to speak more freely. That showed me that I had been on the right
lines and should continue to interpret his suspicions and feelings of persecution. To some extent a
positive as well as a negative transference to me came about; but at one point, when his fear of women
came up very strongly, he demanded from me the name of a male analyst to whom he could turn. I gavehim a name, but he never approached this colleague. During that month I saw the patient every day.
The analyst who had asked me to take over found some progress on his return and wished me to
continue the analysis. I refused, having become fully aware of the danger of treating a paranoic without
any protection or other suitable management. During the time when I analysed him, he often stood for
hours opposite my house, looking up at my window, though it was only on a few occasions that he rang
the bell and asked to see me. I may mention that after a short time he was again certified. Although I
did not at the time draw any theoretical conclusions from this experience, I believe that this fragment of
an analysis may have contributed to my later insight into the psychotic nature of infantile anxieties and
to the development of my technique.

20
 As we know, Freud found that there is no structural difference between the normal and the neurotic,
and this discovery has been of the greatest importance in the understanding of mental processes in
general. My hypothesis that anxieties of a psychotic nature are ubiquitous in infancy, and underlie the
infantile neurosis, is an extension of Freud’s discovery.

21
 The conclusions I have presented in the last paragraph can be found fully dealt with in The Psycho-
Analysis of Children.

22
 In this connection, cf. Dr Ernest Jones’s important paper ‘The Theory of Symbolism’, (1916).

23
 ‘The Importance of Symbol-Formation in the Development of the Ego’ (1930).

24
  This  conclusion  has  since  influenced  the  understanding  of  the  schizophrenic  mode  of
communication and has found its place in the treatment of schizophrenia.

25
 I cannot deal here with the fundamental difference which, besides common features, exist between
the normal, the neurotic and the psychotic.

26
 ‘Personification in the Play of Children’ (1929).

27
 ‘A Contribution to the Psychogenesis of Manic-Depressive States’ (1935).

28
 ‘Notes on Some Schizoid Mechanisms’ (1946).

29
 Fairbairn, W. R. D., ‘A Revised Psychopathology of the Psychoses and Neuroses’ (1941).

30
 The play technique has also influenced work with children in other fields, as for example in child
guidance work and in education. The development of educational methods in England has been given
fresh impetus by Susan Isaacs’ research at the Malting House School. Her books about that work have
been widely read and have had a lasting effect on educational techniques in this country, especially
where young children are concerned. Her approach was strongly influenced by her great appreciation of
child analysis, in particular of play technique; and it is largely due to her that in England the psycho-
analytic understanding of children has contributed to developments in education.Chapter 9


1
 Abraham’s work on melancholia, as early as 1911 (‘Notes on the Psycho-Analytical investigation and
Treatment of Manic-Depressive Insanity and Allied Conditions’) and 1924 (‘A Short History of the
Development of the Libido, viewed in the Light of Mental Disorders’) was also of great importance in
this connection.

2
 The Ego and the Id (1923).

3
 Among them from the beginning of life the mother’s attitude is of vital importance and remains a
major factor in the development of the child. Cf., for instance, Developments in Psycho-Analysis (Klein
et al., 1952).

4
 To put it in terms of the two instincts, it is a question whether in the struggle between the life and
death instincts the life instinct prevails.

5
 In this connection I refer to the papers by Herbert Rosenfeld, ‘Analysis of a Schizophrenic State with
Depersonalization’ (1947) ‘Remarks on the Relation of Male Homosexuality to Paranoia, Paranoid
Anxiety, and Narcissism’ (1949); and ‘Notes on the Psychopathology of Confusional States in Chronic
Schizophrenias’ (1950), which are relevant to these problems.

6
 Cf. my Psycho-Analysis of Children; for instance, pp. 128 ff.

7
 (1921) Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (S.E. 18), p. 112.

8
 Anna Freud has described another aspect of the projection on to a loved object and identification with
it in her concept of ‘altruistic surrender’. The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defence (1937), Ch. X.

9
 On re-reading recently Freud’s Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, it appeared to me that
he was aware of the process of identification by projection, although he did not differentiate it by
means of a special term from the process of identification by introjection with which he was mainly
concerned. Elliott Jaques (1955) quotes some passages from Group Psychology as implicitly referring
to identification by projection.

10
 Cf. also ‘Some Theoretical Conclusions Regarding the Emotional Life of the Infant’ (1952).

11
 If I Were You (Translated from the French by J. H. F. McEwen) (London, 1950).

12
 The various and contradictory characteristics—both ideal and bad—with which the father, as well as
the mother, are endowed are a familiar feature in the development of the child’s object relations.
Similarly, such conflicting attitudes are also attributed to the internalized figures some of which form
the super-ego.13
 I have suggested (‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’) that projective identification arises during
the paranoid-schizoid position which is characterized by splitting processes. I have pointed out above
that Fabian’s depression and his feeling of worthlessness gave additional impetus to his need to escape
from his self. The heightened greed and denial which characterize manic defences against depression
are, together with envy, also an important factor in projective identifications.

14
 In The Ego and the Id Freud writes (S.E. 19, pp. 30–1): ‘If they [the object-identifications] obtain
the upper hand and become too numerous, unduly powerful and incompatible with one another, a
pathological outcome will not be far off. It may come to a disruption of the ego in consequence of the
different identifications becoming cut off from one another by resistances; perhaps the secret of the
cases of what is described as ‘multiple personality’ is that the different identifications seize hold of
consciousness in turn. Even when things do not go so far as this, there remains the question of conflicts
between the various identifications into which the ego comes apart, conflicts which cannot after all be
described as entirely pathological.’

15
 This state of elation is, I think, comparable to the wish-fulfilling hallucination (Freud) which the
infant under the stress of reality, in particular of hunger, cannot maintain for long.

16
 I touch here on one of the essential causes for guilt and unhappiness in the infantile mind. The very
young child feels that his sadistic impulses and phantasies are omnipotent and therefore have taken, are
taking, and will take effect. He feels similarly about his reparative desires and phantasies, but it appears
that frequently the belief in his destructive powers far outweighs his confidence in his constructive
abilities.

17
 As I have pointed out in various connections, the urge for projective identification derives not only
from greed but from a variety of causes.

18
 In putting forward this interpretation I am aware that this is not the only line on which this episode
could  be  explained.  The  waiter  could  also  be  seen  as  the  father  who  did  not  satisfy  his  oral
expectations; and the baker-woman episode would thus mean a step further back to the mother relation
with all its desires and disappointments.

19
 This is an instance of the mutual influence of physical (possibly inherited) and emotional factors.

20
 One of the meanings of the sun in his pocket may be the good mother whom father has taken into
himself. For the young infant, as I pointed out earlier, feels that when he is deprived of the mother’s
breast it is the father who receives it. The feeling that the father contains the good mother, thus robbing
the infant of her, stirs up envy and greed and is also an important stimulus towards homosexuality.

21
  The  secure  internalization  of  a  good  mother—a  process  of  fundamental  importance—varies  in
degree and is never so complete that it cannot be shaken by anxieties from internal or external sources.

22
  There  is  another  side  to  such  experiences.  As  Paula  Heimann  describes  in  her  paper  (1955)  a
patient’s conscious feelings can also express his splitting processes.23
 I suggested in ‘Schizoid Mechanisms’ that the fear of being imprisoned inside the mother as a
consequence  of  projective  identification  underlines  various  anxiety  situations  and  among  them
claustrophobia. I would now add that projective identification may result in the fear that the lost part of
the self will never be recovered because it is buried in the object. In the story Fabian feels—after both
his transformation into Poujars and into Fruges—that he is entombed and will never escape again. This
implies that he will die inside his objects. There is another point I wish to mention here: besides the fear
of being imprisoned inside the mother, I have found that another contributory factor to claustrophobia
is the fear relating to the inside of one’s own body and the dangers threatening there. To quote again
Milton’s lines, ‘Thou art become (O worst imprisonment) the Dungeon of thyself’.

24
  This  is  of  great  importance  in  technique.  For  we  have  always  to  choose  for  interpretation  the
material which is the most urgent at the moment; and in this context I would say that there are stretches
of analysis during which some patients seem completely ruled by projection or by introjection. On the
other  hand,  it  is  essential  to  remember  that  the  opposite  process  remains  always  to  some  extent
operative and therefore enters sooner or later again into the picture as the predominant factor.

25
 I would say that however strongly splitting and projection operate, the disintegration of the ego is
never complete as long as life exists. For I believe that the urge towards integration, however disturbed
—even at the root—is in some degree inherent in the ego. This is in keeping with my view that no
infant could survive without possessing in some degree a good object. It is these facts which make it
possible for the analysis to bring about some measure of integration sometimes even in very severe
cases.

26
 The feeling of having dispersed goodness and good parts of the self into the external world adds to
the sense of grievance and envy of others who are felt to contain the lost goodness.

27
 Freud’s concept of the ego ideal was, as we know, the precursor of his super-ego concept. But there
are some features of the ego ideal which have not been fully taken over into his super-ego concept. My
description of the ideal self which Fabian is trying to regain comes, I think, much closer to Freud’s
original views about the ego ideal than to his views about the super-ego.


Chapter 10


1
 I wish to express my deep gratitude to my friend Lola Brook who has worked with me throughout the
preparation  of  this  book  [Envy  and  Gratitude]  as  with  many  of  my  writings.  She  has  a  rare
understanding of my work and has helped me with formulations and criticisms of the content at every
stage. My thanks are also due to Dr Elliott Jaques who has made a number of valuable suggestions
while the book was still in manuscript and has helped me by working on the proofs. I am indebted to
Miss Judith Fay who took great trouble over making the index.

2
 Constructions in Analysis’ (1937).

3
 All this is felt by the infant in much more primitive ways than language can express. When these pre-
verbal emotions and phantasies are revived in the transference situation, they appear as ‘memories in
feelings’, as I would call them, and are reconstructed and put into words with the help of the analyst. In
the same way, words have to be used when we are reconstructing and describing other phenomenabelonging  to  the  early  stages  of  development.  In  fact  we  cannot  translate  the  language  of  the
unconscious into consciousness without lending it words from our conscious realm.

4
  In  a  number  of  my  writings, The  Psycho-Analysis  of  Children,  ‘Early  Stages  of  the  Oedipus
Complex’, and in ‘The Emotional Life of the Infant,’ I have referred to envy, arising from oral-,
urethral-, and anal-sadistic sources, during the earliest stages of the Oedipus complex and connected it
with the desire to spoil the mother’s possessions, in particular the father’s penis which in the infant’s
phantasy she contains. Already in my paper ‘An Obsessional Neurosis in a Six-Year-Old Girl’, which
was read in 1924 but not published until it appeared in The Psycho-Analysis of Children, envy bound
up with oral-, urethral-, and anal-sadistic attacks on her mother’s body played a prominent rôle. But I
had not related this envy specifically to the desire to take away and to spoil the mother’s breasts,
although I had come very near to these conclusions. In my paper ‘On Identification’ (1955). I discussed
envy as a very important factor in projective identification. As far back as my Psycho-Analysis of
Children I suggested that not only oral-sadistic but also urethral-sadistic and anal-sadistic trends are
operative in very young infants.

5
 Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’.

6
 Dr Elliott Jaques has drawn my attention to the etymological root of envy in the Latin invidia, which
comes from the verb invideo—to look askance at, to look maliciously or spitefully into, to cast an evil
eye upon, to envy or grudge anything. An early use is given in the phrase from Cicero, the translation
of which is: ‘to produce misfortune by his evil eye’. This confirms the differentiation I made between
envy and greed in laying emphasis on the projective character of envy.

7
 Joan Riviere, in her paper ‘Jealousy as a Mechanism of Defence’ (1932), traced envy in women to the
infantile desire to rob the mother of her breasts and to spoil them. According to her findings, jealousy is
rooted in this primal envy. Her paper contains interesting material illustrating these views.

8
 Cf. my Psycho-Analysis of Children, where these concepts play a part in a number of connections.

9
 ‘A Contribution to the Analysis of the Negative Therapeutic Reaction’ (1936); also Freud, The Ego
and the Id.

10
 The baby may in fact have received too little milk, did not receive it at the time it was most wanted,
or did not get it in the right way, for instance the milk came too quickly or too slowly. The way the
infant was held, whether comfortable or not, the mother’s attitude towards feeding, her pleasure in it or
anxiety about it, whether the bottle or breast was given—all these factors are in every case of great
importance.

11
 A Short History of the Development of the Libido’ (1924).

12
 Observations of babies show us something of these underlying unconscious attitudes. As I have said
above, some infants who have been screaming with rage appear quite happy soon after they begin to
feed.  This  means  that  they  have  temporarily  lost  but  regained  their  good  object.  With  others,  the
persisting grievance and anxiety—even though they are for the moment diminished by the feed—can
be gathered by careful observers.13
 It is clear that deprivation, unsatisfactory feeding, and unfavourable circumstances intensify envy
because they disturb full gratification, and a vicious circle is created.

14
 ‘The Emotional Life of the Infant’ (1952).

15
 Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality.

16
 ‘On Observing the Behaviour of Young Infants’ (1952).

17
 Cf. also Donald Winnicott’s concept of the ‘illusory breast’ and his view that at the beginning the
objects are created by the self (‘Psychoses and Child Care’, 1953).

18
 Freud stated that ‘the unconscious seems to contain nothing that could give any content to the
concept of the annihilation of life’. Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, S.E. 20, 129.

19
 Cf. my ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’; also Herbert Rosenfeld ‘Analysis of a Schizophrenic
State with Depersonalization’ (1947).

20
 I have dealt with the importance of this process in earlier writings and only wish to stress here that it
seems to me a fundamental mechanism in the paranoid-schizoid position.

21
 I have already referred to the inherent need to idealize the pre-natal situation. Another frequent field
for  idealization  is  the  baby-mother  relation.  It  is  particularly  those  people  who  were  not  able  to
experience sufficient happiness in this relation who idealize it in retrospect.

22
 In this connection I refer to my paper on ‘Mourning and its Relation to Manic-Depressive States’ in
which I defined the normal working-through of mourning as a process during which the early good
objects  are  reinstated.  I  suggested  that  this  working-through  first  takes  place  when  the  infant
successfully deals with the depressive position.

23
 Whereas I have not altered my views on the depressive position setting in about the second quarter
of the first year and coming to a climax at about six months, I have found that some infants seem to
experience guilt transiently in the first few months of life (Cf. ‘On the Theory of Anxiety and Guilt’).
This does not imply that the depressive position has already arisen. I have elsewhere described the
variety of processes and defences that characterize the depressive position, such as the relation to the
whole  object;  stronger  recognition  of  internal  and  external  reality;  defences  against  depression,  in
particular the urge for reparation, and the widening of object relations leading to the early stages of the
Oedipus complex. In speaking about guilt transiently experienced in the first stage of life, I came closer
to the view I held at the time when I wrote the Psycho-Analysis of Children, where I described guilt and
persecution experienced by very young infants. When later on I defined the depressive position, I
divided more clearly, and perhaps too schematically, guilt, depression, and the corresponding defences
on the one hand, and the paranoid stage (which I later called the paranoid-schizoid position) on the
other.24
 I have reason to believe that this premature genitalization is often a feature in strong schizophrenic
traits or in full-blown schizophrenia. Cf. W. Bion in ‘Notes on the Theory of Schizophrenia’ (1954) and
‘Differentiation of the Psychotic from the Non-Psychotic Personalities’ (1958).

25
  Cf.  ‘The  Importance  of  Symbol-Formation  in  the  Development  of  the  Ego’  (1930)  and  ‘A
Contribution to the Psychogenesis of Manic-Depressive States’ (1935); also The Psycho-Analysis of
Children.

26
 I have pointed out elsewhere (e.g. in ‘The Emotional Life of the Infant’) the close connection
between  the  phase  in  which  the  depressive  position  develops  and  the  early  stages  of  the  Oedipus
complex.

27
 The Psycho-Analysis of Children (particularly Chapter VIII) and ‘The Emotional Life of the Infant’.
I have pointed out there that these phantasies form normally part of the early stages of the Oedipus
complex  but  I  would  now  add  that  the  whole  development  of  the  Oedipus  complex  is  strongly
influenced by the intensity of envy which determines the strength of the combined parent figure.

28
 ‘The Oedipus Complex in the Light of Early Anxieties’ (1945), Writings, 1, p. 418. ‘Penis envy and
the  castration  complex  play  an  essential  part  in  the  girl’s  development.  But  they  are  very  much
reinforced by frustration of her positive Oedipus desires. Though the little girl at one stage assumes that
her mother possesses a penis as a male attribute, this concept does not play nearly as important a part in
her development as Freud suggests. The unconscious theory that her mother contains the admired and
desired penis of the father underlies, in my experience, many of the phenomena which Freud described
as the relation of the girl to the phallic mother. The girl’s oral desires for her father’s penis mingle with
her  first  genital  desires  to  receive  that  penis.  These  genital  desires  imply  the  wish  to  receive  the
children from her father, which is also borne out by the equation “penis = child”. The feminine desire to
internalize the penis and to receive a child from her father invariably precedes the wish to possess a
penis of her own.’

29
 See ‘The Emotional Life of the Infant’ and ‘The Behaviour of Young Infants’.

30
 ‘On Identification’ (1955).

31
 Books I and II.

32
 But by the envy of the Devil, death entered into the world, and they that are of his portion make trial
thereof. (Wisdom of Solomon, Ch. 3, v. 24.)

33
 In Chaucer also we find extensive references to this backbiting and destructive criticising which
characterizes the envious person. He describes the sin of backbiting as arising from a compound of the
envious person’s unhappiness at other men’s goodness and prosperity, and his joy in their harm. The
sinful behaviour is characterized by ‘the man who praises his neighbour but with wicked intent, for he
always put “but” at the end, and follows it with another of greater blame than is the worth of the person.
Or, if a man is good and does or says things of good intent, the backbiter will turn all this goodness
upside down to his own shrewd intent. Of if other men speak good of a man, then the backbiter will saythat he is very good, but will point to someone else who is better, and will thus disparage he whom
other men praise.’

34
 The belief in the continuity of life was significantly expressed in the remark of a boy in his fifth year
whose mother was pregnant. He expressed the hope that the expected baby would be a girl, and added,
‘then she will have babies, and her babies will have babies, and then it goes on forever’.

35
 I am aware that in the following case material details of the patient’s history, personality, age, and
external circumstances would have been of value. Reasons of discretion make it impossible to go into
such details and I can only attempt illustrations of my main themes by extracts from material.

36
 It is not only in children but also in adults that a full revival of the emotions felt during the earliest
feeding experiences can come about in the transference situation. For instance, a feeling of hunger or
thirst comes up very strongly during the session and has gone after the interpretation which was felt to
have satisfied it. One of my patients, overcome by such feelings, got up from the couch and put his
arms round one section of the arch which separated one part of my consulting room from the other. I
have repeatedly heard the expression at the end of such sessions ‘I have been well nourished’. The good
object, in its earliest primitive form as the mother who takes care of the baby and feeds him, had been
regained.

37
  Freud’s Interpretation  of  Dreams  shows  clearly  that  some  of  this  residue  of  madness  finds
expression in dreams, and that they are therefore a most valuable safeguard for sanity.

38
 Experience has shown me that when the analyst becomes fully convinced of the importance of a
new aspect of emotional life, he becomes able to interpret it earlier in the analysis. By thus giving it
sufficient emphasis whenever the material allows it, he may bring the patient much sooner to the
realization of such processes and in this way the effectiveness of the analysis may be enhanced.

39
 Cf. Rosenfeld, ‘Notes on the Psychopathology of Confusional States in Chronic Schizophrenias’
(1950).

40
 Cf. ‘The Emotional Life of the Infant’.

41
 Cf. Freud, ‘Some Character-Types Met with in Psycho-Analytic Work’ (1915).

42
 ‘An Investigation of the Need of Neurotic and Psychotic Patients to Act Out during Analysis’
(1955).

43
 Some of my colleagues who analyse schizophrenic cases have told me that the emphasis they are
now  laying  on  envy  as  a  spoiling  and  destructive  factor  proves  of  great  importance  both  in
understanding and in treating their patients.

44
 Cf. The Psycho-Analysis of Children, Chapter VIII.45
 I have suggested (cf. my 1952 papers) that in the second year of life obsessional mechanisms come
to the fore and ego organization occurs under the dominance of anal impulses and phantasies.

46
 It might well be that a person who unexpectedly commits a crime or has a psychotic breakdown had
suddenly become aware of the split-off dangerous parts of his self. Cases are known of people trying to
be arrested in order to prevent themselves from committing a murder.

47
 ‘From these indications we infer that the erotogenic significance of the anal zone is intensified in the
innate sexual constitution of these persons.’

48
 ‘A Short History of the Development of the Libido’ (1924).

49
 pp. 144–45 above.

50
 The most fundamental contributions to this topic have been made by Freud, Jones, and Abraham.
Cf. for instance, Freud ‘Character and Anal Erotism’ (1908), Jones ‘Hate and Anal-Erotism in the
Obsessional Neuroses’ (1913) and ‘Anal-Erotic Character Traits’ (1918), and Abraham ‘Contributions
to the Theory of the Anal Character’ (1921), ‘The Influence of Oral Erotism on Character Formation’
(1924), and ‘Character Formation on the Genital Level of Libido Development’ (1925).


Chapter 11


1
 Cf. pp. 126–28.

2
  In  ‘Notes  on  some  Schizoid  Mechanisms’  (1946),  I  suggested  that  some  of  the  functions—in
particular that of dealing with anxiety—which we know from the later ego, are already operative at the
beginning of life. The anxiety arising from the operation of the death instinct within the organism, and
felt as fear of annihilation (death), takes the form of persecution.

3
 See pp. 28–30 in this volume.

4
 Joan Riviere (1952) refers to ‘Freud’s decisive rejection of the possibility of an unconscious fear of
death’; she goes on to conclude that ‘the helplessness and dependence of human children must, in
conjunction with their phantasy life, presuppose that the fear of death is even part of their experience.’

5
 Here I differ from Freud is so far as it seems that Freud understood by deflection only the process
whereby the death instinct directed against the self is turned into aggression against the object. In my
view, two processes are involved in that particular mechanism of deflection. Part of the death instinct is
projected into the object, the object thereby becoming a persecutor; while that part of the death instinct
which is retained in the ego causes aggression to be turned against that persecutory object.

6
 In ‘Notes on some Schizoid Mechanisms’, I said: ‘The fear of the destructive impulse seems to attach
itself at once to an object—or rather it is experienced as the fear of an uncontrollable overpoweringobject. Other important sources of primary anxiety are the trauma of birth (separation anxiety) and
frustration  of  bodily  needs;  these  experiences  too  are  from  the  beginning  felt  as  being  caused  by
objects.’

7
 For a more detailed picture of how my views on the early Oedipus complex have developed, sec
‘Early Stages of the Oedipus Conflict’ (1928), The Psycho-Analysis of Children (1932), (particularly
Chapter VIII), ‘The Oedipus Complex in the Light of Early Anxieties’ (1945), and ‘Some Theoretical
Conclusions Regarding the Emotional Life of the Infant’ (1952, p. 218).

8
 Cf. for instance ‘The Theory of Anxiety and Guilt’ (1948), this volumepp. 31–32.

9
 For clinical material illustrating this particular point, see ‘A Contribution to the Psychogenesis of
Manic-Depressive States (1934). Writings, 1, pp. 273–74.

10
 As I mentioned, for instance, in the footnote on p. 63 of this volume, ‘the anxiety relating to attacks
by internalized objects—first of all part-objects—is in my view the basis of hypochondriasis. I put
forward this hypothesis in my book The Psycho-Analysis of Children, pp. 144, 264, 273.’ Similarly in
‘The Theory of Intellectual Inhibition’ (1931), I pointed out, on p. 238, that ‘a person’s fear of his
faeces as a persecutor is ultimately derived from his sadistic phantasies. . . . These fears give rise to a
terror  of  having  a  number  of  persecutors  inside  his  body  and  of  being  poisoned,  as  well  as  to
hypochondriacal fears.’

11
 Cf. my paper ‘Some Theoretical Conclusions Regarding the Emotional Life of the Infant’ (pp. 86–
87  of  this  volume)  where  I  said:  ‘The  mechanism  of  splitting  underlies  repression  (as  implied  in
Freud’s concept); but in contrast to the earliest forms of splitting which lead to states of disintegration,
repression does not normally result in a disintegration of the self. Since at this stage there is greater
integration, within both the conscious and the unconscious parts of the mind, and since in repression the
splitting predominantly effects a division between conscious and unconscious, neither part of the self is
exposed to the degree of disintegration which may arise in previous stages. However, the extent to
which splitting processes are resorted to in the first few months of life vitally influences the use of
repression at a later stage.’


Chapter 15


1
 My first descriptions of these anxieties are contained in my paper ‘Early Stages of the Oedipus
Conflict’ (1928).

2
 I have dealt with this more fully and given instances of these anxieties in my Psycho-Analysis of
Children.

3
 See my paper ‘On the Development of Mental Functioning’ (1958).

4
 Cf. The Psycho-Analysis of Children, Chapter XI.5
 Cf. Ernest Jones, Hamlet and Oedipus (1949).

6
 ‘On Identification’ (1955b).

7
 Cf. Narrative of a Child Analysis (1961).

8
 This description of sucking out the blood of the victim recalls Abraham’s (1924) suggestion that in
the oral sucking stage cruelty also enters; he spoke of ‘vampire-like sucking’.

9
 Cf. The Psycho-Analysis of Children, Chapter VIII.


Chapter 17


1
 ‘Early Stages of the Oedipus Conflict’, Writings, 1.

2
 Translated from the German.


Explanatory Notes


1
 These notes were prepared on behalf of the Melanie Klein Trustees by Mrs Edna O’Shaughnessy in
consultation with the general editor of the Writings, Mr R. E. Money-Kyrle, and other members of the
Editorial Board, Dr Hanna Segal and Miss Betty Joseph. See the Preface and the editor’s Introduction
to Writings, I (p. vii–xi).


Appendix


1
 Hebbel’s line, ‘Er hat an den Frieden der Welt gerührt’, which has been applied to Freud, might well
be applied to Mrs Klein as well.