" )
FALLACIES

 
                      Table of Contents


    Fallacies and Arguments

    Fallacies

          Ad Hominem

          Ad Hominem Tu Quoque

          Appeal to the Consequences of a Belief

          Appeal to Authority

          Appeal to Belief

          Appeal to Common Practice

          Appeal to Emotion

          Appeal to Fear

          Appeal to Flattery

          Appeal to Novelty

          Appeal to Pity

          Appeal to Popularity

          Appeal to Ridicule

          Appeal to Spite

          Appeal to Tradition

          Begging the Question

          Biased Generalization

          Burden of Proof

            Circumstantial Ad Hominem

          Fallacy of Composition

            Confusuing Cause and Effect

          Fallacy of Division

          False Dilemma

          Gambler’s Fallacy

          Genetic Fallacy

          Guilt by Association

          Hasty Generalization

          Ignoring a Common Cause

          Middle Ground

          Misleading Vividness

          Peer Pressure          Personal Attack

          Poisoning the Well

          Post Hoc

            Questionable Cause

          Red Herring

          Relativist Fallacy

          Slippery Slope

          Special Pleading

          Spotlight

          Straw Man

          Two Wrongs Make a RightForty Two Fallacies

  By Dr. Michael C. LaBossiere, ontologist@aol.com

 

  Legal Information

This book is copyright 2002-2010 by Dr. Michael C. LaBossiere. It may be

freely  distributed  for  personal  or  educational  use  provided  that  it  is  not

modified and no fee above the normal cost of distribution is charged for it.  Fallacies and Arguments


In order to understand what a fallacy is, one must understand what an

argument is. Very briefly an argument consists of one or more premises and

one conclusion. A premise is a statement (a sentence that is either true or

false)  that  is  offered  in  support  of  the  claim  being  made,  which  is  the

conclusion (which is also a sentence that is either true or false).

There  are  two  main  types  of  arguments:  deductive  and  inductive.  A

deductive  argument  is  an  argument  such  that  the  premises  provide  (or

appear  to  provide)  complete  support  for  the  conclusion.  An  inductive

argument  is  an  argument  such  that  the  premises  provide  (or  appear  to

provide) some degree of support (but less than complete support) for the

conclusion. If the premises actually provide the required degree of support

for  the  conclusion,  then  the  argument  is  a  good  one.  A  good  deductive

argument is known as a valid argument and is such that if all its premises are

true,  then  its  conclusion  must  be  true.  If  all  the  argument  is  valid  and

actually has all true premises, then it is known as a sound argument. If it is

invalid  or  has  one  or  more  false  premises,  it  will  be  unsound.  A  good

inductive argument is known as a strong (or “cogent”) inductive argument. It

is such that if the premises are true, the conclusion is likely to be true.

A fallacy is, very generally, an error in reasoning. This differs from a factual

error, which is simply being wrong about the facts. To be more specific, a

fallacy is an “argument” in which the premises given for the conclusion do

not provide the needed degree of support. A deductive fallacy is a deductive

argument that is invalid (it is such that it could have all true premises and

still  have  a  false  conclusion).  An  inductive  fallacy  is  less  formal  than  a

deductive fallacy. They are simply “arguments” which appear to be inductive

arguments,  but  the  premises  do  not  provided  enough  support  for  the

conclusion. In such cases, even if the premises were true, the conclusion

would not be more likely to be true.

 

  Example of a Deductive Argument

 

  Premise 1: If Bill is a cat, then Bill is a mammal.  Premise 2: Bill is a cat.

    Conclusion: Bill is a mammal.

 

  Example of an Inductive Argument

 

  Premise 1: Most American cats are domestic house cats.

  Premise 2: Bill is an American cat.

    Conclusion: Bill is domestic house cat.

 

  Example of a Factual Error

 

    Columbus is the capital of the United States.

 

  Example of a Deductive Fallacy

 

  Premise 1: If Portland is the capital of Maine, then it is in Maine.

  Premise 2: Portland is in Maine.

    Conclusion: Portland is the capital of Maine.

  (Portland is in Maine, but Augusta is the capital. Portland is the largest

city in Maine, though.)

 

  Example of an Inductive Fallacy

 

  Premise 1: Having just arrived in Ohio, I saw a white squirrel.

    Conclusion: All Ohio squirrels are white.

  (While there are many, many squirrels in Ohio, the white ones are very

rare).

 Fallacies


Ad Hominem


  Also Known as: Ad Hominem Abusive, Personal Attack

    Description:

Translated from Latin to English, “ad Hominem” means “against the man”

or “against the person.”

An  ad  Hominem  is  a  general  category  of  fallacies  in  which  a  claim  or

argument is rejected on the basis of some irrelevant fact about the author of

or  the  person  presenting  the  claim  or  argument.  Typically,  this  fallacy

involves two steps. First, an attack against the character of person making

the  claim,  her  circumstances,  or  her  actions  is  made  (or  the  character,

circumstances, or actions of the person reporting the claim). Second, this

attack is taken to be evidence against the claim or argument the person in

question  is  making  (or  presenting).  This  type  of  “argument”  has  the

following form:

 

  1. Person A makes claim X.

  2. Person B makes an attack on person A.

  3. Therefore A’s claim is false.

 

The  reason  why  an  ad  Hominem  (of  any  kind)  is  a  fallacy  is  that  the

character, circumstances, or actions of a person do not (in most cases) have

a bearing on the truth or falsity of the claim being made (or the quality of

the argument being made).

 

    Example#1:

  Bill: “I believe that abortion is morally wrong.”

  Dave: “Of course you would say that, you’re a priest.”

  Bill: “What about the arguments I gave to support my position?”

  Dave: “Those don’t count. Like I said, you’re a priest, so you have to say

that abortion is wrong. Further, you are just a lackey to the Pope, so I can’t

believe what you say.” 

    Example#2:

  John: “Sally was saying that people shouldn’t hunt animals or kill them

for food or clothing. She also…”

  Wanda: “Well, Sally is a sissy crybaby who loves animals way too much.”

  John: “So?”

  Wanda: “That means she is wrong about that animal stuff. Also, if we

weren’t supposed to eat ‘em, they wouldn’t be made of meat.”

 Ad Hominem Tu Quoque


  Also Known as: “You Too Fallacy”

    Description:

This fallacy is committed when it is concluded that a person’s claim is false

because 1) it is inconsistent with something else a person has said or 2) what

a person says is inconsistent with her actions. This type of “argument” has

the following form:

 

  1. Person A makes claim X.

  2. Person B asserts that A’s actions or past claims are inconsistent with

the truth of claim X.

  3. Therefore X is false.

 

The  fact  that  a  person  makes  inconsistent  claims  does  not  make  any

particular claim he makes false (although of any pair of inconsistent claims

only one can be true—but both can be false). Also, the fact that a person’s

claims are not consistent with his actions might indicate that the person is a

hypocrite but this does not prove his claims are false.

 

  Example #1:

  Bill: “Smoking is very unhealthy and leads to all sorts of problems. So

take my advice and never start.”

  Jill: “Well, I certainly don’t want to get cancer.”

  Bill: “I’m going to get a smoke. Want to join me Dave?”

  Jill: “Well, I guess smoking can’t be that bad. After all, Bill smokes.”

 

  Example #2:

  Jill: “I think the gun control bill shouldn’t be supported because it won’t

be effective and will waste money.”

  Bill:  “Well,  just  last  month  you  supported  the  bill.  So  I  guess  you’re

wrong now.”

 

  Example #3:  Peter: “Based on the arguments I have presented, it is evident that it is

morally wrong to use animals for food or clothing.”

  Bill: “But you are wearing a leather jacket and you have a roast beef

sandwich in your hand! How can you say that using animals for food and

clothing is wrong!”Appeal to the Consequences of a Belief


    Description:

The Appeal to the Consequences of a Belief is a fallacy that comes in the

following patterns:

 

  #1: X is true because if people did not accept X as being true, then there

would be negative consequences.

 

  #2: X is false because if people did not accept X as being false, then there

would be negative consequences.

 

  #3: X is true because accepting that X is true has positive consequences.

 

  #4: X is false because accepting that X is false has positive consequences.

 

  #5: I wish that X were true, therefore X is true. This is known as Wishful

Thinking.

 

  #6: I wish that X were false, therefore X is false. This is known as Wishful

Thinking.

 

This line of “reasoning” is fallacious because the consequences of a belief

have  no  bearing  on  whether  the  belief  is  true  or  false.  For  example,  if

someone were to say “If sixteen-headed purple unicorns don’t exist, then I

would be miserable, so they must exist”, it would be clear that this would

not  be  a  good  line  of  reasoning.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the

consequences in question are the consequences that stem from the belief. It

is  important  to  distinguish  between  a  rational  reason  to  believe  (RRB)

(evidence) and a prudential reason to believe (PRB) (motivation). A RRB is

evidence that objectively and logically supports the claim. A PRB is a reason

to accept the belief because of some external factor (such as fear, a threat,

or a benefit or harm that may stem from the belief) that is relevant to what

a person values but is not relevant to the truth or falsity of the claim.The nature of the fallacy is especially clear in the case of Wishful thinking.

Obviously, merely wishing that something is true does not make it true. This

fallacy differs from the Appeal to Belief fallacy in that the Appeal to Belief

involves taking a claim that most people believe that X is true to be evidence

for X being true.

 

  Example #1:

  God must exist! If God did not exist, then all basis for morality would be

lost and the world would be a horrible place!

 

  Example #2:

  It can never happen to me. If I believed it could, I could never sleep

soundly at night.

 

  Example #3:

  I don’t think that there will be a nuclear war. If I believed that, I wouldn’t

be able to get up in the morning. I mean, how depressing.

 

  Example #4:

  I  acknowledge  that  I  have  no  argument  for  the  existence  of  God.

However,  I  have  a  great  desire  for  God  to  exist  and  for  there  to  be  an

afterlife. Therefore I accept that God exists.

 Appeal to Authority


  Also  Known  as:  Fallacious  Appeal  to  Authority,  Misuse  of  Authority,

Irrelevant  Authority,  Questionable  Authority,  Inappropriate  Authority,  Ad

Verecundiam

    Description:

An Appeal to Authority is a fallacy with the following form:

 

  1) Person A is (claimed to be) an authority on subject S.

  2) Person A makes claim C about subject S.

  3) Therefore, C is true.

 

This fallacy is committed when the person in question is not a legitimate

authority on the subject. More formally, if person A is not qualified to make

reliable claims in subject S, then the argument will be fallacious.

This sort of reasoning is fallacious when the person in question is not an

expert.  In  such  cases  the  reasoning  is  flawed  because  the  fact  that  an

unqualified person makes a claim does not provide any justification for the

claim. The claim could be true, but the fact that an unqualified person made

the claim does not provide any rational reason to accept the claim as true.

When a person falls prey to this fallacy, they are accepting a claim as true

without  there  being  adequate  evidence  to  do  so.  More  specifically,  the

person  is  accepting  the  claim  because  they  erroneously  believe  that  the

person making the claim is a legitimate expert and hence that the claim is

reasonable to accept. Since people have a tendency to believe authorities

(and  there  are,  in  fact,  good  reasons  to  accept  some  claims  made  by

authorities) this fallacy is a fairly common one.

Since this sort of reasoning is fallacious only when the person is not a

legitimate authority in a particular context, it is necessary to provide some

acceptable  standards  of  assessment.  The  following  standards  are  widely

accepted:

 

  1. The person has sufficient expertise in the subject matter in question.

Claims made by a person who lacks the needed degree of expertise tomake a reliable claim will, obviously, not be well supported. In contrast,

claims  made  by  a  person  with  the  needed  degree  of  expertise  will  be

supported by the person’s reliability in the area.

Determining whether or not a person has the needed degree of expertise

can  often  be  very  difficult.  In  academic  fields  (such  as  philosophy,

engineering,  history,  etc.),  the  person’s  formal  education,  academic

performance,  publications,  membership  in  professional  societies,  papers

presented,  awards  won  and  so  forth  can  all  be  reliable  indicators  of

expertise.  Outside  of  academic  fields,  other  standards  will  apply.  For

example, having sufficient expertise to make a reliable claim about how to

tie a shoe lace only requires the ability to tie the shoe lace and impart that

information to others. It should be noted that being an expert does not

always require having a university degree. Many people have high degrees

of  expertise  in  sophisticated  subjects  without  having  ever  attended  a

university. Further, it should not be simply assumed that a person with a

degree is an expert.

Of course, what is required to be an expert is often a matter of great

debate. For example, some people have (and do) claim expertise in certain

(even all) areas because of a divine inspiration or a special gift. The followers

of such people accept such credentials as establishing the person’s expertise

while others often see these self-proclaimed experts as deluded or even as

charlatans. In other situations, people debate over what sort of education

and experience is needed to be an expert. Thus, what one person may take

to be a fallacious appeal another person might take to be a well supported

line of reasoning. Fortunately, many cases do not involve such debate.

 

  2. The claim being made by the person is within her area(s) of expertise.

If a person makes a claim about some subject outside of his area(s) of

expertise, then the person is not an expert in that context. Hence, the claim

in question is not backed by the required degree of expertise and is not

reliable.

It is very important to remember that because of the vast scope of human

knowledge and skill it is simply not possible for one person to be an expert

on everything. Hence, experts will only be true experts in respect to certain

subject areas. In most other areas they will have little or no expertise. Thus,

it is important to determine what subject area a claim falls under.It  is  also  very  important  to  note  that  expertise  in  one  area  does  not

automatically  confer  expertise  in  another.  For  example,  being  an  expert

physicist does not automatically make a person an expert on morality or

politics. Unfortunately, this is often overlooked or intentionally ignored. In

fact, a great deal of advertising rests on a violation of this condition. As

anyone  who  watches  television  knows,  it  is  extremely  common  to  get

famous  actors  and  sports  heroes  to  endorse  products  that  they  are  not

qualified to assess. For example, a person may be a great actor, but that

does not automatically make him an expert on cars or shaving or underwear

or diets or politics.

 

  3. There is an adequate degree of agreement among the other experts in

the subject in question.

If there is a significant amount of legitimate dispute among the experts

within a subject, then it will fallacious to make an Appeal to Authority using

the disputing experts. This is because for almost any claim being made and

“supported” by one expert there will be a counterclaim that is made and

“supported” by another expert. In such cases an Appeal to Authority would

tend  to  be  futile.  In  such  cases,  the  dispute  has  to  be  settled  by

consideration of the actual issues under dispute. Since either side in such a

dispute  can  invoke  experts,  the  dispute  cannot  be  rationally  settled  by

Appeals to Authority.

There are many fields in which there is a significant amount of legitimate

dispute. Economics is a good example of such a disputed field. Anyone who

is familiar with economics knows that there are many plausible theories that

are incompatible with one another. Because of this, one expert economist

could sincerely claim that the deficit is the key factor while another equally

qualified  individual  could  assert  the  exact  opposite.  Another  area  where

dispute is very common (and well known) is in the area of psychology and

psychiatry. As has been demonstrated in various trials, it is possible to find

one expert that will assert that an individual is insane and not competent to

stand  trial  and  to  find  another  equally  qualified  expert  who  will  testify,

under oath, that the same individual is both sane and competent to stand

trial.  Obviously,  one  cannot  rely  on  an  Appeal  to  Authority  in  such  a

situation without making a fallacious argument. Such an argument would be

fallacious since the evidence would not warrant accepting the conclusion.It is important to keep in mind that no field has complete agreement, so

some degree of dispute is acceptable. How much is acceptable is, of course,

a matter of serious debate. It is also important to keep in mind that even a

field with a great deal of internal dispute might contain areas of significant

agreement. In such cases, an Appeal to Authority could be legitimate.

 

  4. The person in question is not significantly biased.

If an expert is significantly biased then the claims he makes within his are

of bias will be less reliable. Since a biased expert will not be reliable, an

Argument from Authority based on a biased expert will be fallacious. This is

because the evidence will not justify accepting the claim.

Experts, being people, are vulnerable to biases and prejudices. If there is

evidence  that  a  person  is  biased  in  some  manner  that  would  affect  the

reliability of her claims, then an Argument from Authority based on that

person is likely to be fallacious. Even if the claim is actually true, the fact that

the expert is biased weakens the argument. This is because there would be

reason to believe that the expert might not be making the claim because he

has carefully considered it using his expertise. Rather, there would be reason

to  believe  that  the  claim  is  being  made  because  of  the  expert’s  bias  or

prejudice.

It is important to remember that no person is completely objective. At the

very least, a person will be favorable towards her own views (otherwise she

would probably not hold them). Because of this, some degree of bias must

be  accepted,  provided  that  the  bias  is  not  significant.  What  counts  as  a

significant degree of bias is open to dispute and can vary a great deal from

case  to  case.  For  example,  many  people  would  probably  suspect  that

doctors who were paid by tobacco companies to research the effects of

smoking would be biased while other people might believe (or claim) that

they would be able to remain objective.

 

  5. The area of expertise is a legitimate area or discipline.

Certain  areas  in  which  a  person  may  claim  expertise  may  have  no

legitimacy  or  validity  as  areas  of  knowledge  or  study.  Obviously,  claims

made in such areas will not be very reliable.

What  counts  as  a  legitimate  area  of  expertise  is  sometimes  difficult  to

determine. However, there are cases which are fairly clear cut. For example,if a person claimed to be an expert at something he called “chromabullet

therapy” and asserted that firing painted rifle bullets at a person would cure

cancer it would not be very reasonable to accept his claim based on his

“expertise.” After all, his expertise is in an area which is devoid of legitimate

content. The general idea is that to be a legitimate expert a person must

have mastery over a real field or area of knowledge.

As noted above, determining the legitimacy of a field can often be difficult.

In European history, various scientists had to struggle with the Church and

established  traditions  to  establish  the  validity  of  their  disciplines.  For

example, experts on evolution faced an uphill battle in getting the legitimacy

of their area accepted.

A modern example involves psychic phenomenon. Some people claim that

they are certified “master psychics” and that they are actually experts in the

field.  Other  people  contend  that  ther  claims  of  being  certified  “master

psychics” are simply absurd since there is no real content to such an area of

expertise. If these people are right, then anyone who accepts the claims of

these  “master  psychics”  as  true  are  victims  of  a  fallacious  appeal  to

authority.

 

  6. The authority in question must be identified.

A common variation of the typical Appeal to Authority fallacy is an Appeal

to an Unnamed Authority. This fallacy is Also Known as an Appeal to an

Unidentified Authority.

This  fallacy  is  committed  when  a  person  asserts  that  a  claim  is  true

because an expert or authority makes the claim and the person does not

actually  identify  the  expert.  Since  the  expert  is  not  named  or  identified,

there is no way to tell if the person is actually an expert. Unless the person is

identified and has his expertise established, there is no reason to accept the

claim.

This  sort  of  reasoning  is  not  unusual.  Typically,  the  person  making  the

argument will say things like “I have a book that says…” , or “they say…”, or

“the experts say…”, or “scientists believe that…”, or “I read in the paper..” or

“I saw on TV…” or some similar statement. in such cases the person is often

hoping that the listener(s) will simply accept the unidentified source as a

legitimate authority and believe the claim being made. If a person accepts

the claim simply because they accept the unidentified source as an expert(without good reason to do so), he has fallen prey to this fallacy.

 

    Non-Fallacious Appeals to Authority

As  suggested  above,  not  all  Appeals  to  Authority  are  fallacious.  This  is

fortunate  since  people  have  to  rely  on  experts.  This  is  because  no  one

person can be an expert on everything and people do not have the time or

ability to investigate every single claim themselves.

In  many  cases,  Arguments  from  Authority  will  be  good  arguments.  For

example, when a person goes to a skilled doctor and the doctor tells him

that he has a cold, then the patient has good reason to accept the doctor’s

conclusion. As another example, if a person’s computer is acting odd and his

friend, who is a computer expert, tells him it is probably his hard drive then

he has good reason to believe her.

What distinguishes a fallacious Appeal to Authority from a good Appeal to

Authority is that the argument meets the six conditions discussed above.

In a good Appeal to Authority, there is reason to believe the claim because

the expert says the claim is true. This is because a person who is a legitimate

expert is more likely to be right than wrong when making considered claims

within her area of expertise. In a sense, the claim is being accepted because

it is reasonable to believe that the expert has tested the claim and found it

to  be  reliable.  So,  if  the  expert  has  found  it  to  be  reliable,  then  it  is

reasonable to accept it as being true. Thus, the listener is accepting a claim

based on the testimony of the expert.

It  should  be  noted  that  even  a  good  Appeal  to  Authority  is  not  an

exceptionally  strong  argument.  After  all,  in  such  cases  a  claim  is  being

accepted as true simply because a person is asserting that it is true. The

person may be an expert, but her expertise does not really bear on the truth

of the claim. This is because the expertise of a person does not actually

determine whether the claim is true or false. Hence, arguments that deal

directly with evidence relating to the claim itself will tend to be stronger.

 

  Example #1:

  Bill and Jane are arguing about the morality of abortion:

 

  Bill: “I believe that abortion is morally acceptable. After all, a woman

should have a right to her own body.”  Jane: ‘I disagree completely. Dr. Johan Skarn says that abortion is always

morally wrong, regardless of the situation. He has to be right, after all, he is

a respected expert in his field.”

  Bill: “I’ve never heard of Dr. Skarn. Who is he?”

  Jane: “He’s the guy that won the Nobel Prize in physics for his work on

cold fusion.”

  Bill: “I see. Does he have any expertise in morality or ethics?”

  Jane: “I don’t know. But he’s a world famous expert, so I believe him.”

 

  Example #2:

  Dave and Kintaro are arguing about Stalin’s reign in the Soviet Union.

Dave has been arguing that Stalin was a great leader while Kintaro disagrees

with him.

 

    Kintaro: “I don’t see how you can consider Stalin to be a great leader. He

killed millions of his own people, he crippled the Soviet economy, kept most

of  the  people  in  fear  and  laid  the  foundations  for  the  violence  that  is

occurring in much of Eastern Europe.”

  Dave: “Yeah, well you say that. However, I have a book at home that

says that Stalin was acting in the best interest of the people. The millions

that were killed were vicious enemies of the state and they had to be killed

to protect the rest of the peaceful citizens. This book lays it all out, so it has

to be true.”

 

  Example #3:

  I’m  not  a  doctor,  but  I  play  one  on  the  hit  series  “Bimbos  and

Studmuffins in the OR.” You can take it from me that when you need a fast

acting,  effective  and  safe  pain  killer  there  is  nothing  better  than

MorphiDope 2000. That is my considered medical opinion.

 

  Example #4:

    Siphwe and Sasha are having a conversation:

 

  Sasha:  “I  played  the  lottery  today  and  I  know  I  am  going  to  win

something.”

  Siphwe: “What did you do, rig the outcome?”  Sasha:  “No,  silly.  I  called  my  Super  Psychic  Buddy  at  the  1-900-

MindPower number. After consulting his magic Californian Tarot deck, he

told me my lucky numbers.”

  Siphwe: “And you believed him?”

  Sasha: “Certainly, he is a certified Californian Master-Mind Psychic. That

is why I believe what he has to say. I mean, like, who else would know what

my lucky numbers are?”

 Appeal to Belief


    Description:Appeal to Belief is a fallacy that has this general pattern:

 

  1) Most people believe that a claim, X, is true.

  2) Therefore X is true.

 

This line of “reasoning” is fallacious because the fact that many people

believe a claim does not, in general, serve as evidence that the claim is true.

There are, however, some cases when the fact that many people accept a

claim as true is an indication that it is true. For example, while you are

visiting Maine, you are told by several people that they believe that people

older than 16 need to buy a fishing license in order to fish. Barring reasons

to doubt these people, their statements give you reason to believe that

anyone over 16 will need to buy a fishing license.

There are also cases in which what people believe actually determines the

truth of a claim. For example, the truth of claims about manners and proper

behavior might simply depend on what people believe to be good manners

and proper behavior. Another example is the case of community standards,

which are often taken to be the standards that most people accept. In some

cases, what violates certain community standards is taken to be obscene. In

such cases, for the claim “x is obscene” to be true is for most people in that

community to believe that x is obscene. In such cases it is still prudent to

question the justification of the individual beliefs.

 

  Example #1:

  At one time, most people in Europe believed that the earth was the

center of the solar system (at least most of those who had beliefs about

such things). However, this belief turned out to be false.

 

  Example #2:

  God must exist. After all, I just saw a poll that says 85% of all Americans

believe in God.

   Example #3:

  Of course there is nothing wrong with drinking. Ask anyone, he’ll tell you

that he thinks drinking is just fine.

 Appeal to Common Practice


    Description:

The Appeal to Common Practice is a fallacy with the following structure:

 

  1) X is a common action.

  2) Therefore X is correct/moral/justified/reasonable, etc.

 

The basic idea behind the fallacy is that the fact that most people do X is

used as “evidence” to support the action or practice. It is a fallacy because

the mere fact that most people do something does not make it correct,

moral, justified, or reasonable.

An appeal to fair play, which might seem to be an appeal to common

practice, need not be a fallacy. For example, a woman working in an office

might say “the men who do the same job as me get paid more than I do, so

it would be right for me to get paid the same as them.” This would not be a

fallacy as long as there was no relevant difference between her and the men

(in terms of ability, experience, hours worked, etc.). More formally:

 

  1) It is common practice to treat people of type Y in manner X and to

treat people of type Z in a different manner.

  2) There is no relevant difference between people of type Y and type Z.

  3) Therefore people of type Z should be treated in manner X, too.

 

This argument rests heavily on the principle of relevant difference. On this

principle two people, A and B, can only be treated differently if and only if

there is a relevant difference between them. For example, it would be fine

for  me  to  give  a  better  grade  to  A  than  B  if  A  did  better  work  than  B.

However, it would be wrong of me to give A a better grade than B simply

because A has red hair and B has blonde hair.

There might be some cases in which the fact that most people accept X as

moral  entails  that  X  is  moral.  For  example,  one  view  of  morality  is  that

morality is relative to the practices of a culture, time, person, etc. If what is

moral is determined by what is commonly practiced, then this argument: 

  1) Most people do X.

  2) Therefore X is morally correct.

 

  would not be a fallacy. This would however entail some odd results. For

example, imagine that there are only 100 people on earth. 60 of them do

not steal or cheat and 40 do. At this time, stealing and cheating would be

wrong. The next day, a natural disaster kills 30 of the 60 people who do not

cheat or steal. Now it is morally correct to cheat and steal. Thus, it would be

possible to change the moral order of the world to one’s view simply by

eliminating those who disagree.

 

 

  Example #1:

  Director  Jones  is  in  charge  of  running  a  state  waste  management

program. When it is found that the program is rife with corruption, Jones

says “This program has its problems, but nothing goes on in this program

that doesn’t go on in all state programs.”

 

  Example #2:

  “Yeah, I know some people say that cheating on tests is wrong. But we

all know that everyone does it, so it’s okay.”

 

  Example #3:

  “Sure, some people buy into that equality crap. However, we know that

everyone pays women less then men. It’s okay, too. Since everyone does it,

it can’t really be wrong.”

 

  Example #4:

  “There is nothing wrong with requiring multicultural classes, even at the

expense of core subjects. After all, all of the universities and colleges are

pushing multiculturalism.”

 Appeal to Emotion


    Description:

An Appeal to Emotion is a fallacy with the following structure:

 

  1) Favorable emotions are associated with X.

  2) Therefore, X is true.

 

This fallacy is committed when someone manipulates peoples’ emotions in

order to get them to accept a claim as being true. More formally, this sort of

“reasoning” involves the substitution of various means of producing strong

emotions  in  place  of  evidence  for  a  claim.  If  the  favorable  emotions

associated with X influence the person to accept X as true because they “feel

good about X,” then he has fallen prey to the fallacy.

This sort of “reasoning” is very common in politics and it serves as the basis

for a large portion of modern advertising. Most political speeches are aimed

at generating feelings in people so that these feelings will get them to vote

or act a certain way. In the case of advertising, the commercials are aimed at

evoking emotions that will influence people to buy certain products. In most

cases, such speeches and commercials are notoriously free of real evidence.

This sort of “reasoning” is quite evidently fallacious. It is fallacious because

using various tactics to incite emotions in people does not serve as evidence

for a claim. For example, if a person were able to inspire in a person an

incredible hatred of the claim that 1+1 = 2 and then inspired the person to

love the claim that 1+1 =3, it would hardly follow that the claim that 1+1 = 3

would be adequately supported.

It should be noted that in many cases it is not particularly obvious that the

person committing the fallacy is attempting to support a claim. In many

cases, the user of the fallacy will appear to be attempting to move people to

take an action, such as buying a product or fighting in a war. However, it is

possible to determine what sort of claim the person is actually attempting to

support. In such cases one needs to ask “what sort of claim is this person

attempting to get people to accept and act on?” Determining this claim (or

claims)  might  take  some  work.  However,  in  many  cases  it  will  be  quiteevident.  For  example,  if  a  political  leader  is  attempting  to  convince  her

followers  to  participate  in  certain  acts  of  violence  by  the  use  of  a  hate

speech, then her claim would be “you should participate in these acts of

violence.” In this case, the “evidence” would be the hatred evoked in the

followers. This hatred would serve to make them favorable inclined towards

the  claim  that  they  should  engage  in  the  acts  of  violence.  As  another

example,  a  beer  commercial  might  show  happy,  scantily  clad  men  and

women prancing about a beach, guzzling beer. In this case the claim would

be “you should buy this beer.” The “evidence” would be the excitement

evoked by seeing the beautiful people guzzling the beer.

This fallacy is actually an extremely effective persuasive device. As many

people have argued, peoples’ emotions often carry much more force than

their reason. Logical argumentation is often difficult and time consuming

and it rarely has the power to spurn people to action. It is the power of this

fallacy that explains its great popularity and wide usage. However, it is still a

fallacy.

In all fairness it must be noted that the use of tactics to inspire emotions is

an  important  skill.  Without  an  appeal  to  peoples’  emotions,  it  is  often

difficult to get them to take action or to perform at their best. For example,

no  good  coach  presents  her  team  with  syllogisms  before  the  big  game.

Instead she inspires them with emotional terms and attempts to “fire” them

up.  There  is  nothing  inherently  wrong  with  this.  However,  it  is  not  any

acceptable  form  of  argumentation.  As  long  as  one  is  able  to  clearly

distinguish between what inspires emotions and what justifies a claim, one

is unlikely to fall prey to this fallacy.

As a final point, in many cases it will be difficult to distinguish an Appeal to

Emotion from some other fallacies and in many cases multiple fallacies may

be  committed.  For  example,  many  Ad Hominems  will  be  very  similar  to

Appeals to Emotion and, in some cases, both fallacies will be committed. As

an example, a leader might attempt to invoke hatred of a person to inspire

his followers to accept that they should reject her claims. The same attack

could function as an Appeal to Emotion and a Personal Attack. In the first

case, the attack would be aimed at making the followers feel very favorable

about rejecting her claims. In the second case, the attack would be aimed at

making the followers reject the person’s claims because of some perceived

(or imagined) defect in her character.This  fallacy  is  related  to  the  Appeal  to  Popularity  fallacy.  Despite  the

differences between these two fallacies, they are both united by the fact

that they involve appeals to emotions. In both cases the fallacies aim at

getting people to accept claims based on how they or others feel about the

claims and not based on evidence for the claims.

 

Another way to look at these two fallacies is as follows

 

  Appeal to Popularity

  1) Most people approve of X.

  2) So, I should approve of X, too.

  3) Since I approve of X, X must be true.

 

  Appeal to Emotion

  1) I approve of X.

  2) Therefore, X is true.

 

  On this view, in an Appeal to Popularity the claim is accepted because

most people approve of the claim. In the case of an Appeal to Emotion the

claim is accepted because the individual approves of the claim because of

the emotion of approval he feels in regards to the claim.

 

 

  Example #1:

  The new PowerTangerine computer gives you the power you need. If

you buy one, people will envy your power. They will look up to you and wish

they  were  just  like  you.  You  will  know  the  true  joy  of  power.

TangerinePower.

 

  Example #2:

  The new UltraSkinny diet will make you feel great. No longer be troubled

by your weight. Enjoy the admiring stares of the opposite sex. Revel in your

new freedom from fat. You will know true happiness if you try our diet!

 

  Example #3:

  Bill goes to hear a politician speak. The politician tells the crowd aboutthe evils of the government and the need to throw out the people who are

currently in office. After hearing the speech, Bill is full of hatred for the

current politicians. Because of this, he feels good about getting rid of the old

politicians and accepts that it is the right thing to do because of how he

feels.

 Appeal to Fear


  Also Known as: Scare Tactics, Appeal to Force, Ad Baculum

    Description:

The Appeal to Fear is a fallacy with the following pattern:

 

  1) Y is presented (a claim that is intended to produce fear).

  2) Therefore claim X is true (a claim that is generally, but need not be,

related to Y in some manner).

 

This line of “reasoning” is fallacious because creating fear in people does

not constitute evidence for a claim.

It is important to distinguish between a rational reason to believe (RRB)

(evidence) and a prudential reason to believe(PRB) (motivation). A RRB is

evidence that objectively and logically supports the claim. A PRB is a reason

to accept the belief because of some external factor (such as fear, a threat,

or a benefit or harm that may stem from the belief) that is relevant to what

a person values but is not relevant to the truth or falsity of the claim. For

example,  it  might  be  prudent  to  not  fail  the  son  of  your  department

chairperson because you fear he will make life tough for you. However, this

does not provide evidence for the claim that the son deserves to pass the

class.

 

  Example #1:

  You know, Professor Smith, I really need to get an A in this class. I’d like

to stop by during your office hours later to discuss my grade. I’ll be in your

building anyways, visting my father. He’s your dean, by the way. I’ll see you

later.

 

  Example #2:

  I don’t think a Red Ryder BB rifle would make a good present for you.

They are very dangerous and you’ll put your eye out. Now, don’t you agree

that you should think of another gift idea?

   Example #3:

  You must believe that God exists. After all, if you do not accept the

existence of God, then you will face the horrors of hell.

 

  Example #4:

  You shouldn’t say such things against multiculturalism! If the chair heard

what you were saying, you would never receive tenure. So, you had just

better learn to accept that it is simply wrong to speak out against it.

 Appeal to Flattery


  Also Known as: Apple Polishing, various “colorful” expressions

    Description:

  An Appeal to Flattery is a fallacy of the following form:

 

  1) Person A is flattered by person B.

  2) Person B makes claim X.

  3) Therefore X is true.

 

The basic idea behind this fallacy is that flattery is presented in the place of

evidence for accepting a claim. This sort of “reasoning” is fallacious because

flattery is not, in fact, evidence for a claim. This is especially clear in a case

like this: “My Bill, that is a really nice tie. By the way, it is quite clear that one

plus one is equal to forty three.

 

  Example #1:

  Might I say that this is the best philosophy class I’ve ever taken. By the

way, about those two points I need to get an A.

 

  Example #2:

  “That was a wonderful joke about AIDS boss, and I agree with you that

the damn liberals are wrecking the country. Now about my raise…”

 

  Example #3:

  That was a singularly brilliant idea. I have never seen such a clear and

eloquent defense of Plato’s position. If you do not mind, I’ll base my paper

on it. Provided that you allow me a little extra time past the deadline to

work on it.

 Appeal to Novelty


  Also Known as: Appeal to the New, Newer is Better, Novelty

    Description:

  Appeal  to  Novelty  is  a  fallacy  that  occurs  when  it  is  assumed  that

something  is  better  or  correct  simply  because  it  is  new.  This  sort  of

“reasoning” has the following form:

 

  1. X is new.

  2. Therefore X is correct or better.

 

This sort of “reasoning” is fallacious because the novelty or newness of

something does not automatically make it correct or better than something

older.  This  is  made  quite  obvious  by  the  following  example:  Joe  has

proposed  that  1+1  should  now  be  equal  to  3.  When  asked  why  people

should accept this, he says that he just came up with the idea. Since it is

newer than the idea that 1+1=2, it must be better.

This  sort  of  “reasoning”  is  appealing  for  many  reasons.  First,  “western

culture” includes a very powerful commitment to the notion that new things

must be better than old things. Second, the notion of progress (which seems

to have come, in part, from the notion of evolution) implies that newer

things will be superior to older things. Third, media advertising often sends

the message that newer must be better. Because of these three factors (and

others) people often accept that a new thing (idea, product, concept, etc.)

must be better because it is new. Hence, Novelty is a somewhat common

fallacy, especially in advertising.

It should not be assumed that old things must be better than new things

(see the fallacy Appeal to Tradition) any more than it should be assumed

that new things are better than old things. The age of a thing does not, in

general, have any bearing on its quality or correctness (in this context).

Obviously, age does have a bearing in some contexts. For example, if a

person concluded that his day old milk was better than his two-month old

milk, he would not be committing an Appeal to Novelty. This is because in

such  cases  the  newness  of  the  thing  is  relevant  to  its  quality.  Thus,  thefallacy is committed only when the newness is not, in and of itself, relevant

to the claim.

 

  Example #1:

  The Sadisike 900 pump-up glow shoe. It’s better because it’s new.

 

  Example #2:

  James: “So, what is this new plan?”

  Biff: “Well, the latest thing in marketing techniques is the GK method. It

is the latest thing out of the think tank. It is so new that the ink on the

reports is still drying.”

  James: “Well, our old marketing method has been quite effective. I don’t

like the idea of jumping to a new method without a good reason.”

  Biff: “Well, we know that we have to stay on the cutting edge. That

means new ideas and new techniques have to be used. The GK method is

new, so it will do better than that old, dusty method.”

 

  Example #3:

  Prof: “So you can see that a new and better morality is sweeping the

nation. No longer are people with alternative lifestyles ashamed. No longer

are people caught up in the outmoded moralities of the past.”

    Student: “Well, what about the ideas of the great thinkers of the past?

Don’t they have some valid points?”

  Prof: “A good question. The answer is that they had some valid points in

their own, barbaric times. But those are old, moldy moralities from a time

long  gone.  Now  is  a  time  for  new  moralities.  Progress  and  all  that,  you

know.”

    Student: “So would you say that the new moralities are better because

they are newer?”

  Prof:  “Exactly.  Just  as  the  dinosaurs  died  off  to  make  way  for  new

animals,  the  old  ideas  have  to  give  way  for  the  new  ones.  And  just  as

humans are better than dinosaurs, the new ideas are better than the old. So

newer is literally better.”

    Student: “I see.”

 Appeal to Pity


  Also Known as: Ad Misericordiam

    Description:

An Appeal to Pity is a fallacy in which a person substitutes a claim intended

to create pity for evidence in an argument. The form of the “argument” is as

follows:

 

  1. P is presented, with the intent to create pity.

  2. Therefore claim C is true.

 

This  line  of  “reasoning”  is  fallacious  because  pity  does  not  serve  as

evidence for a claim. This is extremely clear in the following case: “You must

accept that 1+1=46, after all I’m dying…” While you may pity me because I

am dying, it would hardly make my claim true.

This fallacy differs from the Appeal to the Consequences of a Belief (ACB).

In the ACB fallacy, a person is using the effects of a belief as a substitute for

evidence. In the Appeal to Pity, it is the feelings of pity or sympathy that are

substituted for evidence.

It must be noted that there are cases in which claims that actually serve as

evidence also evoke a feeling of pity. In such cases, the feeling of pity is still

not evidence. The following is an example of a case in which a claim evokes

pity and also serves as legitimate evidence:

 

  Professor: “You missed the midterm, Bill.”

  Bill: “I know. I think you should let me take the makeup.”

  Professor: “Why?”

  Bill: “I was hit by a truck on the way to the midterm. Since I had to go to

the emergency room with a broken leg, I think I am entitled to a makeup.”

  Professor: “I’m sorry about the leg, Bill. Of course you can make it up.”

 

  The above example does not involve a fallacy. While the professor does

feel sorry for Bill, she is justified in accepting Bill’s claim that he deserves a

makeup. After all getting run over by a truck would be a legitimate excusefor missing a test.

 

  Example #1:

  Jill: “He’d be a terrible coach for the team.”

  Bill: “He had his heart set on the job, and it would break if he didn’t get

it.”

  Jill: “I guess he’ll do an adequate job.”

 

  Example #2:

  “I’m positive that my work will meet your requirements. I really need the

job since my grandmother is sick”

 

  Example #3:

  “I should receive an ‘A’ in this class. After all, if I don’t get an ‘A’ I won’t

get the fellowship that I want.”

 Appeal to Popularity


    Description:

The Appeal to Popularity has the following form:

 

  1) Most people approve of X (have favorable emotions towards X).

  2) Therefore X is true.

 

The basic idea is that a claim is accepted as being true simply because most

people are favorably inclined towards the claim. More formally, the fact that

most  people  have  favorable  emotions  associated  with  the  claim  is

substituted in place of actual evidence for the claim. A person falls prey to

this fallacy if he accepts a claim as being true simply because most other

people approve of the claim.

It is clearly fallacious to accept the approval of the majority as evidence for

a claim. For example, suppose that a skilled speaker managed to get most

people to absolutely love the claim that 1+1=3. It would still not be rational

to accept this claim simply because most people approved of it. After all,

mere approval is no substitute for a mathematical proof. At one time people

approved of claims such as “the world is flat”, “humans cannot survive at

speeds greater than 25 miles per hour”, “the sun revolves around the earth”

but all these claims turned out to be false.

This sort of “reasoning” is quite common and can be quite an effective

persuasive device. Since most humans tend to conform with the views of the

majority, convincing a person that the majority approves of a claim is often

an effective way to get him to accept it. Advertisers often use this tactic

when they attempt to sell products by claiming that everyone uses and loves

their  products.  In  such  cases  they  hope  that  people  will  accept  the

(purported) approval of others as a good reason to buy the product.

This  fallacy  is  vaguely  similar  to  such  fallacies  as  Appeal  to  Belief  and

Appeal to Common Practice. However, in the case of an Ad Populum the

appeal is to the fact that most people approve of a claim. In the case of an

Appeal to Belief, the appeal is to the fact that most people believe a claim.

In the case of an Appeal to Common Practice, the appeal is to the fact thatmany people take the action in question.

This fallacy is closely related to the Appeal to Emotion fallacy, as discussed

in the entry for that fallacy.

 

  Example #1:

  My fellow Americans…there has been some talk that the government is

overstepping its bounds by allowing police to enter people’s homes without

the warrants traditionally required by the Constitution. However, these are

dangerous times and dangerous times require appropriate actions. I have in

my  office  thousands  of  letters  from  people  who  let  me  know,  in  no

uncertain  terms,  that  they  heartily  endorse  the  war  against  terrorism  in

these United States. Because of this overwhelming approval, it is evident

that the police are doing the right thing.

 

  Example #2:

  I read the other day that most people really like the new gun control

laws. I was sort of suspicious of them, but I guess if most people like them,

then they must be okay.

 

  Example #3:

  Jill and Jane have some concerns that the rules their sorority has set are

racist in character. Since Jill is a decent person, she brings her concerns up in

the next meeting. The president of the sorority assures her that there is

nothing wrong with the rules, since the majority of the sisters like them.

Jane accepts this ruling but Jill decides to leave the sorority.

 Appeal to Ridicule


  Also Known as: Appeal to Mockery, The Horse Laugh.

    Description:

  The  Appeal  to  Ridicule  is  a  fallacy  in  which  ridicule  or  mockery  is

substituted for evidence in an “argument.” This line of “reasoning” has the

following form:

  1. X, which is some form of ridicule is presented (typically directed at the

claim).

  2. Therefore claim C is false.

 

This sort of “reasoning” is fallacious because mocking a claim does not

show that it is false. This is especially clear in the following example: “1+1=2!

That’s the most ridiculous thing I have ever heard!”

It should be noted that showing that a claim is ridiculous through the use

of  legitimate  methods  (such  as  a  non  fallacious  argument)  can  make  it

reasonable to reject the claim. One form of this line of reasoning is known as

a “reductio ad absurdum” (“reducing to absurdity”). In this sort of argument,

the idea is to show that a contradiction (a statement that must be false) or

an  absurd  result  follows  from  a  claim.  For  example:  “Bill  claims  that  a

member of a minority group cannot be a racist. However, this is absurd.

Think about this: white males are a minority in the world. Given Bill’s claim,

it would follow that no white males could be racists. Hence, the Klan, Nazis,

and white supremacists are not racist organizations.”

Since the claim that the Klan, Nazis, and white supremacists are not racist

organizations is clearly absurd, it can be concluded that the claim that a

member of a minority cannot be a racist is false.

 

    Example#1:

  “Sure my worthy opponent claims that we should lower tuition, but that

is just laughable.”

 

    Example#2:

  “Equal rights for women? Yeah, I’ll support that when they start payingfor dinner and taking out the trash! Hah hah! Fetch me another brewski,

Mildred.”

 

    Example#3:

  “Those crazy conservatives! They think a strong military is the key to

peace! Such fools!”Appeal to Spite


    Description:

The Appeal to Spite Fallacy is a fallacy in which spite is substituted for

evidence  when  an  “argument”  is  made  against  a  claim.  This  line  of

“reasoning” has the following form:

  1. Claim X is presented with the intent of generating spite.

  2. Therefore claim C is false (or true)

 

This sort of “reasoning” is fallacious because a feeling of spite does not

count as evidence for or against a claim. This is quite clear in the following

case: “Bill claims that the earth revolves around the sun. But remember that

dirty trick he pulled on you last week. Now, doesn’t my claim that the sun

revolves around the earth make sense to you?”

Of course, there are cases in which a claim that evokes a feeling of spite or

malice can serve as legitimate evidence. However, it should be noted that

the actual feelings of malice or spite are not evidence. The following is an

example of such a situation:

 

  Jill: “I think I’ll vote for Jane to be treasurer of NOW.”

  Vicki: “Remember the time that your purse vanished at a meeting last

year?”

  Jill: “Yes.”

  Vicki:  “Well, I just found out that she stole your purse and stole some

other stuff from people.”

  Jill: “I’m not voting for her!”

 

  In this case, Jill has a good reason not to vote for Jane. Since a treasurer

should  be  honest,  a  known  thief  would  be  a  bad  choice.  As  long  as  Jill

concludes that she should vote against Jane because she is a thief and not

just out of spite, her reasoning would not be fallacious.

 

 

  Example #1:  Bill: “I think that Jane did a great job this year. I’m going to nominate her

for the award.”

  Dave:  “Have  you  forgotten  last  year?  Remember  that  she  didn’t

nominate you last year.”

  Bill: “You’re right. I’m not going to nominate her.”

 

  Example #2:

  Jill: “I think Jane’s idea is a really good one and will really save a lot of

money for the department.”

  Bill: “Maybe. Remember how she showed that your paper had a fatal

flaw when you read it at the convention last year…”

  Jill: “I had just about forgotten about that! I think I’ll go with your idea

instead.”

 Appeal to Tradition


  Also Known as: Appeal to the Old, Old Ways are Best, Fallacious Appeal

to the Past, Appeal to Age

    Description:

Appeal  to  Tradition  is  a  fallacy  that occurs  when  it  is  assumed  that

something  is  better  or  correct  simply  because  it  is  older,  traditional,  or

“always has been done.” This sort of “reasoning” has the following form:

 

  1. X is old or traditional

  2. Therefore X is correct or better.

 

This sort of “reasoning” is fallacious because the age of something does

not automatically make it correct or better than something newer. This is

made quite obvious by the following example: The theory that witches and

demons cause disease is far older than the theory that microorganism cause

diseases. Therefore, the theory about witches and demons must be true.

This sort of “reasoning” is appealing for a variety of reasons. First, people

often prefer to stick with what is older or traditional. This is a fairly common

psychological characteristic of people which may stem from the fact that

people feel more comfortable about what has been around longer. Second,

sticking with things that are older or traditional is often easier than testing

new things. Hence, people often prefer older and traditional things out of

laziness. Hence, Appeal to Tradition is a somewhat common fallacy.

It should not be assumed that new things must be better than old things

(see the fallacy Appeal to Novelty) any more than it should be assumed that

old things are better than new things. The age of thing does not, in general,

have any bearing on its quality or correctness (in this context). In the case of

tradition, assuming that something is correct just because it is considered a

tradition is poor reasoning. For example, if the belief that 1+1 = 56 were a

tradition of a group of people it would hardly follow that it is true.

Obviously, age does have a bearing in some contexts. For example, if a

person concluded that aged wine would be better than brand new wine, he

would not be committing an Appeal to Tradition. This is because, in suchcases  the  age  of  the  thing  is  relevant  to  its  quality.  Thus,  the  fallacy  is

committed only when the age is not, in and of itself, relevant to the claim.

One final issue that must be considered is the “test of time.” In some cases

people might be assuming that because something has lasted as a tradition

or has been around a long time that it is true because it has “passed the test

of time.” If a person assumes that something must be correct or true simply

because it has persisted a long time, then he has committed an Appeal to

Tradition. After all, as history has shown people can persist in accepting false

claims for centuries.

However,  if  a  person  argues  that  the  claim  or  thing  in  question  has

successfully stood up to challenges and tests for a long period of time then

they would not be committing a fallacy. In such cases the claim would be

backed  by  evidence.  As  an  example,  the  theory  that  matter  is  made  of

subatomic particles has survived numerous tests and challenges over the

years so there is a weight of evidence in its favor. The claim is reasonable to

accept because of the weight of this evidence and not because the claim is

old. Thus, a claim’s surviving legitimate challenges and passing valid tests for

a long period of time can justify the acceptance of a claim. But mere age or

persistence does not warrant accepting a claim.

 

 

  Example #1:

  Sure I believe in God. People have believed in God for thousands of years

so it seems clear that God must exist. After all, why else would the belief last

so long?

 

  Example #2:

    Gunthar is the father of Connan. They live on a small island and in their

culture women are treated as property to be exchanged at will by men.

 

  Connan: “You know father, when I was going to school in the United

States I saw that American women are not treated as property. In fact, I read

a book by this person named Mill in which he argued for women’s rights.”

  Gunthar: “So, what is your point son?”

  Connan: “Well, I think that it might be wrong to trade my sisters for

cattle. They are human beings and should have a right to be masters of theirown fate.”

  Gunthar:  “What  a  strange  and  new-fangled  notion  you  picked  up  in

America. That country must be even more barbaric then I imagined. Now

think about this son. We have been trading women for cattle for as long as

our people have lived on this island. It is a tradition that goes back into the

mists of time. “

  Connan: “But I still think there is something wrong with it.”

  Gunthar: “Nonsense my boy. A tradition this old must be endorsed by

the gods and must be right. “

 

  Example #3:

  Of  course  this  mode  of  government  is  the  best.  We  have  had  this

government for over 200 years and no one has talked about changing it in all

that time. So, it has got to be good.

 

  Example #4:

  A reporter is interviewing the head of a family that has been involved

with a feud with another family.

 

    Reporter:  “Mr.  Hatfield,  why  are  you  still  fighting  it  out  with  the

McCoys?”

    Hatfield: “Well you see young man, my father feuded with the McCoys

and his father feuded with them and so did my great grandfather.”

    Reporter: “But why? What started all this?”

    Hatfield: “I don’t rightly know. I’m sure it was the McCoys who started it

all, though.”

    Reporter: “If you don’t know why you’re fighting, why don’t you just

stop?”

    Hatfield: “Stop? What are you crazy? This feud has been going on for

generations so I’m sure there is a darn good reason why it started. So I aim

to keep it going. It has got to be the right thing to do. Hand me my shooting

iron boy, I see one of those McCoy skunks sneaking in the cornfield.”

 Begging the Question


  Also Known as: Circular Reasoning, Reasoning in a Circle, Petitio Principii

    Description:

Begging the Question is a fallacy in which the premises include the claim

that  the  conclusion  is  true  or  (directly  or  indirectly)  assume  that  the

conclusion is true. This sort of “reasoning” typically has the following form.

 

  1. Premises in which the truth of the conclusion is claimed or the truth of

the conclusion is assumed (either directly or indirectly).

  2. Claim C (the conclusion) is true.

 

This  sort  of  “reasoning”  is  fallacious  because  simply  assuming  that  the

conclusion is true (directly or indirectly) in the premises does not constitute

evidence for that conclusion. Obviously, simply assuming a claim is true does

not serve as evidence for that claim. This is especially clear in particularly

blatant cases: “X is true. The evidence for this claim is that X is true.”

 

  Some cases of question begging are fairly blatant, while others can be

extremely subtle.

 

  Example #1:

  Bill: “God must exist.”

  Jill: “How do you know.”

  Bill: “Because the Bible says so.”

  Jill: “Why should I believe the Bible?”

  Bill: “Because the Bible was written by God.”

 

  Example #2:

  “If such actions were not illegal , then they would not be prohibited by

the law.”

 

  Example #3:

  “The belief in God is universal. After all, everyone believes in God.” 

  Example #4:

    Interviewer:  “Your  resume  looks  impressive  but  I  need  another

reference.”

  Bill: “Jill can give me a good reference.”

    Interviewer: “Good. But how do I know that Jill is trustworthy?”

  Bill: “Certainly. I can vouch for her.”

 Biased Generalization


  Also Known as: Biased Statistics, Loaded Sample, Prejudiced Statistics,

Prejudiced  Sample,  Loaded  Statistics,  Biased  Induction,  Biased

Generalization

    Description:

This  fallacy  is  committed  when  a  person  draws  a  conclusion  about  a

population based on a sample that is biased or prejudiced in some manner.

It has the following form:

 

  1. Sample S, which is biased, is taken from population P.

  2. Conclusion C is drawn about Population P based on S.

 

The  person  committing  the  fallacy  is  misusing  the  following  type  of

reasoning,  which  is  known  variously  as  Inductive  Generalization,

Generalization, and Statistical Generalization:

 

  1. X% of all observed A’s are B’s.

  2. Therefore X% of all A’s are B’s.

 

The fallacy is committed when the sample of A’s is likely to be biased in

some manner. A sample is biased or loaded when the method used to take

the sample is likely to result in a sample that does not adequately represent

the population from which it is drawn.

 

Biased samples are generally not very reliable. As a blatant case, imagine

that a person is taking a sample from a truckload of small colored balls,

some of which are metal and some of which are plastic. If he used a magnet

to  select  his  sample,  then  his  sample  would  include  a  disproportionate

number  of  metal  balls  (after  all,  the  sample  will  probably  be  made  up

entirely  of  the  metal  balls).  In  this  case,  any  conclusions  he  might  draw

about the whole population of balls would be unreliable since he would

have few or no plastic balls in the sample.

 The general idea is that biased samples are less likely to contain numbers

proportional to the whole population. For example, if a person wants to find

out what most Americans thought about gun control, a poll taken at an NRA

meeting would be a biased sample.

Since  the  Biased  Sample  fallacy  is  committed  when  the  sample  (the

observed instances) is biased or loaded, it is important to have samples that

are not biased making a generalization. The best way to do this is to take

samples  in  ways  that  avoid  bias.  There  are,  in  general,  three  types  of

samples  that  are  aimed  at  avoiding  bias.  The  general  idea  is  that  these

methods  (when  used  properly)  will  result  in  a  sample  that  matches  the

whole population fairly closely. The three types of samples are as follows

Random Sample: This is a sample that is taken in such a way that nothing

but chance determines which members of the population are selected for

the sample. Ideally, any individual member of the population has the same

chance as being selected as any other. This type of sample avoids being

biased because a biased sample is one that is taken in such a way that some

members  of  the  population  have  a  significantly  greater  chance  of  being

selected for the sample than other members. Unfortunately, creating an

ideal random sample is often very difficult.

 

    Stratified Sample: This is a sample that is taken by using the following

steps: 1) The relevant strata (population subgroups) are identified, 2) The

number of members in each stratum is determined and 3) A random sample

is taken from each stratum in exact proportion to its size. This method is

obviously  most  useful  when  dealing  with  stratified  populations.  For

example,  a  person’s  income  often  influences  how  she  votes,  so  when

conducting a presidential poll it would be a good idea to take a stratified

sample using economic classes as the basis for determining the strata. This

method avoids loaded samples by (ideally) ensuring that each stratum of the

population is adequately represented.

 

  Time Lapse Sample: This type of sample is taken by taking a stratified or

random sample and then taking at least one more sample with a significant

lapse of time between them. After the two samples are taken, they can be

compared for changes. This method of sample taking is very important when

making predictions. A prediction based on only one sample is likely to be aHasty Generalization (because the sample is likely to be too small to cover

past,  present  and  future  populations)  or  a  Biased  Sample  (because  the

sample will only include instances from one time period).

 

People  often  commit  Biased  Sample  because  of  bias  or  prejudice.  For

example, a person might intentionally or unintentionally seek out people or

events  that  support  his  bias.  As  an  example,  a  person  who  is  pushing  a

particular scientific theory might tend to gather samples that are biased in

favor of that theory.

People also commonly commit this fallacy because of laziness or sloppiness.

It  is  very  easy  to  simply  take  a  sample  from  what  happens  to  be  easily

available rather than taking the time and effort to generate an adequate

sample and draw a justified conclusion.

It is important to keep in mind that bias is relative to the purpose of the

sample. For example, if Bill wanted to know what NRA members thought

about a gun control law, then taking a sample at a NRA meeting would not

be biased. However, if Bill wanted to determine what Americans in general

thought about the law, then a sample taken at an NRA meeting would be

biased.

 

  Example #1:

  Bill is assigned by his editor to determine what most Americans think

about a new law that will place a federal tax on all modems and computers

purchased. The revenues from the tax will be used to enforce new online

decency laws. Bill, being technically inclined, decides to use an email poll. In

his poll, 95% of those surveyed opposed the tax. Bill was quite surprised

when 65% of all Americans voted for the taxes.

 

  Example #2:

  The United Pacifists of America decide to run a poll to determine what

Americans think about guns and gun control. Jane is assigned the task of

setting up the study. To save mailing costs, she includes the survey form in

the group’s newsletter mailing. She is very pleased to find out that 95% of

those surveyed favor gun control laws and she tells her friends that the vast

majority of Americans favor gun control laws.

   Example #3:

  Large scale polls were taken in Florida, California, and Maine and it was

found that an average of 55% of those polled spent at least fourteen days a

year near the ocean. So, it can be safely concluded that 55% of all Americans

spend at least fourteen days near the ocean each year.

 Burden of Proof


  Also Known As: Appeal to Ignorance (“Ad Ignorantiam’)

    Description:

Burden of Proof is a fallacy in which the burden of proof is placed on the

wrong side. Another version occurs when a lack of evidence for side A is

taken to be evidence for side B in cases in which the burden of proof actually

rests on side B. A common name for this is an Appeal to Ignorance. This sort

of reasoning typically has the following form:

 

  1. Claim X is presented by side A and the burden of proof actually rests

on side B.

  2. Side B claims that X is false because there is no proof for X.

 

In many situations, one side has the burden of proof resting on it. This side

is obligated to provide evidence for its position. The claim of the other side,

the one that does not bear the burden of proof, is assumed to be true unless

proven otherwise. The difficulty in such cases is determining which side, if

any, the burden of proof rests on. In many cases, settling this issue can be a

matter of significant debate. In some cases the burden of proof is set by the

situation. For example, in American law a person is assumed to be innocent

until proven guilty (hence the burden of proof is on the prosecution). As

another example, in debate the burden of proof is placed on the affirmative

team. As a final example, in most cases the burden of proof rests on those

who claim something exists (such as Bigfoot, psychic powers, universals, and

sense data).

 

 

  Example #1:

  Bill:  “I  think  that  we  should  invest  more  money  in  expanding  the

interstate system.”

  Jill:  “I  think  that  would  be  a  bad  idea,  considering  the  state  of  the

treasury.”

  Bill: How can anyone be against highway improvements?” 

  Example #2:

  Bill: “I think that some people have psychic powers.”

  Jill: “What is your proof?”

  Bill: “No one has been able to prove that people do not have psychic

powers.”

 

  Example #3:

  “You cannot prove that God does not exist, so He does.”

 Circumstantial Ad Hominem


    Description:

A Circumstantial ad Hominem is a fallacy in which one attempts to attack a

claim by asserting that the person making the claim is making it simply out

of self interest. In some cases, this fallacy involves substituting an attack on

a person’s circumstances (such as the person’s religion, political affiliation,

ethnic background, etc.). The fallacy has the following forms:

 

  1. Person A makes claim X.

  2. Person B asserts that A makes claim X because it is in A’s interest to

claim X.

  3. Therefore claim X is false.

 

  1. Person A makes claim X.

  2. Person B makes an attack on A’s circumstances.

  3. Therefore X is false.

 

A Circumstantial ad Hominem is a fallacy because a person’s interests and

circumstances have no bearing on the truth or falsity of the claim being

made. While a person’s interests will provide them with motives to support

certain claims, the claims stand or fall on their own. It is also the case that a

person’s circumstances (religion, political affiliation, etc.) do not affect the

truth  or  falsity  of  the  claim.  This  is  made  quite  clear  by  the  following

example: “Bill claims that 1+1 =2. But he is a Republican, so his claim is

false.”

There are times when it is prudent to suspicious of a person’s claims, such

as  when  it  is  evident  that  the  claims  are  being  biased  by  the  person’s

interests.  For  example,  if  a  tobacco  company  representative  claims  that

tobacco does not cause cancer, it would be prudent to not simply accept the

claim.  This  is  because  the  person  has  a  motivation  to  make  the  claim,

whether it is true or not. However, the mere fact that the person has a

motivation to make the claim does not make it false. For example, suppose a

parent tells her son that sticking a fork in a light socket would be dangerous.Simply because she has a motivation to say this obviously does not make her

claim false.

 

  Example #1:

  “She asserts that we need more military spending, but that is false, since

she is only saying it because she is a Republican.”

 

  Example #2:

  “I think that we should reject what Father Jones has to say about the

ethical issues of abortion because he is a Catholic priest. After all, Father

Jones is required to hold such views.”

 

  Example #3:

  “Of  course  the  Senator  from Maine  opposes  a  reduction  in  naval

spending. After all, Bath Ironworks, which produces warships, is in Maine.”

 

  Example #4:

  “Bill claims that tax breaks for corporations increases development. Of

course, Bill is the CEO of a corporation.”

 Fallacy of Composition


    Description:

The fallacy of Composition is committed when a conclusion is drawn about

a  whole  based  on  the  features  of  its  constituents  when,  in  fact,  no

justification provided for the inference. There are actually two types of this

fallacy, both of which are known by the same name (because of the high

degree of similarity).

The first type of fallacy of Composition arises when a person reasons from

the characteristics of individual members of a class or group to a conclusion

regarding the characteristics of the entire class or group (taken as a whole).

More formally, the “reasoning” would look something like this.

 

  1. Individual F things have characteristics A, B, C, etc.

  2. Therefore, the (whole) class of F things has characteristics A, B, C, etc.

 

This line of reasoning is fallacious because the mere fact that individuals

have  certain  characteristics  does  not,  in  itself,  guarantee  that  the  class

(taken as a whole) has those characteristics.

It is important to note that drawing an inference about the characteristics

of a class based on the characteristics of its individual members is not always

fallacious. In some cases, sufficient justification can be provided to warrant

the conclusion. For example, it is true that an individual rich person has

more wealth than an individual poor person. In some nations (such as the

US) it is true that the class of wealthy people has more wealth as a whole

than does the class of poor people. In this case, the evidence used would

warrant  the  inference  and  the  fallacy  of  Composition  would  not  be

committed.

The  second  type  of  fallacy  of  Composition  is  committed  when  it  is

concluded that what is true of the parts of a whole must be true of the

whole  without  there  being  adequate  justification  for  the  claim.  More

formally, the line of “reasoning” would be as follows:

 

  1. The parts of the whole X have characteristics A, B, C, etc.  2. Therefore the whole X must have characteristics A, B, C.

 

This sort of reasoning is fallacious because it cannot be inferred that simply

because the parts of a complex whole have (or lack) certain properties that

the whole that they are parts of has those properties. This is especially clear

in  math:  The  numbers  1  and  3  are  both  odd.  1  and  3  are  parts  of  4.

Therefore, the number 4 is odd.

It must be noted that reasoning from the properties of the parts to the

properties of the whole is not always fallacious. If there is justification for

the inference from parts to whole, then the reasoning is not fallacious. For

example, if every part of the human body is made of matter, then it would

not be an error in reasoning to conclude that the whole human body is

made of matter. Similarly, if every part of a structure is made of brick, there

is no fallacy committed when one concludes that the whole structure is

made of brick.

 

  Example #1:

  A main battle tank uses more fuel than a car. Therefore, the main battle

tanks use up more of the available fuel in the world than do all the cars.

 

  Example #2:

  A tiger eats more food than a human being. Therefore, tigers, as a group,

eat more food than do all the humans on the earth.

 

  Example #3:

  Atoms are colorless. Cats are made of atoms, so cats are colorless.

 

  Example #4:

  Every player on the team is a superstar and a great player, so the team is

a great team.” This is fallacious since the superstars might not be able to

play together very well and hence they could be a lousy team.

 

  Example #5:

  Each  part  of  the  show,  from  the  special  effects  to  the  acting  is  a

masterpiece. So, the whole show is a masterpiece.” This is fallacious since a

show could have great acting, great special effects and such, yet still fail to“come together” to make a masterpiece.

 

  Example #6:

  Come on, you like beef, potatoes, and green beans, so you will like this

beef,  potato,  and  green  been  casserole.”  This  is  fallacious  for  the  same

reason that the following is fallacious: “You like eggs, ice cream, pizza, cake,

fish, jello, chicken, taco sauce, soda, oranges, milk, egg rolls, and yogurt so

you must like this yummy dish made out of all of them.

 

  Example #7:

  Sodium  and  chlorine  are  both  dangerous  to  humans.  Therefore  any

combination of sodium and chlorine will be dangerous to humans.

 Confusuing Cause and Effect


  Also Known as: Questionable Cause, Reversing Causation

    Description:

Confusing Cause and Effect is a fallacy that has the following general form:

 

  1) A and B regularly occur together.

  2) Therefore A is the cause of B.

 

This  fallacy  requires  that  there  not  be,  in  fact,  a  common  cause  that

actually causes both A and B.

This fallacy is committed when a person assumes that one event must

cause another just because the events occur together. More formally, this

fallacy  involves  drawing  the  conclusion  that  A  is  the  cause  of  B  simply

because A and B are in regular conjunction (and there is not a common

cause that is actually the cause of A and B). The mistake being made is that

the causal conclusion is being drawn without adequate justification.

In some cases it will be evident that the fallacy is being committed. For

example, a person might claim that an illness was caused by a person getting

a fever. In this case, it would be quite clear that the fever was caused by

illness and not the other way around. In other cases, the fallacy is not always

evident. One factor that makes causal reasoning quite difficult is that it is

not always evident what is the cause and what is the effect. For example, a

problem child might be the cause of the parents being short tempered or

the  short  temper  of  the  parents  might  be  the  cause  of  the  child  being

problematic.  The  difficulty  is  increased  by  the  fact  that  some  situations

might involve feedback. For example, the parents’ temper might cause the

child  to  become  problematic  and  the  child’s  behavior  could  worsen  the

parents’ temper. In such cases it could be rather difficult to sort out what

caused what in the first place.

In order to determine that the fallacy has been committed, it must be

shown that the causal conclusion has not been adequately supported and

that the person committing the fallacy has confused the actual cause with

the effect. Showing that the fallacy has been committed will typically involvedetermining the actual cause and the actual effect. In some cases, as noted

above, this can be quite easy. In other cases it will be difficult. In some cases,

it might be almost impossible. Another thing that makes causal reasoning

difficult is that people often have very different conceptions of cause and, in

some cases,  the  issues  are  clouded  by  emotions  and  ideologies.  For

example, people often claim violence on TV and in movies must be censored

because it causes people to like violence. Other people claim that there is

violence on TV and in movies because people like violence. In this case, it is

not obvious what the cause really is and the issue is clouded by the fact that

emotions often run high on this issue.

While causal reasoning can be difficult, many errors can be avoided with

due care and careful testing procedures. This is due to the fact that the

fallacy arises because the conclusion is drawn without due care. One way to

avoid the fallacy is to pay careful attention to the temporal sequence of

events. Since (outside of Star Trek), effects do not generally precede their

causes, if A occurs after B, then A cannot be the cause of B. However, these

methods go beyond the scope of this program.

All  causal  fallacies  involve  an  error  in  causal  reasoning.  However,  this

fallacy  differs  from  the  other  causal  fallacies  in  terms  of  the  error  in

reasoning being made. In the case of a Post Hoc fallacy, the error is that a

person is accepting that A is the cause of B simply because A occurs before

B. In the case of the Fallacy of Ignoring a Common Cause A is taken to be the

cause of B when there is, in fact, a third factor that is the cause of both A

and B. For more information, see the relevant entries in this program.

 

  Example #1:

  Bill and Joe are having a debate about music and moral decay:

  Bill: ‘”It seems clear to me that this new music is causing the youth to

become corrupt.”

  Joe: ‘What do you mean?”

  Bill: “This rap stuff is always telling the kids to kill cops, do drugs, and

abuse women. That is all bad and the kids today shouldn’t be doing that sort

of stuff. We ought to ban that music!”

  Joe: “So, you think that getting rid of the rap music would solve the drug,

violence and sexism problems in the US?”

  Bill: “Well, it wouldn’t get rid of it all, but it would take care of a lot of it.”  Joe: “Don’t you think that most of the rap singers sing about that sort of

stuff because that is what is really going on these days? I mean, people often

sing about the conditions of their time, just like the people did in the sixties.

But then I suppose that you think that people were against the war and into

drugs just because they listened to Dylan and Baez.”

  Bill: “Well…”

  Joe: “Well, it seems to me that the main cause of the content of the rap

music  is  the  pre-existing  social  conditions.  If  there  weren’t  all  these

problems, the rap singers probably wouldn’t be singing about them. I also

think that if the social conditions were great, kids could listen to the music

all day and not be affected.”

  Joe:  ‘Well,  I  still  think  the  rap  music  causes  the  problems.  You  can’t

argue against the fact that social ills really picked up at the same time rap

music got started.”

 

  Example #2:

  It is claimed by some people that severe illness is caused by depression

and anger. After all, people who are severely ill are very often depressed

and angry. Thus, it follows that the cause of severe illness actually is the

depression and anger. So, a good and cheerful attitude is key to staying

healthy.

 

  Example #3:

  Bill sets out several plates with bread on them. After a couple days, he

notices that the bread has mold growing all over it. Bill concludes that the

mold was produced by the bread going bad. When Bill tells his mother about

his experiment, she tells him that the mold was the cause of the bread going

bad and that he better clean up the mess if he wants to get his allowance

this week.

 Fallacy of Division


    Description:

The fallacy of Division is committed when a person infers that what is true

of a whole must also be true of its constituents and justification for that

inference is not provided. There are two main variants of the general fallacy

of Division:

The first type of fallacy of Division is committed when 1) a person reasons

that what is true of the whole must also be true of the parts and 2) the

person fails to justify that inference with the required degree of evidence.

More formally, the “reasoning” follows this sort of pattern:

 

  1. The whole, X, has properties A, B, C, etc.

  2. Therefore the parts of X have properties A,B,C, etc.

 

That this line of reasoning is fallacious is made clear by the following case:

4 is an even number. 1 and 3 are parts of 4. Therefore 1 and 3 are even.

It should be noted that it is not always fallacious to draw a conclusion

about the parts of a whole based on the properties of the whole. As long as

adequate  evidence  is  provided  in  the  argument,  the  reasoning  can  be

acceptable. For example, the human body is made out of matter and it is

reasonable to infer from this that the parts that make up the human body

are also made out of matter. This is because there is no reason to believe

that the body is made up of non-material parts that somehow form matter

when they get together.

The second version of the fallacy of division is committed when a person 1)

draws a conclusion about the properties of individual members of a class or

group based on the collective properties of the class or group and 2) there is

not  enough  justification  for  the  conclusion.  More  formally,  the  line  of

“reasoning” is as follows:

 

  1. As a collective, group or class X has properties A,B,C, etc.

  2. Therefore the individual members of group or class X have properties

A,B,C, etc. 

That  this  sort  of  reasoning  is  fallacious  can  be  easily  shown  by  the

following: It is true that athletes, taken as a group, are football players, track

runners, swimmers, tennis players, long jumpers, pole vaulters and such. But

it would be fallacious to infer that each individual athlete is a football player,

a track runner, a swimmer, a tennis player , a swimmer, etc.

It should be noted that it is not always fallacious to draw a conclusion

about an individual based on what is true of the class he/she/it belongs to. If

the inference is backed by evidence, then the reasoning can be fine. For

example, it is not fallacious to infer that Bill the Siamese cat is a mammal

from the fact that all cats are mammals. In this case, what is true of the class

is also true of each individual member.

 

  Example #1:

  “The ball is blue, therefore the atoms that make it up are also blue.”

 

  Example #2:

  “A living cell is organic material, so the chemicals making up the cell

must also be organic material.”

 

  Example #3:

  “Bill lives in a large building, so his apartment must be large.”

 

  Example #4:

    “Sodium  chloride  (table  salt)  may  be  safely  eaten.  Therefore  its

constituent elements, sodium and chlorine, may be safely eaten.”

 

  Example #5:

    “Americans use much more electricity than Africans do. So Bill, who lives

in primitive cabin in Maine, uses more electricity than Nelson, who lives in a

modern house in South Africa. “

 

  Example #6:

  “Men receive more higher education than women. Therefore Dr. Jane

Smart has less higher education than Mr. Bill Buffoon. “

   Example #7:

    “Minorities get paid less than whites in America. Therefore, the black

CEO of a multi-billion dollar company gets paid less than the white janitor

who cleans his office.”

 False Dilemma


  Also Known as: Black & White Thinking

    Description:

A False Dilemma is a fallacy in which a person uses the following pattern of

“reasoning”:

 

  1. Either claim X is true or claim Y is true (when X and Y could both be

false).

  2. Claim Y is false.

  3. Therefore claim X is true.

 

This line of “reasoning” is fallacious because if both claims could be false,

then it cannot be inferred that one is true because the other is false. That

this is the case is made clear by the following example:

 

  1. Either 1+1 =4 or 1+1=12 .

  2. It is not the case that 1+1 = 4.

  3. Therefore 1+1 =12.

 

In cases in which the two options are, in fact, the only two options, this line

of reasoning is not fallacious. For example:

 

  1. Bill is dead or he is alive.

  2. Bill is not dead.

  3. Therefore Bill is alive.

 

 

  Example #1:

  Senator Jill: “We’ll have to cut education funding this year.”

  Senator Bill” “Why?”

  Senator Jill: “Well, either we cut the social programs of we live with a

huge deficit and we can’t live with the deficit.”

   Example #2:

  Bill: “Jill and I both support having prayer in public schools.”

  Jill: “Hey, I never said that!”

  Bill: “You’re not an atheist are you Jill?

 

  Example #3:

  “Look, you are going to have to make up your mind. Either you decide

that you can afford this stereo, or you decide you are going to do without

music for a while.”

 Gambler’s Fallacy


    Description:

The  Gambler’s  Fallacy  is  committed  when  a  person  assumes  that  a

departure from what occurs on average or in the long term will be corrected

in the short term. The form of the fallacy is as follows:

 

  1. X has happened.

  2. X departs from what is expected to occur on average or over the long

term.

  3. Therefore, X will come to an end soon.

 

There are two common ways this fallacy is committed. In both cases a

person is assuming that some result must be “due” simply because what has

previously happened departs from what would be expected on average or

over the long term.

The first involves events whose probabilities of occurring are independent

of one another. For example, one toss of a fair (two sides, non-loaded) coin

does not affect the next toss of the coin. So, each time the coin is tossed

there is (ideally) a 50% chance of it landing heads and a 50% chance of it

landing tails. Suppose that a person tosses a coin 6 times and gets a head

each time. If he concludes that the next toss will be tails because tails “is

due”, then he will have committed the Gambler’s Fallacy. This is because the

results of previous tosses have no bearing on the outcome of the 7th toss. It

has a 50% chance of being heads and a 50% chance of being tails, just like

any other toss.

The  second  involves  cases  whose  probabilities  of  occurring  are  not

independent of one another. For example, suppose that a boxer has won

50% of his fights over the past two years. Suppose that after several fights

he has won 50% of his matches this year, that he his lost his last six fights

and he has six left. If a person believed that he would win his next six fights

because he has used up his losses and is “due” for a victory, then he would

have  committed  the  Gambler’s  Fallacy.  After  all,  the  person  would  be

ignoring the fact that the results of one match can influence the results ofthe next one. For example, the boxer might have been injured in one match

which would lower his chances of winning his last six fights.

It should be noted that not all predictions about what is likely to occur are

fallacious. If a person has good evidence for his predictions, then they will be

reasonable to accept. For example, if a person tosses a fair coin and gets

nine heads in a row it would be reasonable for him to conclude that he will

probably not get another nine in a row again. This reasoning would not be

fallacious as long as he believed his conclusion because of an understanding

of the laws of probability. In this case, if he concluded that he would not get

another nine heads in a row because the odds of getting nine heads in a row

are lower than getting fewer than nine heads in a row, then his reasoning

would be good and his conclusion would be justified. Hence, determining

whether  or  not  the  Gambler’s  Fallacy  is  being  committed  often  requires

some basic understanding of the laws of probability.

 

  Example #1:

  Bill is playing against Doug in a WWII tank battle game. Doug has had a

great “streak of luck” and has been killing Bill’s tanks left and right with good

die rolls. Bill, who has a few tanks left, decides to risk all in a desperate

attack on Doug. He is a bit worried that Doug might wipe him out, but he

thinks that since Doug’s luck at rolling has been great Doug must be due for

some bad dice rolls. Bill launches his attack and Doug butchers his forces.

 

  Example #2:

  Jane and Bill are talking:

 

  Jane: “I’ll be able to buy that car I always wanted soon.”

  Bill: “Why, did you get a raise?”

  Jane:  “No.  But  you  know  how  I’ve  been  playing  the  lottery  all  these

years?”

  Bill: “Yes, you buy a ticket for every drawing, without fail.”

  Jane: “And I’ve lost every time.”

  Bill: “So why do you think you will win this time?”

  Jane: “Well, after all those losses I’m due for a win.”

 

  Example #3:  Joe and Sam are at the race track betting on horses.

 

  Joe: “You see that horse over there? He lost his last four races. I’m going

to bet on him.”

  Sam: ‘Why? I think he will probably lose.”

  Joe: “No way, Sam. I looked up the horse’s stats and he has won half his

races in the past two years. Since he has lost three of his last four races, he’ll

have to win this race. So I’m betting the farm on him.”

  Sam: “Are you sure?”

  Joe: “Of course I’m sure. That pony is due, man…he’s due!”

 Genetic Fallacy


    Description:

A Genetic Fallacy is a line of “reasoning” in which a perceived defect in the

origin of a claim or thing is taken to be evidence that discredits the claim or

thing itself. It is also a line of reasoning in which the origin of a claim or thing

is taken to be evidence for the claim or thing. This sort of “reasoning” has

the following form:

 

  1. The origin of a claim or thing is presented.

  2. The claim is true(or false) or the thing is supported (or discredited).

 

It is clear that sort of “reasoning” is fallacious. For example: “Bill claims

that 1+1=2. However, my parents brought me up to believe that 1+1=254, so

Bill must be wrong.”

It should be noted that there are some cases in which the origin of a claim

is relevant to the truth or falsity of the claim. For example, a claim that

comes from a reliable expert is likely to be true (provided it is in her area of

expertise).

 

  Example #1:

  “Yeah, the environmentalists do claim that over-development can lead

to all kinds of serious problems. But we all know about those darn bunny

huggers and their silly views!.”

 

  Example #2:

  “I was brought up to believe in God, and my parents told me God exists,

so He must.”

 

  Example #3:

  “Sure, the media claims that Senator Bedfellow was taking kickbacks. But

we all know about the media’s credibility, don’t we.”

 Guilt by Association


  Also Known as: Bad Company Fallacy, Company that You Keep Fallacy

    Description:

Guilt by Association is a fallacy in which a person rejects a claim simply

because it is pointed out that people she dislikes accept the claim. This sort

of “reasoning” has the following form:

 

  1. It is pointed out that person A accepts claim P.

  2. Therefore P is false

 

It is clear that sort of “reasoning” is fallacious. For example the following is

obviously  a  case  of  poor  “reasoning”:  “You  think  that  1+1=2.  But,  Adolf

Hitler,  Charles  Manson,  Joseph  Stalin,  and  Ted  Bundy  all  believed  that

1+1=2. So, you shouldn’t believe it.”

The fallacy draws its power from the fact that people do not like to be

associated  with  people  they  dislike.  Hence,  if  it  is  shown  that  a  person

shares a belief with people he dislikes he might be influenced into rejecting

that belief. In such cases the person will be rejecting the claim based on how

he thinks or feels about the people who hold it and because he does not

want to be associated with such people.

Of  course,  the  fact  that  someone  does  not  want  to  be  associated  with

people she dislikes does not justify the rejection of any claim. For example,

most wicked and terrible people accept that the earth revolves around the

sun and that lead is heavier than helium. No sane person would reject these

claims simply because this would put them in the company of people they

dislike (or even hate).

 

  Example #1:

  Will and Kiteena are arguing over socialism. Kiteena  is  a  pacifist  and

hates violence and violent people.

 

    Kiteena: “I think that the United States should continue to adopt socialist

programs. For example, I think that the government should take control ofvital industries.”

  Will: “So, you are for state ownership of industry.”

    Kiteena: “Certainly. It is a great idea and will help make the world a less

violent place.”

  Will: “Well, you know Stalin also endorsed state ownership on industry.

At last count he wiped out millions of his own people. Pol Pot of Cambodia

was also for state ownership of industry. He also killed millions of his own

people. The leadership of China is for state owned industry. They killed their

own people in that square. So, are you still for state ownership of industry?”

    Kiteena: “Oh, no! I don’t want to be associated with those butchers!”

 

  Example #2:

  Jen  and  Sandy  are  discussing  the  topic  of  welfare.  Jen  is  fairly

conservative  politically  but  she  has  been  an  active  opponent  of  racism.

Sandy is extremely liberal politically.

 

  Jen: “I was reading over some private studies of welfare and I think it

would be better to have people work for their welfare. For example, people

could pick up trash, put up signs, and maybe even do skilled labor that they

are  qualified  for.  This  would  probably  make  people  feel  better  about

themselves and it would get more out of our tax money.”

  Sandy: “I see. So, you want to have the poor people out on the streets

picking up trash for their checks? Well, you know that is exactly the position

David Count endorses.”

  Jen: “Who is he?”

  Sandy: “I’m surprised you don’t know him, seeing how alike you two are.

He was a Grand Mooky Wizard for the Aryan Pure White League and is well

known for his hatred of blacks and other minorities. With your views, you’d

fit right in to his little racist club.”

  Jen:  “So,  I  should  reject  my  view  just  because  I  share  it  with  some

racist?”

  Sandy: “Of course.”

 

  Example #3:

  Libard and Ferris are discussing who they are going to vote for as the

next  department  chair  in  the  philosophy  department. Libard  is  a  radicalfeminist and she despises Wayne and Bill, who are two sexist professors in

the department.

 

  Ferris: “So, who are you going to vote for?”

  Libard: ‘Well, I was thinking about voting for Jane, since she is a woman

and there has never been a woman chair here. But, I think that Steve will do

an excellent job. He has a lot of clout in the university and he is a decent

person.”

  Ferris: “You know, Wayne and Bill are supporting him. They really like

the idea of having Steve as the new chair. I never thought I’d see you and

those two pigs on the same side.”

  Libard: “Well, maybe it is time that we have a woman as chair.”

 

 Hasty Generalization


  Also Known as: Fallacy of Insufficient Statistics, Fallacy of Insufficient

Sample, Leaping to A Conclusion, Hasty Induction

 

    Description:

This  fallacy  is  committed  when  a  person  draws  a  conclusion  about  a

population based on a sample that is not large enough. It has the following

form:

 

  1. Sample S, which is too small, is taken from population P.

  2. Conclusion C is drawn about Population P based on S.

 

The  person  committing  the  fallacy  is  misusing  the  following  type  of

reasoning,  which  is  known  variously  as  Inductive  Generalization,

Generalization, and Statistical Generalization:

 

  1. X% of all observed A’s are B’s.

  2. Therefore X% of all A’s are B’s.

 

The fallacy is committed when not enough A’s are observed to warrant the

conclusion. If enough A’s are observed then the reasoning is not fallacious.

Small samples will tend to be unrepresentative. As a blatant case, asking

one person what she thinks about gun control would clearly not provide an

adequate  sized  sample  for  determining  what  Canadians  in  general  think

about the issue. The general idea is that small samples are less likely to

contain numbers proportional to the whole population. For example, if a

bucket contains blue, red, green and orange marbles, then a sample of three

marbles  cannot  possible  be  representative  of  the  whole  population  of

marbles. As the sample size of marbles increases the more likely it becomes

that marbles of each color will be selected in proportion to their numbers in

the whole population. The same holds true for things others than marbles,

such as people and their political views.

Since Hasty Generalization is committed when the sample (the observedinstances) is too small, it is important to have samples that are large enough

when making a generalization. The most reliable way to do this is to take as

large a sample as is practical. There are no fixed numbers as to what counts

as being large enough. If the population in question is not very diverse (a

population of cloned mice, for example) then a very small sample would

suffice. If the population is very diverse (people, for example) then a fairly

large sample would be needed. The size of the sample also depends on the

size of the population. Obviously, a very small population will not support a

huge sample. Finally, the required size will depend on the purpose of the

sample. If Bill wants to know what Joe and Jane think about gun control,

then a sample consisting of Bill and Jane would (obviously) be large enough.

If Bill wants to know what most Australians think about gun control, then a

sample consisting of Bill and Jane would be far too small.

People often commit Hasty Generalizations because of bias or prejudice.

For example, someone who is a sexist might conclude that all women are

unfit  to  fly  jet  fighters  because  one  woman  crashed  one.  People  also

commonly commit Hasty Generalizations because of laziness or sloppiness.

It is very easy to simply leap to a conclusion and much harder to gather an

adequate sample and draw a justified conclusion. Thus, avoiding this fallacy

requires minimizing the influence of bias and taking care to select a sample

that is large enough.

One final point: a Hasty Generalization, like any fallacy, might have a true

conclusion. However, as long as the reasoning is fallacious there is no reason

to accept the conclusion based on that reasoning.

 

  Example #1:

  Smith, who is from England, decides to attend graduate school at Ohio

State University.  He  has  never  been  to  the US  before.  The  day  after  he

arrives, he is walking back from an orientation session and sees two white

(albino) squirrels chasing each other around a tree. In his next letter home,

he tells his family that American squirrels are white.

 

  Example #2:

  Sam is riding her bike in her home town in Maine, minding her own

business.  A  station  wagon  comes  up  behind  her  and  the  driver  starts

beeping his horn and then tries to force her off the road. As he goes by, thedriver yells “get on the sidewalk where you belong!” Sam sees that the car

has Ohio plates and concludes that all Ohio drivers are jerks.

 

  Example #3:

  Bill: “You know, those feminists all hate men.”

  Joe: “Really?”

  Bill: “Yeah. I was in my philosophy class the other day and that Rachel

chick gave a presentation.”

  Joe: “Which Rachel?”

  Bill: “You know her. She’s the one that runs that feminist group over at

the Women’s Center. She said that men are all sexist pigs. I asked her why

she believed this and she said that her last few boyfriends were real sexist

pigs.”

  Joe: “That doesn’t sound like a good reason to believe that all of us are

pigs.”

  Bill: “That was what I said.”

  Joe: “What did she say?”

  Bill: “She said that she had seen enough of men to know we are all pigs.

She obviously hates all men.”

  Joe: “So you think all feminists are like her?”

  Bill: “Sure. They all hate men.”

 Ignoring a Common Cause


  Also Known as: Questionable Cause

    Description:

This fallacy has the following general structure:

 

  1)  A  and  B  are  regularly  connected  (but  no  third,  common  cause  is

looked for).

  2) Therefore A is the cause of B.

 

This  fallacy  is  committed  when  it  is  concluded  that  one  thing  causes

another simply because they are regularly associated. More formally, this

fallacy is committed when it is concluded that A is the cause of B simply

because A and B are regularly connected. Further, the causal conclusion is

drawn without considering the possibility that a third factor might be the

cause of both A and B.

In many cases, the fallacy is quite evident. For example, if a person claimed

that  a  person’s  sneezing  was  caused  by  her  watery  eyes  and  he  simply

ignored the fact that the woman was standing in a hay field, he would have

fallen prey to the fallacy of ignoring a common cause. In this case, it would

be reasonable to conclude that the woman’s sneezing and watering eyes

was caused by an allergic reaction of some kind. In other cases, it is not as

evident that the fallacy is being committed. For example, a doctor might find

a large amount of bacteria in one of her patients and conclude that the

bacteria are the cause of the patient’s illness. However, it might turn out

that the bacteria are actually harmless and that a virus is weakening the

person, Thus, the viruses would be the actual cause of the illness and growth

of the bacteria (the viruses would weaken the ability of the person’s body to

resist the growth of the bacteria).

As noted in the discussion of other causal fallacies, causality is a rather

difficult matter. However, it is possible to avoid this fallacy by taking due

care.  In  the  case  of Ignoring  a  Common  Cause,  the  key  to  avoiding  this

fallacy is to be careful to check for other factors that might be the actual

cause of both the suspected cause and the suspected effect. If a person failsto check for the possibility of a common cause, then they will commit this

fallacy. Thus, it is always a good idea to always ask “could there be a third

factor that is actually causing both A and B?”

 

  Example #1:

  One day Bill wakes up with a fever. A few hours later he finds that his

muscles  are  sore.  He  concludes  that  the  fever  must  have  caused  the

soreness. His friend insists that the soreness and the fever are caused by

some microbe. Bill laughs at this and insists that if he spends the day in a tub

of cold water his soreness will go away.

 

  Example #2:

  Over the course of several weeks the leaves from the trees along the

Wombat river fell into the water. Shortly thereafter, many dead fish were

seen floating in the river. When the EPA investigated, the owners of the

Wombat River Chemical Company claimed that is it was obvious that the

leaves had killed the fish. Many local environmentalists claimed that the

chemical plant’s toxic wastes caused both the trees and the fish to die and

that the leaves had no real effect on the fish.

 

  Example #3:

  A  thunderstorm  wakes  Joe  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  He  goes

downstairs to get some milk to help him get back to sleep. On the way to the

refrigerator,  he  notices  that  the  barometer  has  fallen  a  great  deal.  Joe

concludes that the storm caused the barometer to fall. In the morning he

tells  his  wife  about  his  conclusion.  She  tells  him  that  it  was  a  drop  in

atmospheric pressure that caused the barometer to drop and the storm.

 Middle Ground


  Also Known as: Golden Mean Fallacy, Fallacy of Moderation

    Description:

This  fallacy  is  committed  when  it  is  assumed  that  the  middle  position

between  two  extremes  must  be  correct  simply  because  it  is  the  middle

position. this sort of “reasoning” has the following form:

 

  1. Position A and B are two extreme positions.

  2. C is a position that rests in the middle between A and B.

  3. Therefore C is the correct position.

 

This  line  of  “reasoning”  is  fallacious  because  it  does  not  follow  that  a

position is correct just because it lies in the middle of two extremes. This is

shown  by  the  following  example.  Suppose  that  a  person  is  selling  his

computer. He wants to sell it for the current market value, which is $800 and

someone offers him $1 for it. It would hardly follow that $400.50 is the

proper price.

This  fallacy  draws  its  power  from  the  fact  that  a  moderate  or  middle

position  is  often  the  correct  one.  For  example,  a  moderate  amount  of

exercise is better than too much exercise or too little exercise. However, this

is not simply because it lies in the middle ground between two extremes. It

is because too much exercise is harmful and too little exercise is all but

useless. The basic idea behind many cases in which moderation is correct is

that  the  extremes  are  typically  “too  much”  and  “not  enough”  and  the

middle position is “enough.” In such cases the middle position is correct

almost by definition.

It should be kept in mind that while uncritically assuming that the middle

position must be correct because it is the middle position is poor reasoning

it does not follow that accepting a middle position is always fallacious. As

was just mentioned, many times a moderate position is correct. However,

the claim that the moderate or middle position is correct must be supported

by legitimate reasoning.

  

  Example #1:

  Some people claim that God is all powerful, all knowing, and all good.

Other people claim that God does not exist at all. Now, it seems reasonable

to accept a position somewhere in the middle. So, it is likely that God exists,

but that he is only very powerful, very knowing, and very good. That seems

right to me.

 

  Example #2:

    Congressman  Jones  has  proposed  cutting  welfare  payments  by  50%

while Congresswoman Shender has proposed increasing welfare payments

by 10% to keep up with inflation and cost of living increases. I think that the

best proposal is the one made by Congressman Trumple. He says that a 30%

decrease in welfare payments is a good middle ground, so I think that is

what we should support.

 

  Example #3:

  A month ago, a tree in Bill’s yard was damaged in a storm. His neighbor,

Joe, asked him to have the tree cut down so it would not fall on Joe’s new

shed. Bill refused to do this. Two days later another storm blew the tree

onto Joe’s new shed. Joe demanded that Joe pay the cost of repairs, which

was $250. Bill said that he wasn’t going to pay a cent. Obviously, the best

solution is to reach a compromise between the two extremes, so Bill should

pay Joe $125.

 Misleading Vividness


    Description:

Misleading  Vividness  is  a  fallacy  in  which  a  very  small  number  of

particularly dramatic events are taken to outweigh a significant amount of

statistical evidence. This sort of “reasoning” has the following form:

 

  1.  Dramatic  or  vivid  event  X  occurs  (and  is  not  in  accord  with  the

majority of the statistical evidence) .

  2. Therefore events of type X are likely to occur.

 

This sort of “reasoning” is fallacious because the mere fact that an event is

particularly vivid or dramatic does not make the event more likely to occur,

especially in the face of significant statistical evidence.

People often accept this sort of “reasoning” because particularly vivid or

dramatic cases tend to make a very strong impression on the human mind.

For example, if a person survives a particularly awful plane crash, he might

be inclined to believe that air travel is more dangerous than other forms of

travel. After all, explosions and people dying around him will have a more

significant  impact  on  his  mind  than  will  the  rather  dull  statistics  that  a

person is more likely to be struck by lightning than killed in a plane crash.

It  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  taking  into  account  the  possibility  of

something dramatic or vivid occurring is not always fallacious. For example,

a  person  might  decide  to  never  go  sky  diving  because  the  effects  of  an

accident  can  be  very,  very  dramatic.  If  he  knows  that,  statistically,  the

chances of the accident are happening are very low but he considers even a

small risk to be unacceptable, then he would not be making an error in

reasoning.

 

  Example #1:

  Bill and Jane are talking about buying a computer.

 

  Jane: “I’ve been thinking about getting a computer. I’m really tired of

having to wait in the library to write my papers.”  Bill: ‘What sort of computer do you want to get?”

  Jane: “Well, it has to be easy to use, have a low price and have decent

processing power. I’ve been thinking about getting a Kiwi Fruit 2200. I read

in that consumer magazine that they have been found to be very reliable in

six independent industry studies.”

  Bill: “I wouldn’t get the Kiwi Fruit. A friend of mine bought one a month

ago to finish his master’s thesis. He was halfway through it when smoke

started pouring out of the CPU. He didn’t get his thesis done on time and he

lost  his  financial  aid.  Now  he’s  working  over  at  the  Gut  Boy  Burger

Warehouse.”

  Jane: “I guess I won’t go with the Kiwi!”

 

  Example #2:

  Joe and Drew are talking about flying.

 

  Joe: “When I was flying back to school, the pilot came on the intercom

and  told  us  that  the  plane  was  having  engine  trouble.  I  looked  out  the

window and I saw smoke billowing out of the engine nearest me. We had to

make an emergency landing and there were fire trucks everywhere. I had to

spend the next six hours sitting in the airport waiting for a flight. I was lucky I

didn’t die! I’m never flying again.”

  Drew: “So how are you going to get home over Christmas break?”

  Joe: “I’m going to drive. That will be a lot safer than flying.”

  Drew: “I don’t think so. You are much more likely to get injured or killed

driving than flying.”

  Joe: “I don’t buy that! You should have seen the smoke pouring out of

that engine! I’m never getting on one of those death traps again!”

 

  Example #3:

  Jane and Sarah are talking about running in a nearby park.

 

  Jane:  “Did  you  hear  about  that  woman  who  was  attacked  in Tuttle

Park?”

  Sarah: “Yes. It was terrible.”

  Jane: “Don’t you run there every day?”

  Sarah: “Yes.”  Jane: ‘How can you do that? I’d never be able to run there!”

  Sarah: “Well, as callous as this might sound, that attack was out of the

ordinary. I’ve been running there for three years and this has been the only

attack. Sure, I worry about being attacked, but I’m not going give up my

running just because there is some slight chance I’ll be attacked.”

  Sarah: “That is stupid! I’d stay away from that park if I was you! That

woman was really beat up badly so you know it is going to happen again. If

you don’t stay out of that park, it will probably happen to you!”

 Peer Pressure


    Description:

Peer Pressure is a fallacy in which a threat of rejection by one’s peers (or

peer pressure) is substituted for evidence in an “argument.” This line of

“reasoning” has the following form:

 

  1. Person P is pressured by his/her peers or threatened with rejection.

  2. Therefore person P’s claim X is false.

 

This line of “reasoning” is fallacious because peer pressure and threat of

rejection do not constitute evidence for rejecting a claim. This is especially

clear in the following example:

 

  Joe: “Bill, I know you think that 1+1=2. But we don’t accept that sort of

thing in our group.”

  Bill: “I was just joking. Of course I don’t believe that.”

 

  It is clear that the pressure from Bill’s group has no bearing on the truth

of the claim that 1+1=2.

 

It should be noted that loyalty to a group and the need to belong can give

people very strong reasons to conform to the views and positions of those

groups. Further, from a practical standpoint we must often compromise our

beliefs in order to belong to groups. However, this feeling of loyalty or the

need to belong simply do not constitute evidence for a claim.

 

  Example #1:

  Bill says that he likes the idea that people should work for their welfare

when they can. His friends laugh at him, accuse him of fascist leanings, and

threaten  to  ostracize  him  from  their  group.  He  decides  to  recant  and

abandon his position to avoid rejection.

 

  Example #2:  Bill: “I like classical music and I think it is of higher quality than most

modern music.”

  Jill: “That stuff is for old people.”

  Dave: “Yeah, only real sissy monkeys listen to that crap. Besides, Anthrax

rules! It Rules!”

  Bill: “Well, I don’t really like it that much. Anthrax is much better.”

 

  Example #3:

  Bill thinks that welfare is needed in some cases. His friends in the Young

Republicans taunt him every time he makes his views known. He accepts

their views in order to avoid rejection.

 Personal Attack


  Also Known as: Ad Hominem Abusive

    Description:

A personal attack is committed when a person substitutes abusive remarks

for evidence when attacking another person’s claim or claims. This line of

“reasoning” is fallacious because the attack is directed at the person making

the claim and not the claim itself. The truth value of a claim is independent

of  the  person  making  the  claim.  After  all,  no  matter  how  repugnant  an

individual might be, he or she can still make true claims.

Not  all  ad Hominems  are  fallacious.  In  some  cases,  an  individual’s

characteristics can have a bearing on the question of the veracity of her

claims. For example, if someone is shown to be a pathological liar, then what

he says can be considered to be unreliable. However, such attacks are weak,

since even pathological liars might speak the truth on occasion.

In general, it is best to focus one’s attention on the content of the claim

and not on who made the claim. It is the content that determines the truth

of the claim and not the characteristics of the person making the claim.

 

  Example #1:

  In  a  school  debate,  Bill  claims  that  the  President’s  economic  plan  is

unrealistic. His opponent, a professor, retorts by saying “the freshman has

his facts wrong.”

 

  Example #2:

  “This theory about a potential cure for cancer has been introduced by a

doctor who is a known lesbian feminist. I don’t see why we should extend an

invitation for her to speak at the World Conference on Cancer.”

 

  Example #3:

  “Bill  says  that  we  should  give  tax  breaks  to  companies.  But  he  is

untrustworthy, so it must be wrong to do that.”

 

  Example #4:  “That claim cannot be true. Dave believes it, and we know how morally

repulsive he is.”

 

  Example #5:

  “Bill claims that Jane would be a good treasurer. However I find Bill’s

behavior offensive, so I’m not going to vote for Jill.”

 

  Example #6

  “Jane says that drug use is morally wrong, but she is just a goody-two

shoes Christian, so we don’t have to listen to her.”

 

  Example #7

  Bill: “I don’t think it is a good idea to cut social programs.”

  Jill: “Why not?”

  Bill: “Well, many people do not get a fair start in life and hence need

some help. After all, some people have wealthy parents and have it fairly

easy. Others are born into poverty and…”

  Jill: “You just say that stuff because you have a soft heart and an equally

soft head.”

 Poisoning the Well


    Description:

This sort of “reasoning” involves trying to discredit what a person might

later claim by presenting unfavorable information (be it true or false) about

the person. This “argument” has the following form:

 

  1.  Unfavorable  information  (be  it  true  or  false)  about  person  A  is

presented.

  2. Therefore any claims person A makes will be false.

 

This sort of “reasoning” is obviously fallacious. The person making such an

attack is hoping that the unfavorable information will bias listeners against

the person in question and hence that they will reject any claims he might

make. However, merely presenting unfavorable information about a person

(even if it is true) hardly counts as evidence against the claims he/she might

make. This is especially clear when Poisoning the Well is looked at as a form

of ad Hominem in which the attack is made prior to the person even making

the claim or claims. The following example clearly shows that this sort of

“reasoning” is quite poor.

 

  Example #1:

  “Don’t listen to him, he’s a scoundrel.”

 

  Example #2:

    “Before turning the floor over to my opponent, I ask you to remember

that  those  who  oppose  my  plans  do  not  have  the  best  wishes  of  the

university at heart.”

 

  Example #3:

  You  are  told,  prior  to  meeting  him,  that  your  friend’s  boyfriend  is  a

decadent  wastrel.  When  you  meet  him,  everything  you  hear  him  say  is

tainted.

   Example #4

  Before class

  Bill:  “Boy,  that  professor  is  a  real  jerk.  I  think  he  is  some  sort  of

Eurocentric fascist.”

  Jill: “Yeah.”

  During Class:

  Prof. Jones: “…and so we see that there was never any ‘Golden Age of

Matriarchy’ in 1895 in America.”

  After Class:

  Bill: “See what I mean?”

  Jill: “Yeah. There must have been a Golden Age of Matriarchy, since that

jerk said there wasn’t.”

 Post Hoc


  Also Known as: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc, False Cause, Questionable

Cause, Confusing Coincidental Relationships With Causes

    Description:

A Post Hoc is a fallacy with the following form:

 

  1) A occurs before B.

  2) Therefore A is the cause of B.

 

The Post Hoc fallacy derives its name from the Latin phrase “Post hoc, ergo

propter hoc.” This has been traditionally interpreted as “After this, therefore

because of this.” This fallacy is committed when it is concluded that one

event causes another simply because the proposed cause occurred before

the proposed effect. More formally, the fallacy involves concluding that A

causes or caused B because A occurs before B and there is not sufficient

evidence to actually warrant such a claim.

It is evident in many cases that the mere fact that A occurs before B in no

way  indicates  a  causal  relationship.  For  example,  suppose  Jill,  who  is  in

London, sneezed at the exact same time an earthquake started in California.

It would clearly be irrational to arrest Jill for starting a natural disaster, since

there  is  no  reason  to  suspect  any  causal  connection  between  the  two

events. While such cases are quite obvious, the Post Hoc fallacy is fairly

common because there are cases in which there might be some connection

between the events. For example, a person who has her computer crash

after she installs a new piece of software would probably suspect that the

software was to blame. If she simply concluded that the software caused the

crash because it was installed before the crash she would be committing the

Post Hoc fallacy. In such cases the fallacy would be committed because the

evidence provided fails to justify acceptance of the causal claim. It is even

theoretically possible for the fallacy to be committed when A really does

cause B, provided that the “evidence” given consists only of the claim that A

occurred before B. The key to the Post Hoc fallacy is not that there is no

causal connection between A and B. It is that adequate evidence has notbeen provided for a claim that A causes B. Thus, Post Hoc resembles a Hasty

Generalization  in  that  it  involves  making  a  leap  to  an  unwarranted

conclusion. In the case of the Post Hoc fallacy, that leap is to a causal claim

instead of a general proposition.

Not  surprisingly,  many  superstitions  are  probably  based  on  Post  Hoc

reasoning. For example, suppose a person buys a good luck charm, does well

on his exam, and then concludes that the good luck charm caused him to do

well. This person would have fallen victim to the Post Hoc fallacy. This is not

to say that all “superstitions” have no basis at all. For example, some “folk

cures” have actually been found to work.

Post Hoc fallacies are typically committed because people are simply not

careful enough when they reason. Leaping to a causal conclusion is always

easier  and  faster  than  actually  investigating  the  phenomenon.  However,

such leaps tend to land far from the truth of the matter. Because Post Hoc

fallacies are committed by drawing an unjustified causal conclusion, the key

to avoiding them is careful investigation. While it is true that causes precede

effects (outside of Star Trek, anyway), it is not true that precedence makes

something a cause of something else. Because of this, a causal investigation

should begin with finding what occurs before the effect in question, but it

should not end there.

 

  Example #1:

  I had been doing pretty poorly this season. Then my girlfriend gave me

this neon laces for my spikes and I won my next three races. Those laces

must be good luck…if I keep on wearing them I can’t help but win!

 

  Example #2:

  Bill purchases a new PowerMac and it works fine for months. He then

buys and installs a new piece of software. The next time he starts up his

Mac, it freezes. Bill concludes that the software must be the cause of the

freeze.

 

  Example #3:

  Joan is scratched by a cat while visiting her friend. Two days later she

comes down with a fever. Joan concludes that the cat’s scratch must be the

cause of her illness. 

  Example #4:

  The  Republicans  pass  a  new  tax  reform  law  that  benefits  wealthy

Americans.  Shortly  thereafter  the  economy  takes  a  nose  dive.  The

Democrats claim that the tax reform caused the economic woes and they

push to get rid of it.

 

  Example #5:

  The picture on Jim’s old TV set goes out of focus. Jim goes over and

strikes the TV soundly on the side and the picture goes back into focus. Jim

tells his friend that hitting the TV fixed it.

 

  Example #6:

  Jane gets a rather large wart on her finger. Based on a story her father

told her, she cuts a potato in half, rubs it on the wart and then buries it

under the light of a full moon. Over the next month her wart shrinks and

eventually vanishes. Jane writes her father to tell him how right he was

about the cure.Questionable Cause


    Description:

This fallacy has the following general form:

 

  1) A and B are associated on a regular basis.

  2) Therefore A is the cause of B.

 

The general idea behind this fallacy is that it is an error in reasoning to

conclude  that  one  thing  causes  another  simply  because  the  two  are

associated on a regular basis. More formally, this fallacy is committed when

it is concluded that A is the cause of B simply because they are associated on

a regular basis. The error being made is that a causal conclusion is being

drawn from inadequate evidence.

The Questionable Cause Fallacy is actually a general type of fallacy. Any

causal  fallacy  that  involves  an  error  in a  reasoning  due  to  a  failure  to

adequately investigate the suspected cause is a fallacy of this type. Thus,

fallacies like Post Hoc and Confusing Cause and Effect are specific examples

of the general Questionable Cause Fallacy.

Causal reasoning can be quite difficult since causation is a rather complex

philosophic  issue.  The  complexity  of  causation  is  briefly  discussed  in  the

context of the specific versions of this fallacy.

The key to avoiding the Questionable Cause fallacy is to take due care in

drawing  causal  conclusions.  This  requires  taking  steps  to  adequately

investigate the phenomena in question as well using the proper methods of

careful investigation.

 

  Example #1:

  Joe gets a chain letter that threatens him with dire consequences if he

breaks the chain. He laughs at it and throws it in the garbage. On his way to

work he slips and breaks his leg. When he gets back from the hospital he

sends out 200 copies of the chain letter, hoping to avoid further accidents.

 

  Example #2:  When investigating a small pond a group of graduate students found

that there was a severe drop in the fish population. Further investigation

revealed that the fishes’ food supply had also been severely reduced. At first

the students believed that the lack of food was killing the fish, but then they

realized they had to find what was causing the decline in the food supply.

The students suspected acid rain was the cause of both the reduction in the

fish  population  as  well  as  the  food  supply.  However,  the  local  business

council insisted that it was just the lack of food that caused the reduction in

the fish population. Most of the townspeople agreed with this conclusion

since it seemed pretty obvious that a lack of food would cause fish to die.

 Red Herring


  Also Known as: Smoke Screen, Wild Goose Chase

 

    Description:

A Red Herring is a fallacy in which an irrelevant topic is presented in order

to divert attention from the original issue. The basic idea is to “win” an

argument  by  leading  attention  away  from  the  argument  and  to  another

topic. This sort of “reasoning” has the following form:

 

  1. Topic A is under discussion.

  2. Topic B is introduced under the guise of being relevant to topic A

(when topic B is actually not relevant to topic A).

  3. Topic A is abandoned.

 

This sort of “reasoning” is fallacious because merely changing the topic of

discussion hardly counts as an argument against a claim.

 

  Example #1:

    “Argument” against a bond measure:

 

  “We admit that this measure is popular. But we also urge you to note

that there are so many bond issues on this ballot that the whole thing is

getting ridiculous.”

 

  Example #2:

    “Argument” for a tax cut:

 

  “You  know,  I’ve  begun  to  think  that  there  is  some  merit  in  the

Republicans’ tax cut plan. I suggest that you come up with something like it,

because If we Democrats are going to survive as a party, we have got to

show that we are as tough-minded as the Republicans, since that is what the

public wants.

   Example #3:

    “Argument” for making grad school requirements stricter:

  “I think there is great merit in making the requirements stricter for the

graduate students. I recommend that you support it, too. After all, we are in

a budget crisis and we do not want our salaries affected.”

 Relativist Fallacy


  Also Known as: The Subjectivist Fallacy

    Description:

The  Relativist  Fallacy  is  committed  when  a  person  rejects  a  claim  by

asserting that the claim might be true for others but is not for him/her. This

sort of “reasoning” has the following form:

 

  1. Claim X is presented.

  2. Person A asserts that X may be true for others but is not true for

him/her.

  3. Therefore A is justified in rejecting X.

 

In this context, relativism is the view that truth is relative to Z (a person,

time, culture, place, etc.). This is not the view that claims will be true at

different times or of different people, but the view that a claim could be true

for one person and false for another at the same time.

In many cases, when people say “that X is true for me” what they really

mean is “I believe X” or “X is true about me.” It is important to be quite clear

about the distinction between being true about a person and being true for

a person. A claim is true about a person if the claim is a statement that

describes the person correctly. For example, “Bill has blue eyes” is true of

Bill if Bill has blue eyes. To make a claim such as “ X is true for Bill” is to say

that the claim is true for Bill and that it need not be true for others. For

example: “1+1=23 is true for Bill” would mean that, for Bill, 1+1 actually

does equal 23, not that he merely believes that 1+1=23 (that would be “It is

true of Bill that he believes 1+1=23”). Another example would be “The claim

that the earth is flat is true for Bill” would mean that the earth really is flat

for Bill (in other words, Bill would be in a different world than the rest of the

human race). Since these situations (1+1 being 23 and the earth being flat

for Bill ) are extremely strange, it certainly seems that truth is not relative to

individuals (although beliefs are).

As long as truth is objective (that is, not relative to individuals), then the

Relativist Fallacy is a fallacy. If there are cases in which truth is actuallyrelative, then such reasoning need not be fallacious.

 

  Example #1:

  Jill: “Look at this, Bill. I read that people who do not get enough exercise

tend to be unhealthy.”

  Bill: “That may be true for you, but it is not true for me.”

 

  Example #2:

  Jill: “I think that so called argument you used to defend your position is

terrible. After all, a fallacy hardly counts as an argument. “

  Bill: “That may be true for you, but it is not true for me.”

 

  Example #3:

  Bill: “Your position results in a contradiction, so I can’t accept it.”

  Dave:  “Contradictions  may  be  bad  in  your  Eurocentric,  oppressive,

logical world view, but I don’t think they are bad. Therefore my position is

just fine.”

 Slippery Slope


  Also Known as: The Camel’s Nose

    Description:

The Slippery Slope is a fallacy in which a person asserts that some event

must  inevitably  follow  from  another  without  any  argument  for  the

inevitability of the event in question. In most cases, there are a series of

steps or gradations between one event and the one in question and no

reason is given as to why the intervening steps or gradations will simply be

bypassed. This “argument” has the following form:

 

  1. Event X has occurred (or will or might occur).

  2. Therefore event Y will inevitably happen.

 

This sort of “reasoning” is fallacious because there is no reason to believe

that one event must inevitably follow from another without an argument for

such a claim. This is especially clear in cases in which there are a significant

number of steps or gradations between one event and another.

 

  Example #1:

  We have to stop the tuition increase! The next thing you know, they’ll be

charging $40,000 a semester!”

 

  Example #2:

  “Europe shouldn’t get involved militarily in other countries. Once the

governments send in a few troops, then they will send in thousands to die.”

 

  Example #3:

  “You can never give anyone a break. If you do, they’ll walk all over you.”

 

  Example #4:

  “We’ve got to stop them from banning pornographic web sites. Once

they start banning that, they will never stop. Next thing you know, they will

be burning all the books!” Special Pleading


    Description:

Special Pleading is a fallacy in which a person applies standards, principles,

rules, etc. to others while taking herself (or those she has a special interest

in)  to  be  exempt,  without  providing  adequate  justification  for  the

exemption. This sort of “reasoning” has the following form:

 

  1.  Person  A  accepts  standard(s)  S  and  applies  them  to  others  in

circumstance(s) C.

  2. Person A is in circumstance(s) C.

  3. Therefore A is exempt from S.

 

  The person committing Special Pleading is claiming that he is exempt

from certain principles or standards yet he provides no good reason for his

exemption. That this sort of reasoning is fallacious is shown by the following

extreme example:

 

  1.  Barbara  accepts  that  all  murderers  should  be  punished  for  their

crimes.

  2.  Although  she  murdered  Bill,  Barbara  claims  she  is  an  exception

because she really would not like going to prison.

  3. Therefore, the standard of punishing murderers should not be applied

to her.

 

This is obviously a blatant case of special pleading. Since no one likes going

to prison, this cannot justify the claim that Barbara alone should be exempt

from punishment.

 

  The Principle of Relevant Difference

From a philosophic standpoint, the fallacy of Special Pleading is violating a

well  accepted  principle,  namely  the  Principle  of  Relevant  Difference.

According to this principle, two people can be treated differently if and only

if there is a relevant difference between them. This principle is a reasonableone.  After  all,  it  would  not  be  particularly  rational  to  treat  two  people

differently  when  there  is  no  relevant  difference  between  them.  As  an

extreme case, it would be very odd for a parent to insist on making one child

wear size 5 shoes and the other wear size 7 shoes when the children are

both size 5.

It should be noted that the Principle of Relevant Difference does allow

people to be treated differently. For example, if one employee was a slacker

and the other was a very productive worker the boss would be justified in

giving only the productive worker a raise. This is because the productivity of

each is a relevant difference between them. Since it can be reasonable to

treat people differently, there will be cases in which some people will be

exempt from the usual standards. For example, if it is Bill’s turn to cook

dinner and Bill is very ill, it would not be a case of Special Pleading if Bill

asked to be excused from making dinner (this, of course, assumes that Bill

does not accept a standard that requires people to cook dinner regardless of

the circumstances). In this case Bill is offering a good reason as to why he

should be exempt and, most importantly, it would be a good reason for

anyone who was ill and not just Bill.

While determining what counts as a legitimate basis for exemption can be

a difficult task, it seems clear that claiming you are exempt because you are

you  does  not  provide  such  a  legitimate  basis.  Thus,  unless  a  clear  and

relevant justification for exemption can be presented, a person cannot claim

to be exempt.

There are cases which are similar to instances of Special Pleading in which

a person is offering at least some reason why he should be exempt but the

reason is not good enough to warrant the exemption. This could be called

“Failed Pleading.” For example, a professor may claim to be exempt from

helping the rest of the faculty move books to the new department office

because it would be beneath his dignity. However, this is not a particularly

good reason and would hardly justify his exemption. If it turns out that the

real  “reason”  a  person  is  claiming  exemption  is  that  they  simply  take

themselves to be exempt, then they would be committing Special Pleading.

Such cases will be fairly common. After all, it is fairly rare for adults to simply

claim  they  are  exempt  without  at  least  some  pretense  of  justifying  the

exemption.

   Example #1:

  Bill and Jill are married. Both Bill and Jill have put in a full day at the

office. Their dog, Rover, has knocked over all the plants in one room and has

strewn the dirt all over the carpet. When they return, Bill tells Jill that it is

her job to clean up after the dog. When she protests, he says that he has put

in a full day at the office and is too tired to clean up after the dog.

 

  Example #2:

  Jane and Sue share a dorm room.

 

  Jane: “Turn of that stupid stereo, I want to take a nap.”

  Sue: ‘Why should I? What are you exhausted or something?”

  Jane: “No, I just feel like taking a nap.”

  Sue: “Well, I feel like playing my stereo.”

  Jane: “Well, I’m taking my nap. You have to turn your stereo off and

that’s final.”

 

  Example #3:

  Mike and Barbara share an apartment.

 

  Mike: “Barbara, you’ve tracked in mud again.”

    Barbara: “So? It’s not my fault.”

  Mike: “Sure. I suppose it walked in on its own. You made the mess, so

you clean it up.”

    Barbara: “Why?”

  Mike: “We agreed that whoever makes a mess has to clean it up. That is

fair.”

    Barbara: “Well, I’m going to watch TV. If you don’t like the mud, then

you clean it up.”

  Mike: “Barbara…”

    Barbara: “What? I want to watch the show. I don’t want to clean up the

mud. Like I said, if it bothers you that much, then you should clean it up.”

 Spotlight


    Description:

The Spotlight fallacy is committed when a person uncritically assumes that

all members or cases of a certain class or type are like those that receive the

most attention or coverage in the media. This line of “reasoning” has the

following form:

 

  1. Xs with quality Q receive a great deal of attention or coverage in the

media.

  2. Therefore all Xs have quality Q.

 

This line of reasoning is fallacious since the mere fact that someone or

something attracts the most attention or coverage in the media does not

mean that it automatically represents the whole population. For example,

suppose a mass murderer from Old Town, Maine received a great deal of

attention in the media. It would hardly follow that everyone from the town

is a mass murderer.

The Spotlight fallacy derives its name from the fact that receiving a great

deal of attention or coverage is often referred to as being in the spotlight. It

is similar to Hasty Generalization, Biased Sample and Misleading Vividness

because  the  error  being  made  involves  generalizing  about  a  population

based on an inadequate or flawed sample.

The  Spotlight  Fallacy  is  a  very  common  fallacy.  This  fallacy  most  often

occurs  when  people  assume  that  those  who  receive  the  most  media

attention actually represent the groups they belong to. For example, some

people began to believe that all those who oppose abortion are willing to

gun down doctors in cold blood simply because those incidents received a

great deal of media attention. Since the media typically covers people or

events that are unusual or exceptional, it is somewhat odd for people to

believe that such people or events are representative.

For  brief  discussions  of  adequate  samples  and  generalizations,  see  the

entries for Hasty Generalization and Biased Sample.

   Example #1:

  Bill: “Jane, you say you are a feminist, but you can’t be.”

  Jane: “What! What do you mean? Is this one of your stupid jokes or

something?”

  Bill: “No, I’m serious. Over the summer I saw feminists appear on several

talk  shows  and  news  shows  and  I  read  about  them  in  the  papers.  The

women were really bitter and said that women were victims of men and

needed  to  be  given  special  compensation.  You  are  always  talking  about

equal rights and forging your own place in the world. So, you can’t be a

feminist.”

  Jane: “Bill, there are many types of feminism, not just the brands that

get media attention.”

  Bill: “Oh. Sorry.”

 

  Example #2:

  Joe:  “Man,  I’d  never  want  to  go  to New York.  It  is  all  concrete  and

pollution.”

  Sam: “Not all of it.”

  Joe: “Sure it is. Every time I watch the news they are always showing

concrete, skyscrapers, and lots of pollution.”

  Sam:  “Sure,  that  is  what  the  news  shows,  but  a  lot  of New York  is

farmlands and forest. It is not all New York City, it just receives most of the

attention.”

 

  Example #3:

  Ann: “I’m not letting little Jimmy use his online account anymore!”

  Sasha: “Why not? Did he hack into the Pentagon and try to start world

war three?”

  Ann: “No. Haven’t you been watching the news and reading the papers?

There are perverts online just waiting to molest kids! You should take away

your  daughter’s  account.  Why,  there  must  be  thousands  of  sickos  out

there!”

  Sasha: “Really? I thought that there were only a very few cases.”

  Ann: “I’m not sure of the exact number, but if the media is covering it so

much , then most people who are online must be indecent.”

 Straw Man


    Description:

The  Straw  Man  fallacy  is  committed  when  a  person  simply  ignores  a

person’s  actual  position  and  substitutes  a  distorted,  exaggerated  or

misrepresented version of that position. This sort of “reasoning” has the

following pattern:

 

  1. Person A has position X.

  2. Person B presents position Y (which is a distorted version of X).

  3. Person B attacks position Y.

  4. Therefore X is false/incorrect/flawed.

 

This sort of “reasoning” is fallacious because attacking a distorted version

of a position simply does not constitute an attack on the position itself. One

might as well expect an attack on a poor drawing of a person to hurt the

person.

 

 

  Example #1:

  Prof. Jones: “The university just cut our yearly budget by $10,000.”

  Prof. Smith: “What are we going to do?”

  Prof. Brown: “I think we should eliminate one of the teaching assistant

positions. That would take care of it.”

  Prof. Jones: “We could reduce our scheduled raises instead.”

  Prof. Brown:” I can’t understand why you want to bleed us dry like that,

Jones.”

 

  Example #2:

    “Senator  Jones  says  that  we  should  not  fund  the  attack  submarine

program. I disagree entirely. I can’t understand why he wants to leave us

defenseless like

  that.”

   Example #3:

  Bill and Jill are arguing about cleaning out their closets:

  Jill: “We should clean out the closets. They are getting a bit messy.”

  Bill: “Why, we just went through those closets last year. Do we have to

clean them out every day?”

  Jill: I never said anything about cleaning them out every day. You just

want too keep all your junk forever, which is just ridiculous.”

 Two Wrongs Make a Right


    Description:

Two Wrongs Make a Right is a fallacy in which a person “justifies” an action

against a person by asserting that the person would do the same thing to

him/her, when the action is not necessary to prevent B from doing X to A.

This fallacy has the following pattern of “reasoning”:

 

  1. It is claimed that person B would do X to person A.

  2. It is acceptable for person A to do X to person B (when A’s doing X to B

is not necessary to prevent B from doing X to A).

 

This sort of “reasoning” is fallacious because an action that is wrong is

wrong even if another person would also do it.

It should be noted that it can be the case that it is not wrong for A to do X

to B if X is done to prevent B from doing X to A or if X is done in justified

retribution. For example, if Sally is running in the park and Biff tries to attack

her, Sally would be justified in attacking Biff to defend herself. As another

example, if country A is planning to invade country B in order to enslave the

people, then country B would be justified in launching a preemptive strike to

prevent the invasion.

 

  Example #1:

  Bill has borrowed Jane’s expensive pen, but found he didn’t return it. He

tells himself that it is okay to keep it, since she would have taken his.

 

  Example #2:

  Jane: “Did you hear about those terrorists killing those poor people?

That sort of killing is just wrong.”

  Sue: “Those terrorists are justified. After all, their land was taken from

them. It is morally right for them to do what they do.”

  Jane: “Even when they blow up busloads of children?”

  Sue: “Yes. “

   Example #3:

  After leaving a bookstore, Jill notices that she was undercharged for her

book. She decides not to return the money to the store because if she had

overpaid, they would not have returned the money.”

 

  Example #4:

  Jill is horrified by the way the state uses capital punishment. Bill says

that capital punishment is fine, since those the state kill don’t have any

qualms about killing others.

 

 

 