(B L e S
il
LOGIC

YN BT AT
DOVER BOOKS ON WESTERN


PHILOSOPHY








AGRIPPA’S  OCCULT  PHILOSOPHY:  NATURAL  MAGIC,  Cornelius

Agrippa. (0-486-44717-0)

THE CROSS: ITS HISTORY AND SYMBOLISM, George Willard Benson.

  (0-486-44054-0)

THE  CREATIVE  MIND:  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  METAPHYSICS,

Henri Bergson. Translated by Mabelle L. Andison. (0-486-45439-8)

THE CONSOLATION OF PHILOSOPHY, Boethius. Translated by Richard

H. Green. (0-486-42163-5)

AN INVESTIGATION OF THE LAWS OF THOUGHT, George Boole. (0-

  486-60028-9)

ON  READING  THE  BIBLE:  THOUGHTS  AND  REFLECTIONS  OF

OVER 500 MEN AND WOMEN, FROM ST. AUGUSTINE TO OPRAH

  WINFREY, Edited by Bill Bradfield. (0-486-43708-6)

COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS: A STUDY IN THE EVOLUTION OF THE

  HUMAN MIND, Richard Maurice Bucke. (0-486-47190-X)

A PHILOSOPHICAL ENQUIRY INTO THE ORIGIN OF OUR IDEAS OF

THE SUBLIME AND BEAUTIFUL, Edmund Burke. (0-486-46166-1)

BUTLER’S LIVES OF THE SAINTS: WITH REFLECTIONS FOR EVERY

DAY IN THE YEAR, Rev. Alban Butler. (0-486-44399-X)ABANDONMENT  To  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE,  Jean-Pierre  de  Caussade.

  (0-486-46426-1)

THE EVERLASTING MAN, G. K. Chesterton. (0-486-46036-3)

HERETICS, G. K. Chesterton. (0-486-44914-9)

ORTHODOXY, G. K. Chesterton. (0-486-43701-9)

ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI, G. K. Chesterton. (0-486-46923-9)

CHRISTIAN MYSTICS OF THE MIDDLE AGES: AN ANTHOLOGY OF

  WRITINGS, Edited by Paul de Jaegher. Translated by Donald Attwater and

Others. (0-486-43659-4)

How WE THINK, John Dewey. (0-486-29895-7)

ESSAYS IN EXPERIMENTAL LOGIC, John Dewey. (0-486-43748-5)

THE AQUARIAN GOSPEL OF JESUS THE CHRIST, Levi Dowling. (0-

  486-46776-7)

EINSTEIN  ON  COSMIC  RELIGION  AND  OTHER  OPINIONS  AND

  APHORISMS, Albert Einstein. (0-486-47010-5)

THE  WAY  OF  A  PILGRIM  AND  OTHER  CLASSICS  OF  RUSSIAN

  SPIRITUALITY, Edited by G. P. Fedotov. (0-486-42712-9)

THE  ESSENCE  OF  CHRISTIANITY,  Ludwig  Feuerbach.  Translated  by

George Eliot. (0-486-45421-5)

THE LOST BOOKS OF THE BIBLE, Edited by William Hone. Translated

by Jeremiah Jones and William Wake. (0-486-44390-6)

THE  JEFFERSON  BIBLE:  THE  LIFE  AND  MORALS  OF  JESUS  OF

  NAZARETH, Thomas Jefferson. (0-486-44921-1)

GUIDE TO PHILOSOPHY, C. E. M. Joad. (0-486-20297-6)

THE PRACTICE OF THE PRESENCE OF GOD AND THE SPIRITUAL

  MAXIMS, Brother Lawrence. (0-486-44068-0)

THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF THÉRÈSE OF LISIEUX: THE STORY OF A

SOUL, Thérèse of Lisieux. (0-486-46302-8)LANGUAGE,
TRUTH AND LOGIC

by
ALFRED JULES AYER

G Prfir of he Phi
it o ety ot Y

DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC.
NEW YORK
LANGUAGE,
TRUTH AND LOGIC

by
ALFRED JULES AYER

G Prfir of he Phi
it o ety ot Y

DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC.
NEW YORK
                                        To R. A.This Dover edition, first published in 1952, is an unabridged and unaltered

republication of the second (1946) edition. It is reprinted by special

arrangement with Victor Gollantz, Ltd., and is for sale in the United States of

America and Canada only.





International Standard Book Number

9780486113098

ISBN-10: 0-486-20010-8

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 52-860





Manufactured in the United States by Courier Corporation

20010848

  www.doverpublications.comINTRODUCTION








IN THE TEN YEARS that have passed since Language, Truth and Logic was

first published, I have come to see that the questions with which it deals are

not in all respects so simple as it makes them appear; but I still believe that

the point of view which it expresses is substantially correct. Being in every

sense  a  young  man’s  book,  it  was  written  with  more  passion  than  most

philosophers allow themselves to show, at any rate in their published work,

and while this probably helped to secure it a larger audience than it might

have had otherwise, I think now that much of its argument would have been

more persuasive if it had not been presented in so harsh a form. It would,

however,  be  very  difficult  for  me  to  alter  the  tone  of  the  book  without

extensively re-writing it, and the fact that, for reasons not wholly dependent

upon its merits, it has achieved something of the status of a text-book is, I

hope, a sufficient justification for reprinting it as it stands. At the same time,

there  are  a  number  of  points  that  seem  to  me  to  call  for  some  further

explanation,  and  I  shall  accordingly  devote  the  remainder  of  this  new

introduction to commenting briefly upon them.


THE PRINCIPLE OF VERIFICATION




The principle of verification is supposed to furnish a criterion by which it

can be determined whether or not a sentence is literally meaningful. A simple

way to formulate it would be to say that a sentence had literal meaning if and

only  if  the  proposition  it  expressed  was  either  analytic  or  empiricallyverifiable. To this, however, it might be objected that unless a sentence was
                                                                  1
literally meaningful it would not express a proposition; for it is commonly

assumed  that  every  proposition  is  either  true  or  false,  and  to  say  that  a

sentence expressed what was either true or false would entail saying that it

was literally meaningful. Accordingly, if the principle of verification were

formulated in this way, it might be argued not only that it was incomplete as

a criterion of meaning, since it would not cover the case of sentences which

did not express any propositions at all, but also that it was otiose, on the

ground that the question which it was designed to answer must already have

been answered before the principle could be applied. It will be seen that when

I introduce the principle in this book I try to avoid this difficulty by speaking

of “putative propositions” and of the proposition which a sentence “purports

to express”; but this device is not satisfactory. For, in the first place, the use

of  words  like  “putative”  and  “purports”  seems  to  bring  in  psychological

considerations into which I do not wish to enter, and secondly, in the case

where the “putative proposition” is neither analytic nor empirically verifiable,

there would, according to this way of speaking, appear to be nothing that the

sentence  in  question  could  properly  be  said  to  express.  But  if  a  sentence

expresses nothing there seems to be a contradiction in saying that what it

expresses is empirically unverifiable; for even if the sentence is adjudged on

this ground to be meaningless, the reference to “what it expresses” appears

still to imply that something is expressed.

This is, however, no more than a terminological difficulty, and there are

various ways in which it might be met. One of them would be to make the

criterion  of  verifiability  apply  directly  to  sentences,  and  so  eliminate  the

reference  to  propositions  altogether.  This  would,  indeed,  run  counter  to

ordinary usage, since one would not normally say of a sentence, as opposed

to a proposition, that it was capable of being verified, or, for that matter, that

it was either true or false; but it might be argued that such a departure from

ordinary usage was justified, if it could be shown to have some practical

advantage. The fact is, however, that the practical advantage seems to lie on

the other side. For while it is true that the use of the word “proposition” does

not enable us to say anything that we could not, in principle, say without it, it

does fulfil an important function; for it makes it possible to express what is

valid not merely for a particular sentence s but for any sentence to which s is

logically equivalent. Thus, if I assert, for example, that the proposition p is

entailed by the proposition q I am indeed claiming implicitly that the Englishsentence s  which  expresses p  can  be  validly  derived  from  the  English

sentence r which expresses q, but this is not the whole of my claim. For, if I

am right, it will also follow that any sentence, whether of the English or any

other language, that is equivalent to s can be validly derived, in the language

in question, from any sentence that is equivalent to r; and it is this that my use

of the word “proposition” indicates. Admittedly, we could decide to use the

word “sentence” in the way in which we now use the word “proposition,” but

this would not be conducive to clarity, particularly as the word “sentence” is

already ambiguous. Thus, in a case of repetition, it can be said either that

there  are  two  different  sentences  or  that  the  same  sentence  has  been

formulated twice. It is in the latter sense that I have so far been using the

word, but the other usage is equally legitimate. In either usage, a sentence

which  was  expressed  in  English  would  be  accounted  a  different  sentence

from its French equivalent, but this would not hold good for the new usage of

the  word  “sentence”  that  we  should  be  introducing  if  we  substituted

“sentence” for “proposition.” For in that case we should have to say that the

English expression and its French equivalent were different formulations of

the same sentence. We might indeed be justified in increasing the ambiguity

of  the  word  “sentence”  in  this  way  if  we  thereby  avoided  any  of  the

difficulties  that  have  been  thought  to  be  attached  to  the  use  of  the  word

“proposition”;  but  I  do  not  think  that  this  is  to  be  achieved  by  the  mere

substitution of one verbal token for another. Accordingly, I conclude that this

technical use of the word “sentence,” though legitimate in itself, would be

likely  to  promote  confusion,  without  securing  us  any  compensatory

advantage.

A second way of meeting our original difficulty would be to extend the use

of the word “proposition,” so that anything that could properly be called a

sentence would be said to express a proposition, whether or not the sentence

was literally meaningful. This course would have the advantage of simplicity,

but it is open to two objections. The first is that it would involve a departure

from current philosophical usage; and the second is that it would oblige us to

give up the rule that every proposition is to be accounted either true or false.

For while, if we adopted this new usage, we should still be able to say that

anything that was either true or false was a proposition, the converse would

no longer hold good; for a proposition would be neither true nor false if it

was expressed by a sentence which was literally meaningless. I do not myself

think that these objections are very serious, but they are perhaps sufficientlyso to make it advisable to solve our terminological problem in some other

way.

The solution that I prefer is to introduce a new technical term; and for this

purpose I shall make use of the familiar word “statement,” though I shall

perhaps be using it in a slightly unfamiliar sense. Thus I propose that any

form of words that is grammatically significant shall be held to constitute a

sentence, and that every indicative sentence, whether it is literally meaningful

or not, shall be regarded as expressing a statement. Furthermore, any two

sentences which are mutually translatable will be said to express the same

statement. The word “proposition,” on the other hand, will be reserved for

what is expressed by sentences which are literally meaningful. Thus, the class

of propositions becomes, in this usage, a sub-class of the class of statements,

and one way of describing the use of the principle of verification would be to

say  that  it  provided  a  means  of  determining  when  an  indicative  sentence

expressed a proposition, or, in other words, of distinguishing the statements

that belonged to the class of propositions from those that did not.

It  should  be  remarked  that  this  decision  to  say  that  sentences  express

statements involves nothing more than the adoption of a verbal convention;

and the proof of this is that the question, “What do sentences express?” to

which it provides an answer is not a factual question. To ask of any particular

sentence what it is that it expresses may, indeed, be to put a factual question;

and one way of answering it would be to produce another sentence which was

a translation of the first. But if the general question, “What do sentences

express?” is to be interpreted factually, all that can be said in answer is that,

since it is not the case that all sentences are equivalent, there is not any one

thing that they all express. At the same time, it is useful to have a means of

referring  indefinitely  to  “what  sentences  express”  in  cases  where  the

sentences themselves are not particularly specified; and this purpose is served

by the introduction of the word “statement” as a technical term. Accordingly,

in  saying  that  sentences  express  statements,  we  are  indicating  how  this

technical term is to be understood, but we are not thereby conveying any

factual information in the sense in which we should be conveying factual

information  if  the  question  we  were  answering  was  empirical.  This  may,

indeed,  seem  a  point  too  obvious  to  be  worth  making;  but  the  question,

“What do sentences express?” is closely analogous to the question, “What do
                                                                        2
sentences  mean?”  and,  as  I  have  tried  to  show  elsewhere,  the  question,“What do sentences mean?” has been a source of confusion to philosophers

because they have mistakenly thought it to be factual. To say that indicative

sentences mean propositions is indeed legitimate, just as it is legitimate to say

that they express statements. But what we are doing, in giving answers of this

kind, is to lay down conventional definitions; and it is important that these

conventional definitions should not be confused with statements of empirical

fact.

  Returning now to the principle of verification, we may, for the sake of

brevity, apply it directly to statements rather than to the sentences which

express them, and we can then reformulate it by saying that a statement is

held to be literally meaningful if and only if it is either analytic or empirically

verifiable.  But  what  is  to  be  understood  in  this  context  by  the  term

“verifiable”? I do indeed attempt to answer this question in the first chapter

of  this  book;  but  I  have  to  acknowledge  that  my  answer  is  not  very

satisfactory.

To begin with, it will be seen that I distinguish between a “strong” and a

“weak” sense of the term “verifiable,” and that I explain this distinction by

saying that “a proposition is said to be verifiable in the strong sense of the

term, if and only if its truth could be conclusively established in experience,”

but that “it is verifiable, in the weak sense, if it is possible for experience to

render it probable.” And I then give reasons for deciding that it is only the

weak sense of the term that is required by my principle of verification. What I

seem, however, to have overlooked is that, as I represent them, these are not
                            3
two genuine alternatives. For I subsequently go on to argue that all empirical

propositions  are  hypotheses  which  are  continually  subject  to  the  test  of

further experience; and from this it would follow not merely that the truth of

any  such  proposition  never  was  conclusively  established  but  that  it  never

could be; for however strong the evidence in its favour, there would never be

a point at which it was impossible for further experience to go against it. But

this  would  mean  that  my  “strong”  sense  of  the  term  “verifiable”  had  no

possible application, and in that case there was no need for me to qualify the

other sense of “verifiable” as weak; for on my own showing it was the only

sense in which any proposition could conceivably be verified.

If I do not now draw this conclusion, it is because I have come to think that

there is a class of empirical propositions of which it is permissible to say that

they can be verified conclusively. It is characteristic of these propositions,                          4
which I have elsewhere called “basic propositions,” that they refer solely to

the  content  of  a  single  experience,  and  what  may  be  said  to  verify  them

conclusively is the occurrence of the experience to which they uniquely refer.

Furthermore, I should now agree with those who say that propositions of this

kind  are  “incorrigible,”  assuming  that  what  is  meant  by  their  being

incorrigible is that it is impossible to be mistaken about them except in a

verbal sense. In a verbal sense, indeed, it is always possible to misdescribe

one’s  experience;  but  if  one  intends  to  do  no  more  than  record  what  is

experienced  without  relating  it  to  anything  else,  it  is  not  possible  to  be

factually mistaken; and the reason for this is that one is making no claim that

any further fact could confute. It is, in short, a case of “nothing venture,

nothing lose.” It is, however, equally a case of “nothing venture, nothing

win,” since the mere recording of one’s present experience does not serve to

convey any information either to any other person or indeed to oneself; for in

knowing a basic proposition to be true one obtains no further knowledge than

what  is  already  afforded  by  the  occurrence  of  the  relevant  experience.

Admittedly, the form of words that is used to express a basic proposition may

be understood to express something that is informative both to another person

and to oneself, but when it is so understood it no longer expresses a basic

proposition.  It  was  for  this  reason,  indeed,  that  I  maintained,  in  the  fifth

chapter of this book, that there could not be such things as basic propositions,

in  the  sense  in  which  I  am  now  using  the  term;  for  the  burden  of  my

argument was that no synthetic proposition could be purely ostensive. My

reasoning on this point was not in itself incorrect, but I think that I mistook

its purport. For I seem not to have perceived that what I was really doing was

to suggest a motive for refusing to apply the term “proposition” to statements

that “directly recorded an immediate experience”; and this is a terminological

point which is not of any great importance.

  Whether or not one chooses to include basic statements in the class of

empirical propositions, and so to admit that some empirical propositions can

be  conclusively  verified,  it  will  remain  true  that  the  vast  majority  of  the

propositions  that  people  actually  express  are  neither  themselves  basic

statements,  nor  deducible  from  any  finite  set  of  basic  statements.

Consequently, if the principle of verification is to be seriously considered as a

criterion  of  meaning,  it  must  be  interpreted  in  such  a  way  as  to  admit

statements that are not so strongly verifiable as basic statements are supposed

to be. But how then is the word “verifiable” to be understood?It will be seen that, in this book, I begin by suggesting that a statement is

“weakly” verifiable, and therefore meaningful, according to my criterion, if

“some possible sense-experience would be relevant to the determination of its

truth or falsehood.” But, as I recognize, this itself requires interpretation; for

the word “relevant” is uncomfortably vague. Accordingly, I put forward a

second version of my principle, which I shall restate here in slightly different

terms,  using  the  phrase  “observation-statement,”  in  place  of  “experiential

proposition,” to designate a statement “which records an actual or possible

observation.”  In  this  version,  then,  the  principle  is  that  a  statement  is

verifiable, and consequently meaningful, if some observation-statement can

be deduced from it in conjunction with certain other premises, without being

deducible from those other premises alone.

I say of this criterion that it “seems liberal enough,” but in fact it is far too

liberal, since it allows meaning to any statement whatsoever. For, given any

statement “S” and an observation-statement “0,” “0” follows from “S” and “if

S then 0” without following from “if S then 0” alone. Thus, the statements

”the Absolute is lazy” and “if the Absolute is lazy, this is white” jointly entail

the observation-statement “this is white,” and since “this is white” does not

follow from either of these premises, taken by itself, both. of them satisfy my

criterion of meaning. Furthermore, this would hold good for any other piece

of nonsense that one cared to put, as an example, in place of “the Absolute is

lazy,”  provided  only  that  it  had  the  grammatical  form  of  an  indicative

sentence.  But  a  criterion  of  meaning  that  allows  such  latitude  as  this  is
                          5
evidently unacceptable.

It may be remarked that the same objection applies to the proposal that we

should take the possibility of falsification as our criterion. For, given any

statement “S” and any observation-statement “0”, ”0” will be incompatible

with the conjunction of “S” and “if S then not 0.” We could indeed avoid the

difficulty,  in  either  case,  by  leaving  out  the  stipulation  about  the  other

premises. But as this would involve the exclusion of all hypotheticals from

the  class  of  empirical  propositions,  we  should  escape  from  making  our

criteria too liberal only at the cost of making them too stringent.

  Another difficulty which I overlooked in my original attempt to formulate

the principle of verification is that most empirical propositions are in some
                                                          6
degree vague. Thus, as I have remarked elsewhere, what is required to verify

a statement about a material thing is never the occurrence of precisely this orprecisely that sense-content, but only the occurrence of one or other of the

sense-contents that fall within a fairly indefinite range. We do indeed test any

such statement by making observations which consist in the occurrence of

particular sense-contents; but, for any test that we actually carry out, there is

always an indefinite number of other tests, differing to some extent in respect

either of their conditions or their results, that would have served the same

purpose. And this means that there is never any set of observation-statements

of which it can truly be said that precisely they are entailed by any given

statement about a material thing.

  Nevertheless,  it  is  only  by  the  occurrence  of  some  sense-content,  and

consequently by the truth of some observation-statement, that any statement

about a material thing is actually verified; and from this it follows that every

significant statement about a material thing can be represented as entailing a

disjunction of observation-statements, although the terms of this disjunction,

being infinite, can not be enumerated in detail. Consequently, I do not think

that we need be troubled by the difficulty about vagueness, so long as it is

understood  that  when  we  speak  of  the  “entailment”  of  observation-

statements, what we are considering to be deducible from the premises in

question is not any particular observation-statement, but only one or other of

a set of such statements, where the defining characteristic of the set is that all

its members refer to sense-contents that fall within a certain specifiable range.

  There remains the more serious objection that my criterion, as it stands,

allows meaning to any indicative statement whatsoever. To meet this, I shall

emend it as follows. I propose to say that a statement is directly verifiable if it

is either itself an observation-statement, or is such that in conjunction with

one  or  more  observation-statements  it  entails  at  least  one  observation-

statement  which  is  not  deducible  from  these  other  premises  alone;  and  I

propose  to  say  that  a  statement  is  indirectly  verifiable  if  it  satisfies  the

following conditions: first, that in conjunction with certain other premises it

entails one or more directly verifiable statements which are not deducible

from these other premises alone; and secondly, that these other premises do

not include any statement that is not either analytic, or directly verifiable, or

capable of being independently established as indirectly verifiable. And I can

now  reformulate  the  principle  of  verification  as  requiring  of  a  literally

meaningful statement, which is not analytic, that it should be either directly

or indirectly verifiable, in the foregoing sense.It may be remarked that in giving my account of the conditions in which a

statement is to be considered indirectly verifiable, I have explicitly put in the

proviso that the “other premises” may include analytic statements; and my

reason for doing this is that I intend in this way to allow for the case of

scientific  theories  which  are  expressed  in  terms  that  do  not  themselves

designate anything observable. For while the statements that contain these

terms may not appear to describe anything that anyone could ever observe, a

“dictionary” may be provided by means of which they can be transformed

into statements that are verifiable; and the statements which constitute the

dictionary  can  be  regarded  as  analytic.  Were  this  not  so,  there  would  be

nothing to choose between such scientific theories and those that I should

dismiss  as  metaphysical;  but  I  take  it  to  be  characteristic  of  the

metaphysician, in my somewhat pejorative sense of the term, not only that his

statements  do  not  describe  anything  that  is  capable,  even  in  principle,  of

being observed, but also that no dictionary is provided by means of which

they  can  be  transformed  into  statements  that  are  directly  or  indirectly

verifiable.

  Metaphysical statements, in my sense of the term, are excluded also by the

older empiricist principle that no statement is literally meaningful unless it

describes what could be experienced, where the criterion of what could be

experienced is that it should be something of the same kind as actually has
                    7
been  experienced.  But,  apart  from  its  lack  of  precision,  this  empiricist

principle has, to my mind, the defect of imposing too harsh a condition upon

the  form  of  scientific  theories;  for  it  would  seem  to  imply  that  it  was

illegitimate  to  introduce  any  term  that  did  not  itself  designate  something

observable. The principle of verification, on the other hand, is, as I have tried

to show, more liberal in this respect, and in view of the use that is actually

made of scientific theories which the other would rule out, I think that the

more liberal criterion is to be preferred.

It has sometimes been assumed by my critics that I take the principle of

verification to imply that no statement can be evidence for another unless it is

a part of its meaning; but this is not the case. Thus, to make use of a simple

illustration,  the  statement  that  I  have  blood  on  my  coat  may,  in  certain

circumstances, confirm the hypothesis that I have committed a murder, but it

is not part of the meaning of the statement that I have committed a murder

that  I  should  have  blood  upon  my  coat,  nor,  as  I  understand  it,  does  theprinciple of verification imply that it is. For one statement may be evidence

for another, and still neither itself express a necessary condition of the truth

of this other statement, nor belong to any set of statements which determines

a range within which such a necessary condition falls; and it is only in these

cases  that  the  principle  of  verification  yields  the  conclusion  that  the  one

statement is part of the meaning of the other. Thus, from the fact that it is

only by the making of some observation that any statement about a material

thing  can  be  directly  verified  it  follows,  according  to  the  principle  of

verification, that every such statement contains some observation-statement

or other as part of its meaning, and it follows also that, although its generality

may  prevent  any  finite  set  of  observation-statements  from  exhausting  its

meaning, it does not contain anything as part of its meaning that cannot be

represented  as  an  observation-statement;  but  there  may  still  be  many

observation-statements  that  are  relevant  to  its  truth  or  falsehood  without

being part of its meaning at all. Again, a person who affirms the existence of

a deity may try to support his contention by appealing to the facts of religious

experience; but it does not follow from this that the factual meaning of his

statement is wholly contained in the propositions by which these religious

experiences are described. For there may be other empirical facts that he

would also consider to be relevant; and it is possible that the descriptions of

these other empirical facts can more properly be regarded as containing the

factual  meaning  of  his  statement  than  the  descriptions  of  the  religious

experiences. At the same time, if one accepts the principle of verification, one

must hold that his statement does not have any other factual meaning than

what is contained in at least some of the relevant empirical propositions; and

that if it is so interpreted that no possible experience could go to verify it, it

does not have any factual meaning at all.

In putting forward the principle of verification as a criterion of meaning, I

do not overlook the fact that the word “meaning” is commonly used in a

variety of senses, and I do not wish to deny that in some of these senses a

statement may properly be said to be meaningful even though it is neither

analytic nor empirically verifiable. I should, however, claim that there was at

least one proper use of the word “meaning” in which it would be incorrect to

say  that  a  statement  was  meaningful  unless  it  satisfied  the  principle  of

verification; and I have, perhaps tendentiously, used the expression “literal

meaning”  to  distinguish  this  use  from  the  others,  while  applying  the

expression  “factual  meaning”  to  the  case  of  statements  which  satisfy  mycriterion without being analytic. Furthermore, I suggest that it is only if it is

literally meaningful, in this sense, that a statement can properly be said to be

either true or false. Thus, while I wish the principle of verification itself to be
                                                    8
regarded,  not  as  an  empirical  hypothesis,  but  as  a  definition,  it  is  not

supposed  to  be  entirely  arbitrary.  It  is  indeed  open  to  anyone  to  adopt  a

different  criterion  of  meaning  and  so  to  produce  an  alternative  definition

which  may  very  well  correspond  to  one  of  the  ways  in  which  the  word

“meaning” is commonly used. And if a statement satisfied such a criterion,

there is, no doubt, some proper use of the word “understanding” in which it

would be capable of being understood. Nevertheless, I think that, unless it

satisfied  the  principle  of  verification,  it  would  not  be  capable  of  being

understood in the sense in which either scientific hypotheses or common-

sense statements are habitually understood. I confess, however, that it now

seems to me unlikely that any metaphysician would yield to a claim of this

kind; and although I should still defend the use of the criterion of verifiability

as a methodological principle, I realize that for the effective elimination of

metaphysics  it  needs  to  be  supported  by  detailed  analyses  of  particular

metaphysical arguments.


THE “A PRIORI”




In saying that the certainty of a priori propositions depends upon the fact

that they are tautologies, I use the word “tautology” in such a way that a

proposition can be said to be a tautology if it is analytic; and I hold that a

proposition  is  analytic  if  it  is  true  solely  in  virtue  of  the  meaning  of  its

constituent symbols, and cannot therefore be either confirmed or refuted by
                                                              9
any fact of experience. It has, indeed, been suggested that my treatment of a

priori propositions makes them into a sub-class of empirical propositions. For

I  sometimes  seem  to  imply  that  they  describe  the  way  in  which  certain

symbols are used, and it is undoubtedly an empirical fact that people use

symbols in the ways that they do. This is not, however, the position that I

wish to hold; nor do I think that I am committed to it. For although I say that

the validity of a priori propositions depends upon certain facts about verbal

usage, I do not think that this is equivalent to saying that they describe these

facts in the sense in which empirical propositions may describe the facts that

verify them; and indeed I argue that they do not, in this sense, describe anyfacts  at  all.  At  the  same  time  I  allow  that  the  usefulness  of a  priori

propositions is founded both on the empirical fact that certain symbols are

used in the way that they are and on the empirical fact that the symbols in

question are successfully applied to our experience; and I try in the fourth

chapter of this book to show how this is so.

Just  as  it  is  a  mistake  to  identify a priori  propositions  with  empirical

propositions about language, so I now think that it is a mistake to say that
                                          10
they are themselves linguistic rules. For apart from the fact that they can

properly  be  said  to  be  true,  which  linguistic  rules  cannot,  they  are

distinguished also by being necessary, whereas linguistic rules are arbitrary.

At  the  same  time,  if  they  are  necessary  it  is  only  because  the  relevant

linguistic rules are presupposed. Thus, it is a contingent, empirical fact that

the word “earlier” is used in English to mean earlier, and it is an arbitrary,

though  convenient,  rule  of  language  that  words  that  stand  for  temporal

relations are to be used transitively; but, given this rule, the proposition that,

if A is earlier than B and B is earlier than C, A is earlier than C becomes a

necessary truth. Similarly, in Russell’s and Whitehead’s system of logic, it is

a contingent, empirical fact that the sign “ ɔ” should have been given the

meaning  that  it  has,  and  the  rules  which  govern  the  use  of  this  sign  are

conventions, which themselves are neither true nor false; but, given these

rules the a priori proposition “q. ɔ .p ɔ q” is necessarily true. Being a priori,

this  proposition  gives  no  information  in  the  ordinary  sense  in  which  an

empirical  proposition  may  be  said  to  give  information,  nor  does  it  itself

prescribe how the logical constant “ ɔ ” is to be used. What it does is to

elucidate the proper use of this logical constant; and it is in this way that it is

informative.

An argument which has been brought against the doctrine that a priori

propositions of the form “p entails q” are analytic is that it is possible for one

proposition to entail another without containing it as part of its meaning; for

it is assumed that this would not be possible if the analytic view of entailment
              11
were  correct.  But  the  answer  to  this  is  that  the  question  whether  one

proposition is part of the meaning of another is ambiguous. If you say, for

example, as I think most of those who raise this objection would, that q is not

part of the meaning of p if it is possible to understand p without thinking of q,

then clearly one proposition can entail another without containing it as part of

its meaning; for it can hardly be maintained that anyone who considers agiven  set  of  propositions  must  be  immediately  conscious  of  all  that  they

entail. This is, however, to make a point with which I do not think that any

upholder of the analytic view of entailment would wish to disagree; for it is

common ground that deductive reasoning may lead to conclusions which are

new in the sense that one had not previously apprehended them. But if this is

admitted by those who say that propositions of the form “p entails q” are

analytic,  how  can  they  also  say  that  if p  entails q  the  meaning  of q  is

contained  in  that  of p?  The  answer  is  that  they  are  using  a  criterion  of

meaning, whether the verification principle or another, from which it follows

that  when  one  proposition  entails  another  the  meaning  of  the  second  is

contained in that of the first. In other words, they determine the meaning of a

proposition by considering what it entails; and this is, to my mind, a perfectly
                        12
legitimate procedure. If this procedure is adopted the proposition that, if p

entails q, the meaning of q is contained in that of p, itself becomes analytic;

and it is therefore not to be refuted by any such psychological facts as those

on which the critics of this view rely. At the same time, it may fairly be

objected to it that it does not give us much information about the nature of

entailment; for although it entitles us to say that the logical consequences of a

proposition are explicative of its meaning, this is only because the meaning of

a proposition is understood to depend upon what it entails.


PROPOSITIONS ABOUT THE PAST AND ABOUT OTHER

MINDS




By  saying  of  propositions  about  the  past  that  they  are  “rules  for  the

prediction  of  those  ‘historical’  experiences  which  are  commonly  said  to

verify  them”  I  seem  to  imply  that  they  can  somehow  be  translated  into

propositions  about  present  or  future  experiences.  But  this  is  certainly

incorrect. Statements about the past may be verifiable in the sense that when

they are conjoined with other premises of a suitable kind they may entail

observation-statements which do not follow from these other premises alone;

but I do not think that the truth of any observation-statements which refer to

the present or the future is a necessary condition of the truth of any statement

about the past. This does not mean, however, that propositions referring to

the past cannot be analysed in phenomenal terms; for they can be taken as

implying that certain observations would have occurred if certain conditionshad  been  fulfilled.  But  the  trouble  is  that  these  conditions  never  can  be

fulfilled; for they require of the observer that he should occupy a temporal

position that ex hypothesi  he  does  not.  This  difficulty,  however,  is  not  a

peculiarity of propositions about the past; for it is true also of unfulfilled

conditionals about the present that their protases cannot in fact be satisfied,

since they require of the observer that he should be occupying a different

spatial position from that which he actually does. But, as I have remarked
          13
elsewhere, just as it is a contingent fact that a person happens at a given

moment to be occupying a particular position in space, so is it a contingent

fact that he happens to be living at a particular time. And from this I conclude

that if one is justified in saying that events which are remote in space are

observable, in principle, the same may be said of events which are situated in

the past.

  Concerning the experiences of others I confess that I am doubtful whether

the account that is given in this book is correct; but I am not convinced that it

is not. In another work, I have argued that, since it is a contingent fact that

any  particular  experience  belongs  to  the  series  of  experiences  which

constitutes a given person, rather than to another series which constitutes

someone else, there is a sense in which “it is not logically inconceivable that I

should have an experience that is in fact owned by someone else”; and from

this I inferred that the use of “the argument from analogy” might after all be
        14
justified. More recently, however, I have come to think that this reasoning

is very dubious. For while it is possible to imagine circumstances in which

we might have found it convenient to say of two dif ferent persons that they

owned the same experience, the fact is that, according to our present usage, it

is a necessary proposition that they do not; and, since this is so, I am afraid

that  the  argument  from  analogy  remains  open  to  the  objections  that  are

brought against it in this book. Consequently, I am inclined to revert to a

“behaviouristic”  interpretation  of  propositions  about  other  people’s

experiences. But I own that it has an air of paradox which prevents me from
                                          15
being wholly confident that it is true.


THE EMOTIVE THEORY OF VALUES




The emotive theory of values, which is developed in the sixth chapter ofthis  book,  has  provoked  a  fair  amount  of  criticism;  but  I  find  that  this

criticism has been directed more often against the positivistic principles on
                                                                                          16
which the theory has been assumed to depend than against the theory itself.

Now I do not deny that in putting forward this theory I was concerned with

maintaining the general consistency of my position; but it is not the only

ethical theory that would have satisfied this requirement, nor does it actually

entail any of the non-ethical statements which form the remainder of my

argument. Consequently, even if it could be shown that these other statements

were invalid, this would not in itself refute the emotive analysis of ethical

judgements; and in fact I believe this analysis to be valid on its own account.

  Having said this, I must acknowledge that the theory is here presented in a

very summary way, and that it needs to be supported by a more detailed
                                                                                          17
analysis of specimen ethical judgements than I make any attempt to give.

Thus,  among  other  things,  I  fail  to  bring  out  the  point  that  the  common

objects of moral approval or disapproval are not particular actions so much as

classes  of  actions;  by  which  I  mean  that  if  an  action  is  labelled  right  or

wrong, or good or bad, as the case may be, it is because it is thought to be an

action of a certain type. And this point seems to me important, because I

think  that  what  seems  to  be  an  ethical  judgement  is  very  often  a  factual

classification of an action as belonging to some class of actions by which a

certain moral attitude on the part of the speaker is habitually aroused. Thus, a

man who is a convinced utilitarian may simply mean by calling an action

right that it tends to promote, or more probably that it is the sort of action that

tends to promote, the general happiness; and in that case the validity of his

statement becomes an empirical matter of fact. Similarly, a man who bases

his ethical upon his religious views may actually mean by calling an action

right or wrong that it is the sort of action that is enjoined or forbidden by

some ecclesiastical authority; and this also may be empirically verified. Now

in these cases the form of words by which the factual statement is expressed

is the same as that which would be used to express a normative statement;

and this may to some extent explain why statements which are recognized to

be normative are nevertheless often thought to be factual. Moreover, a great

many ethical statements contain, as a factual element, some description of the

action, or the situation, to which the ethical term in question is being applied.

But although there may be a number of cases in which this ethical term is

itself to be understood descriptively, I do not think that this is always so. I

think that there are many statements in which an ethical term is used in apurely normative way, and it is to statements of this kind that the emotive

theory of ethics is intended to apply.

The objection that if the emotive theory was correct it would be impossible

for one person to contradict another on a question of value is here met by the

answer that what seem to be disputes about questions of value are really

disputes about questions of fact. I should, however, have made it clear that it

does not follow from this that two persons cannot significantly disagree about

a question of value, or that it is idle for them to attempt to convince one

another. For a consideration of any dispute about a matter of taste will show

that there can be disagreement without formal contradiction, and that in order

to alter another man’s opinions, in the sense of getting him to change his

attitude, it is not necessary to contradict anything that he asserts. Thus, if one

wishes to affect another person in such a way as to bring his sentiments on a

given point into accordance with one’s own, there are various ways in which

one may proceed. One may, for example, call his attention to certain facts

that one supposes him to have overlooked; and, as I have already remarked, I

believe that much of what passes for ethical discussion is a proceeding of this

type. It is, however, also possible to influence other people by a suitable

choice of emotive language; and this is the practical justification for the use

of normative expressions of value. At the same time, it must be admitted that

if  the  other  person  persists  in  maintaining  his  contrary  attitude,  without

however disputing any of the relevant facts, a point is reached at which the

discussion can go no further. And in that case there is no sense in asking

which of the conflicting views is true. For, since the expression of a value

judgement is not a proposition, the question of truth or falsehood does not

here arise.


THE NATURE OF PHILOSOPHICAL ANALYSIS




In  citing  Bertrand  Russell’s  theory  of  descriptions  as  a  specimen  of

philosophical analysis, I unfortunately made a mistake in my exposition of

the  theory.  For,  having  taken  the  familiar  example  of  “The  author  of

Waverley was Scotch,” I said that it was equivalent to “One person, and one

person only, wrote Waverley, and that person was Scotch.” But, as Professor

Stebbing pointed out in her review of this book, “if the word ‘that’ is used

referentially, then ‘that person was Scotch’ is equivalent to the whole of theoriginal,” and if it is used demonstratively, then the defining expression “is
                                      18
not a translation of the original.” The version sometimes given by Russell
      19
himself is that “The author of Waverley was Scotch” is equivalent to a

conjunction of the three propositions “At least one person wrote Waverley”;

“At most one person wrote Waverley”; and “Whoever wrote Waverley was
                                                                20
Scotch.”  Professor  Moore,  however,  has  remarked  that  if  the  words

“whoever wrote Waverley” are understood “in the most natural way,” the

first  of  these  propositions  is  superfluous;  for  he  argues  that  part  of  what

would  ordinarily  be  meant  by  saying  that  whoever  wrote Waverley  was

Scotch is that somebody did write Waverley. Accordingly, he suggests that

the proposition which Russell intended to express by the words “whoever

wrote Waverley was Scotch” is “one which can be expressed more clearly by

the  words  ‘There  never  was  a  person  who  wrote Waverley  but  was  not

Scotch.’ ” And even so he does not think that the proposed translation is

correct. For he objects that to say of someone that he is the author of a work

does not entail saying that he wrote it, since if he had composed it without

actually writing it down he could still properly be called its author. To this

Russell has replied that it was “the inevitable vagueness and ambiguity of any

language  used  for  every-day  purposes”  that  led  him  to  use  an  artificial

symbolic language in Principia Mathematica, and that it is in the definitions

given in Principia Mathematica that the whole of his theory of descriptions
        21
consists; In saying this, however, he is, I think, unjust to himself. For it

seems to me that one of the great merits of his theory of descriptions is that it

does throw light upon the use of a certain class of expressions in ordinary

speech, and that this is a point of philosophical importance. For, by showing

that expressions like “the present King of France” do not function as names,

the  theory  exposes  the  fallacy  that  has  led  philosophers  to  believe  in

“subsistent  entities.”  Thus,  while  it  is  unfortunate  that  the  example  most

frequently chosen to illustrate the theory should contain a minor inaccuracy, I

do not think that this seriously affects its value, even in its application to

every-day language. For, as I point out in this book, the object of analysing

“The  author  of Waverley  was  Scotch”  is  not  just  to  obtain  an  accurate

translation of this particular sentence, but to elucidate the use of a whole class

of expressions, of which “the author of Waverley” serves merely as a typical

example.

A more serious mistake than my misrendering of “The author of Waverleywas Scotch” was my assumption that philosophical analysis consisted mainly

in the provision of “definitions in use.” It is, indeed, true that what I describe

as  philosophical  analysis  is  very  largely  a  matter  of  exhibiting  the  inter-
                                                      22
relationship of different types of propositions; but the cases in which this

process actually yields a set of definitions are the exception rather than the

rule. Thus the problem of showing how statements about material things are

related to observation-statements, which is, in effect, the traditional problem

of perception, might be thought to require for its solution that one should

indicate  a  method  of  translating  statements  about  material  things  into

observation-statements,  and  thereby  furnish  what  could  be  regarded  as  a

definition of a material thing. But, in fact, this is impossible; for, as I have

already remarked, no finite set of observation statements is ever equivalent to

a statement about a material thing. What one can do, however, is to construct

a schema which shows what sort of relations must obtain between sense-

contents for it to be true, in any given case, that a material thing exists: and

while this process cannot, properly speaking, be said to yield a definition, it

does have the effect of showing how the one type of statement is related to
          23
the other. Similarly, in the field of political philosophy, one will probably

not be able to translate statements on the political level into statements about

individual persons; for although what is said about a State, for example, is to

be verified only by the behaviour of certain individuals, such a statement is

usually indefinite in a way that prevents any particular set of statements about

the  behaviour  of  individuals  from  being  exactly  equivalent  to  it.

Nevertheless, here again it is possible to indicate what types of relations must

obtain between individual persons for the political statements in question to

be true: so that even if no actual definitions are obtained, the meaning of the

political statements is appropriately clarified.

In such cases as these one does indeed arrive at something that approaches

a  definition  in  use;  but  there  are  other  cases  of  philosophical  analysis  in

which nothing even approaching a definition is either provided or sought.

Thus, when Professor Moore suggests that to say that “existence is not a

predicate”  may  be  a  way  of  saying  that  “there  is  some  very  important

difference between the way in which ‘exist’ is used in such a sentence as

‘Tame tigers exist’ and the way in which ‘growl’ is used in ‘Tame tigers

growl,’ ”he does not develop his point by giving rules for the translation of

one set of sentences into another. What he does is to remark that whereas it

makes good sense to say “All tame tigers growl” or “Most tame tigers growl”it would be nonsense to say “All tame tigers exist” or “Most tame tigers
      24
exist.” Now this may seem a rather trivial point for him to make, but in fact

it  is  philosophically  illuminating.  For  it  is  precisely  the  assumption  that

existence is a predicate that gives plausibility to “the ontological argument”;

and the ontological argument is supposed to demonstrate the existence of a

God. Consequently Moore by pointing out a peculiarity in the use of the word

“exist”  helps  to  protect  us  from  a  serious  fallacy;  so  that  his  procedure,

though  different  from  that  which  Russell  follows  in  his  theory  of
                                                                    25
descriptions, tends to achieve the same philosophical end.

I maintain in this book that it is not within the province of philosophy to

justify  our  scientific  or  common-sense  beliefs;  for  their  validity  is  an

empirical matter, which cannot be settled by a priori means. At the same

time, the question of what constitutes such a justification is philosophical, as

the  existence  of  “the  problem  of  induction”  shows.  Here  again,  what  is

required  is  not  necessarily  a  definition.  For  although  I  believe  that  the

problems connected with induction can be reduced to the question of what is

meant by saying that one proposition is good evidence for another, I doubt if

the way to answer this is to construct a formal definition of “evidence.” What

is chiefly wanted, I think, is an analysis of scientific method, and although it

might  be  possible  to  express  the  results  of  this  analysis  in  the  form  of

definitions, this would not be an achievement of primary importance. And

here  I  may  add  that  the  reduction  of  philosophy  to  analysis  need  not  be

incompatible  with  the  view  that  its  function  is  to  bring  to  light  “the

presuppositions of science.” For if there are such presuppositions, they can no

doubt  be  shown  to  be  logically  involved  in  the  applications  of  scientific

method, or in the use of certain scientific terms.

It used to be said by positivists of the Viennese school that the function of

philosophy  was  not  to  put  forward  a  special  set  of  “philosophical”

propositions, but to make other propositions clear; and this statement has at

least the merit of bringing out the point that philosophy is not a source of

speculative truth. Nevertheless I now think that it is incorrect to say that there

are no philosophical propositions. For, whether they are true or false, the

propositions that are expressed in such a book as this do fall into a special

category;  and  since  they  are  the  sort  of  propositions  that  are  asserted  or

denied  by  philosophers,  I  do  not  see  why  they  should  not  be  called

philosophical. To say of them that they are, in some sense, about the usage ofwords,  is,  I  believe,  correct  but  also  inadequate;  for  certainly  not  every
                                                              26
statement about the usage of words is philosophical. Thus, a lexicographer

also seeks to give information about the usage of words, but the philosopher,

differs from him in being concerned, as I have tried to indicate, not with the

use of particular expressions but with classes of expressions; and whereas the

propositions of the lexicographer are empirical, philosophical propositions, if
                                        27
they are true, are usually analytic. For the rest I can find no better way of

explaining my conception of philosophy than by referring to examples; and

one such example is the argument of this book.

                                                                            A. J. AYER.

  Wadham College, Oxford.

  January, 1946.Table of Contents










    DOVER BOOKS ON WESTERN PHILOSOPHY

    Title Page

    Dedication

    Copyright Page

      INTRODUCTION

    PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION

    CHAPTER I - THE ELIMINATION OF METAPHYSICS

    CHAPTER II - THE FUNCTION OF PHILOSOPHY

    CHAPTER III - THE NATURE OF PHILOSOPHICAL ANALYSIS

    CHAPTER IV - THE A PRIORI

    CHAPTER V - TRUTH AND PROBABILITY

    CHAPTER VI - CRITIQUE OF ETHICS AND THEOLOGY

    CHAPTER VII - THE SELF AND THE COMMON WORLD

    CHAPTER  VIII  -  SOLUTIONS  OF  OUTSTANDING

      PHILOSOPHICAL DISPUTES

    INDEX

    A CATALOG OF SELECTED DOVER BOOKS IN ALL FIELDS OF

    INTERESTPREFACE TO FIRST EDITION








THE VIEWS which are put forward in this treatise derive from the doctrines

of  Bertrand  Russell  and  Wittgenstein,  which  are  themselves  the  logical

outcome  of  the  empiricism  of  Berkeley  and  David  Hume.  Like  Hume,  I

divide  all  genuine  propositions  into  two  classes:  those  which,  in  his

terminology, concern “relations of ideas,” and those which concern “matters

of fact.” The former class comprises the a priori propositions of logic and

pure mathematics, and these I allow to be necessary and certain only because

they are analytic. That is, I maintain that the reason why these propositions

cannot be confuted in experience is that they do not make any assertion about

the empirical world, but simply record our determination to use symbols in a

certain  fashion.  Propositions  concerning  empirical  matters  of  fact,  on  the

other hand, I hold to be hypotheses, which can be probable but never certain.

And in giving an account of the method of their validation I claim also to

have explained the nature of truth.

To test whether a sentence expresses a genuine empirical hypothesis, I

adopt what may be called a modified verification principle. For I require of

an empirical hypothesis, not indeed that it should be conclusively verifiable,

but  that  some  possible  sense-experience  should  be  relevant  to  the

determination of its truth or falsehood. If a putative proposition fails to satisfy

this principle, and is not a tautology, then I hold that it is metaphysical, and

that, being metaphysical, it is neither true nor false but literally senseless. It

will  be  found  that  much  of  what  ordinarily  passes  for  philosophy  is

metaphysical according to this criterion, and, in particular, that it can not be

significantly asserted that there is a non-empirical world of values, or thatmen have immortal souls, or that there is a transcendent God.

As  for  the  propositions  of  philosophy  themselves,  they  are  held  to  be

linguistically necessary, and so analytic. And with regard to the relationship

of philosophy and empirical science, it is, shown that the philosopher is not in

a position to furnish speculative truths, which would, as it were, compete

with the hypotheses of science, nor yet to pass a priori judgements upon the

validity  of  scientific  theories,  but  that  his  function  is  to  clarify  the

propositions  of  science  by  exhibiting  their  logical  relationships,  and  by

defining the symbols which occur in them. Consequently I maintain that there

is nothing in the nature of philosophy to warrant the existence of conflicting

philosophical “schools.” And I attempt to substantiate this by providing a

definitive  solution  of  the  problems  which  have  been  the  chief  sources  of

controversy between philosophers in the past.

The  view  that  philosophizing  is  an  activity  of  analysis  is  associated  in

England with the work of G. E. Moore and his disciples. But while I have

learned a great deal from Professor Moore, I have reason to believe that he

and  his  followers  are  not  prepared  to  adopt  such  a  thoroughgoing

phenomenalism  as  I  do,  and  that  they  take  a  rather  different  view  of  the

nature of philosophical analysis. The philosophers with whom I am in the

closest agreement are those who compose the “Viennese circle,” under the

leadership of Moritz Schlick, and are commonly known as logical positivists.

And of these I owe most to Rudolf Carnap. Further, I wish to acknowledge

my  indebtedness  to  Gilbert  Ryle,  my  original  tutor  in  philosophy,  and  to

Isaiah Berlin, who have discussed with me every point in the argument of this

treatise, and made many valuable suggestions, although they both disagree

with much of what I assert. And I must also express my thanks to J. R. M.

Willis for his correction of the proofs.

                                                                            A. J. AYER.

11 Foubert’s Place,

  London.

July 1935.CHAPTER I









THE ELIMINATION OF METAPHYSICS




THE TRADITIONAL DISPUTES of philosophers are, for the most part, as

unwarranted as they are unfruitful. The surest way to end them is to establish

beyond question what should be the purpose and method of a philosophical

enquiry.  And  this  is  by  no  means  so  difficult  a  task  as  the  history  of

philosophy would lead one to suppose. For if there are any questions which

science  leaves  it  to  philosophy  to  answer,  a  straightforward  process  of

elimination must lead to their discovery.

We  may  begin  by  criticising  the  metaphysical  thesis  that  philosophy

affords  us  knowledge  of  a  reality  transcending  the  world  of  science  and

common sense. Later on, when we come to define metaphysics and account

for  its  existence,  we  shall  find  that  it  is  possible  to  be  a  metaphysician

without  believing  in  a  transcendent  reality;  for  we  shall  see  that  many

metaphysical utterances are due to the commission of logical errors, rather

than to a conscious desire on the part of their authors to go beyond the limits

of  experience.  But  it  is  convenient  for  us  to  take  the  case  of  those  who

believe that it is possible to have knowledge of a transcendent reality as a

starting-point for our discussion. The arguments which we use to refute them

will subsequently be found to apply to the whole of metaphysics.

One way of attacking a metaphysician who claimed to have knowledge ofa reality which transcended the phenomenal world would be to enquire from

what premises his propositions were deduced. Must he not begin, as other

men do, with the evidence of his senses? And if so, what valid process of

reasoning can possibly lead him to the conception of a transcendent reality?

Surely  from  empirical  premises  nothing  whatsoever  concerning  the

properties, or even the existence, of anything super-empirical can legitimately

be inferred. But this objection would be met by a denial on the part of the

metaphysician that his assertions were ultimately based on the evidence of his

senses.  He  would  say  that  he  was  endowed  with  a  faculty  of  intellectual

intuition which enabled him to know facts that could not be known through

sense-experience.  And  even  if  it  could  be  shown  that  he  was  relying  on

empirical  premises,  and  that  his  venture  into  a  non-empirical  world  was

therefore logically unjustified, it would not follow that the assertions which

he made concerning this non-empirical world could not be true. For the fact

that a conclusion does not follow from its putative premise is not sufficient to

show  that  it  is  false.  Consequently  one  cannot  overthrow  a  system  of

transcendent metaphysics merely by criticising the way in which it comes

into being. What is required is rather a criticism of the nature of the actual

statements which comprise it. And this is the line of argument which we

shall, in fact, pursue. For we shall maintain that no statement which refers to

a  “reality”  transcending  the  limits  of  all  possible  sense-experience  can

possibly have any literal significance; from which it must follow that the

labours of those who have striven to describe such a reality have all been

devoted to the production of nonsense.

It  may  be  suggested  that  this  is  a  proposition  which  has  already  been

proved  by  Kant.  But  although  Kant  also  condemned  transcendent

metaphysics,  he  did  so  on  different  grounds.  For  he  said  that  the  human

understanding was so constituted that it lost itself in contradictions when it

ventured out beyond the limits of possible experience and attempted to deal

with  things  in  themselves.  And  thus  he  made  the  impossibility  of  a

transcendent metaphysic not, as we do, a matter of logic, but a matter of fact.

He asserted, not that our minds could not conceivably have had the power of

penetrating beyond the phenomenal world, but merely that they were in fact

devoid of it. And this leads the critic to ask how, if it is possible to know only

what lies within the bounds of sense-experience, the author can be justified in

asserting that real things do exist beyond, and how he can tell what are the

boundaries beyond which the human understanding may not venture, unlesshe succeeds in passing them himself. As Wittgenstein says, “in order to draw
                                                                                28
a limit to thinking, we should have to think both sides of this limit,” a truth

to which Bradley gives a special twist in maintaining that the man who is

ready to prove that metaphysics is impossible is a brother metaphysician with
                            29
a rival theory of his own.

  Whatever force these objections may have against the Kantian doctrine,

they have none whatsoever against the thesis that I am about to set forth. It

cannot here be said that the author is himself overstepping the barrier he

maintains to be impassable. For the fruitlessness of attempting to transcend

the  limits  of  possible  sense-experience  will  be  deduced,  not  from  a

psychological  hypothesis  concerning  the  actual  constitution  of  the  human

mind, but from the rule which determines the literal significance of language.

Our charge against the metaphysician is not that he attempts to employ the

understanding  in  a  field  where  it  cannot  profitably  venture,  but  that  he

produces sentences which fail to conform to the conditions under which alone

a sentence can be literally significant. Nor are we ourselves obliged to talk

nonsense in order to show that all sentences of a certain type are necessarily

devoid of literal significance. We need only formulate the criterion which

enables us to test whether a sentence expresses a genuine proposition about a

matter of fact, and then point out that the sentences under consideration fail to

satisfy it. And this we shall now proceed to do. We shall first of all formulate

the criterion in somewhat vague terms, and then give the explanations which

are necessary to render it precise.

The criterion which we use to test the genuineness of apparent statements

of fact is the criterion of verifiability. We say that a sentence is factually

significant to any given person, if, and only if, he knows how to verify the

proposition  which  it  purports  to  express—that  is,  if  he  knows  what

observations  would  lead  him,  under  certain  conditions,  to  accept  the

proposition as being true, or reject it as being false. If, on the other hand, the

putative proposition is of such a character that the assumption of its truth, or

falsehood,  is  consistent  with  any  assumption  whatsoever  concerning  the

nature of his future experience, then, as far as he is concerned, it is, if not a

tautology,  a  mere  pseudo-proposition.  The  sentence  expressing  it  may  be

emotionally significant to him; but it is not literally significant. And with

regard to questions the procedure is the same. We enquire in every case what

observations would lead us to answer the question, one way or the other; and,if  none  can  be  discovered,  we  must  conclude  that  the  sentence  under

consideration  does  not,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned,  express  a  genuine

question, however strongly its grammatical appearance may suggest that it

does.

As the adoption of this procedure is an essential factor in the argument of

this book, it needs to be examined in detail.

In the first place, it is necessary to draw a distinction between practical

verifiability,  and  verifiability  in  principle.  Plainly  we  all  understands,  in

many cases believe, propositions which we have not in fact taken steps to

verify. Many of these are propositions which we could verify if we took

enough  trouble.  But  there  remain  a  number  of  significant  propositions,

concerning  matters  of  fact,  which  we  could  not  verify  even  if  we  chose;

simply  because  we  lack  the  practical  means  of  placing  ourselves  in  the

situation  where  the  relevant  observations  could  be  made.  A  simple  and

familiar  example  of  such  a  proposition  is  the  proposition  that  there  are
                                                  30
mountains on the farther side of the moon. No rocket has yet been invented

which would enable me to go and look at the farther side of the moon, so that

I am unable to decide the matter by actual observation. But I do know what

observations would decide it for me, if, as is theoretically conceivable, I were

once in a position to make them. And therefore I say that the proposition is

verifiable in principle, if not in practice, and is accordingly significant. On

the  other  hand,  such  a  metaphysical  pseudo-proposition  as  “the  Absolute
                                                                        31
enters into, but is itself incapable of, evolution and progress,” is not even in

principle verifiable. For one cannot conceive of an observation which would

enable  one  to  determine  whether  the  Absolute  did,  or  did  not,  enter  into

evolution and progress. Of course it is possible that the author of such a

remark is using English words in a way in which they are not commonly used

by  English-speaking  people,  and  that  he  does,  in  fact,  intend  to  assert

something  which  could  be  empirically  verified.  But  until  he  makes  us

understand how the proposition that he wishes to express would be verified,

he fails to communicate anything to us. And if he admits, as I think the author

of  the  remark  in  question  would  have  admitted,  that  his  words  were  not

intended to express either a tautology or a proposition which was capable, at

least  in  principle,  of  being  verified,  then  it  follows  that  he  has  made  an

utterance which has no literal significance even for himself.

A further distinction which we must make is the distinction between the“strong” and the “weak” sense of the term “verifiable.” A proposition is said

to be verifiable, in the strong sense of the term, if, and only if, its truth could

be conclusively established in experience. But it is verifiable, in the weak

sense, if it is possible for experience to render it probable. In which sense are

we using the term when we say that a putative proposition is genuine only if

it is verifiable?

It seems to me that if we adopt conclusive verifiability as our criterion of
                                                          32
significance, as some positivists have proposed, our argument will prove

too much. Consider, for example, the case of general propositions of law—

such propositions, namely, as “arsenic is poisonous”; “all men are mortal”; “a

body tends to expand when it is heated.” It is of the very nature of these

propositions that their truth cannot be established with certainty by any finite

series of observations. But if it is recognised that such general propositions of

law  are  designed  to  cover  an  infinite  number  of  cases,  then  it  must  be

admitted that they cannot, even in principle, be verified conclusively. And

then, if we adopt conclusive verifiability as our criterion of significance, we

are logically obliged to treat these general propositions of law in the same

fashion as we treat the statements of the metaphysician.

                                                  33
In face of this difficulty, some positivists have adopted the heroic course

of saying that these general propositions are indeed pieces of nonsense, albeit

an essentially important type of nonsense. But here the introduction of the

term “important” is simply an attempt to hedge. It serves only to mark the

authors’ recognition that their view is somewhat too paradoxical, without in

any way removing the paradox. Besides, the difficulty is not confined to the

case of general propositions of law, though it is there revealed most plainly. It

is hardly less obvious in the case of propositions about the remote past. For it

must  surely  be  admitted  that,  however  strong  the  evidence  in  favour  of

historical statements may be, their truth can never become more than highly

probable.  And  to  maintain  that  they  also  constituted  an  important,  or

unimportant, type of nonsense would be unplausible, to say the very least.

Indeed, it will be our contention that no proposition, other than a tautology,

can possibly be anything more than a probable hypothesis. And if this is

correct, the principle that a sentence can be factually significant only if it

expresses what is conclusively verifiable is self-stultifying as a criterion of

significance. For it leads to the conclusion that it is impossible to make a

significant statement of fact at all.Nor can we accept the suggestion that a sentence should be allowed to be

factually significant if, and only if, it expresses something which is definitely
                              34
confutable  by  experience.  Those  who  adopt  this  course  assume  that,

although no finite series of observations is ever sufficient to establish the

truth of a hypothesis beyond all possibility of doubt, there are crucial cases in

which a single observation, or series of observations, can definitely confute

it. But, as we shall show later on, this assumption is false. A hypothesis

cannot  be  conclusively  confuted  any  more  than  it  can  be  conclusively

verified. For when we take the occurrence of certain observations as proof

that  a  given  hypothesis  is  false,  we  presuppose  the  existence  of  certain

conditions. And though, in any given case, it may be extremely improbable

that this assumption is false, it is not logically impossible. We shall see that

there  need  be  no  self-contradiction  in  holding  that  some  of  the  relevant

circumstances are other than we have taken them to be, and consequently that

the hypothesis has not really broken down. And if it is not the case that any

hypothesis can be definitely confuted, we cannot hold that the genuineness of

a proposition depends on the possibility of its definite confutation.

  Accordingly, we fall back on the weaker sense of verification. We say that

the question that must be asked about any putative statement of fact is not,

Would any observations make its truth or falsehood logically certain? but

simply, Would any observations be relevant to the determination of its truth

or falsehood? And it is only if a negative answer is given to this second

question  that  we  conclude  that  the  statement  under  consideration  is

nonsensical.

To make our position clearer, we may formulate it in another way. Let us

call  a  proposition  which  records  an  actual  or  possible  observation  an

experiential proposition. Then we may say that it is the mark of a genuine

factual  proposition,  not  that  it  should  be  equivalent  to  an  experiential

proposition, or any finite number of experiential propositions, but simply that

some experiential propositions can be deduced from it in conjunction with

certain other premises without being deducible from those other premises
      35
alone.

This  criterion  seems  liberal  enough.  In  contrast  to  the  principle  of

conclusive  verifiability,  it  clearly  does  not  deny  significance  to  general

propositions  or  to  propositions  about  the  past.  Let  us  see  what  kinds  of

assertion it rules out.A good example of the kind of utterance that is condemned by our criterion

as being not even false but nonsensical would be the assertion that the world

of sense-experience was altogether unreal. It must, of course, be admitted that

our senses do sometimes deceive us. We may, as the result of having certain

sensations, expect certain other sensations to be obtainable which are, in fact,

not  obtainable.  But,  in  all  such  cases,  it  is  further  sense-experience  that

informs us of the mistakes that arise out of sense-experience. We say that the

senses  sometimes  deceive  us,  just  because  the  expectations  to  which  our

sense-experiences give rise do not always accord with what we subsequently

experience.  That  is,  we  rely  on  our  senses  to  substantiate  or  confute  the

judgements which are based on our sensations. And therefore the fact that our

perceptual  judgements  are  sometimes  found  to  be  erroneous  has  not  the

slightest tendency to show that the world of sense-experience is unreal. And,

indeed, it is plain that no conceivable observation, or series of observations,

could have any tendency to show that the world revealed to us by sense-

experience  was  unreal.  Consequently,  anyone  who  condemns  the  sensible

world  as  a  world  of  mere  appearance,  as  opposed  to  reality,  is  saying

something  which,  according  to  our  criterion  of  significance,  is  literally

nonsensical.

An example of a controversy which the application of our criterion obliges

us to condemn as fictitious is provided by those who dispute concerning the

number of substances that there are in the world. For it is admitted both by

monists, who maintain that reality is one substance, and by pluralists, who

maintain that reality is many, that it is impossible to imagine any empirical

situation which would be relevant to the solution of their dispute. But if we

are told that no possible observation could give any probability either to the

assertion that reality was one substance or to the assertion that it was many,

then we must conclude that neither assertion is significant. We shall see later
36
on that there are genuine logical and empirical questions involved in the

dispute  between  monists  and  pluralists.  But  the  metaphysical  question

concerning “substance” is ruled out by our criterion as spurious.

A similar treatment must be accorded to the controversy between realists

and idealists, in its metaphysical aspect. A simple illustration, which I have
                                                      37
made use of in a similar argument elsewhere,  will help to demonstrate this.

Let us suppose that a picture is discovered and the suggestion made that it

was painted by Goya. There is a definite procedure for dealing with such aquestion. The experts examine the picture to see in what way it resembles the

accredited  works  of  Goya,  and  to  see  if  it  bears  any  marks  which  are

characteristic of a forgery; they look up contemporary records for evidence of

the existence of such a picture, and so on. In the end, they may still disagree,

but each one knows what empirical evidence would go to confirm or discredit

his opinion. Suppose, now, that these men have studied philosophy, and some

of  them  proceed  to  maintain  that  this  picture  is  a  set  of  ideas  in  the

perceiver’s mind, or in God’s mind, others that it is objectively real. What

possible experience could any of them have which would be relevant to the

solution of this dispute one way or the other? In the ordinary sense of the

term “real,” in which it is opposed to “illusory,” the reality of the picture is

not in doubt. The disputants have satisfied themselves that the picture is real,

in  this  sense,  by  obtaining  a  correlated  series  of  sensations  of  sight  and

sensations of touch. Is there any similar process by which they could discover

whether the picture was real, in the sense in which the term “real” is opposed

to “ideal”? Clearly there is none. But, if that is so, the problem is fictitious

according  to  our  criterion.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  realist-idealist

controversy may be dismissed without further ado. For it can legitimately be

regarded as a dispute concerning the analysis of existential propositions, and

so as involving a logical problem which, as we shall see, can be definitively
      38
solved.  What  we  have  just  shown  is  that  the  question  at  issue  between

idealists and realists becomes fictitious when, as is often the case, it is given a

metaphysical interpretation.

  There is no need for us to give further examples of the operation of our

criterion of significance. For our object is merely to show that philosophy, as

a genuine branch of knowledge, must be distinguished from metaphysics. We

are not now concerned with the historical question how much of what has

traditionally  passed  for  philosophy  is  actually  metaphysical.  We  shall,

however, point out later on that the majority of the “great philosophers” of

the past were not essentially metaphysicians, and thus reassure those who

would otherwise be prevented from adopting our criterion by considerations

of piety.

As to the validity of the verification principle, in the form in which we

have stated it, a demonstration will be given in the course of this book. For it

will be shown that all propositions which have factual content are empirical

hypotheses; and that the function of an empirical hypothesis is to provide a                                            39
rule for the anticipation of experience. And this means that every empirical

hypothesis must be relevant to some actual, or possible, experience, so that a

statement  which  is  not  relevant  to  any  experience  is  not  an  empirical

hypothesis, and accordingly has no factual content. But this is precisely what

the principle of verifiability asserts.

It  should  be  mentioned  here  that  the  fact  that  the  utterances  of  the

metaphysician are nonsensical does not follow simply from the fact that they

are devoid of factual content. It follows from that fact, together with the fact

that they are not a priori propositions. And in assuming that they are not a

priori propositions, we are once again anticipating the conclusions of a later
                        2
chapter in this book. For it will be shown there that a priori propositions,

which  have  always  been  attractive  to  philosophers  on  account  of  their

certainty, owe this certainty to the fact that they are tautologies. We may

accordingly define a metaphysical sentence as a sentence which purports to

express a genuine proposition, but does, in fact, express neither a tautology

nor an empirical hypothesis. And as tautologies and empirical hypotheses

form  the  entire  class  of  significant  propositions,  we  are  justified  in

concluding that all metaphysical assertions are nonsensical. Our next task is

to show how they come to be made.

The  use  of  the  term  “substance,”  to  which  we  have  already  referred,

provides us with a good example of the way in which metaphysics mostly

comes  to  be  written.  It  happens  to  be  the  case  that  we  cannot,  in  our

language, refer to the sensible properties of a thing without introducing a

word  or  phrase  which  appears  to  stand  for  the  thing  itself  as  opposed  to

anything which may be said about it. And, as a result of this, those who are

infected by the primitive superstition that to every name a single real entity

must correspond assume that it is necessary to distinguish logically between

the thing itself and any, or all, of its sensible properties. And so they employ

the term “substance” to refer to the thing itself. But from the fact that we

happen to employ a single word to refer to a thing, and make that word the

grammatical  subject  of  the  sentences  in  which  we  refer  to  the  sensible

appearances of the thing, it does not by any means follow that the thing itself

is a “simple entity,” or that it cannot be defined in terms of the totality of its

appearances.  It  is  true  that  in  talking  of  “its”  appearances  we  appear  to

distinguish the thing from the appearances, but that is simply an accident of

linguistic usage. Logical analysis shows that what makes these “appearances”the “appearances of” the same thing is not their relationship to an entity other

than  themselves,  but  their  relationship  to  one  another.  The  metaphysician

fails to see this because he is misled by a superficial grammatical feature of

his language.

A  simpler  and  clearer  instance  of  the  way  in  which  a  considertion  of

grammar leads to metaphysics is the case of the metaphysical concept of

Being. The origin of our temptation to raise questions about Being, which no

conceivable experience would enable us to answer, lies in the fact that, in our

language,  sentences  which  express  existential  propositions  and  sentences

which express attributive propositions may be of the same grammatical form.

For instance, the sentences “Martyrs exist” and “Martyrs suffer” both consist

of  a  noun  followed  by  an  intransitive  verb,  and  the  fact  that  they  have

grammatically the same appearance leads one to assume that they are of the

same  logical  type.  It  is  seen  that  in  the  proposition  “Martyrs  suffer,”  the

members of a certain species are credited with a certain attribute, and it is

sometimes  assumed  that  the  same  thing  is  true  of  such  a  proposition  as

“Martyrs  exist.”  If  this  were  actually  the  case,  it  would,  indeed,  be  as

legitimate to speculate about the Being of martyrs as it is to speculate about
                                                40
their suffering. But, as Kant pointed out, existence is not an attribute. For,

when we ascribe an attribute to a thing, we covertly assert that it exists: so

that  if  existence  were  itself  an  attribute,  it  would  follow  that  all  positive

existential  propositions  were  tautologies,  and  all  negative  existential
                                                                  41
propositions self-contradictory; and this is not the case. So that those who

raise questions about Being which are based on the assumption that existence

is an attribute are guilty of following grammar beyond the boundaries of

sense.

A similar mistake has been made in connection with such propositions as

“Unicorns  are  fictitious.”  Here  again  the  fact  that  there  is  a  superficial

grammatical resemblance between the English sentences “Dogs are faithful”

and “Unicorns are fictitious,” and between the corresponding sentences in

other languages, creates the assumption that they are of the same logical type.

Dogs must exist in order to have the property of being faithful, and so it is

held  that  unless  unicorns  in  some  way  existed  they  could  not  have  the

property of being fictitious. But, as it is plainly self-contradictory to say that

fictitious objects exist, the device is adopted of saying that they are real in

some non-empirical sense—that they have a mode of real being which isdifferent from the mode of being of existent things. But since there is no way

of  testing  whether  an  object  is  real  in  this  sense,  as  there  is  for  testing

whether it is real in the ordinary sense, the assertion that fictitious objects

have  a  special  non-empirical  mode  of  real  being  is  devoid  of  all  literal

significance. It comes to be made as a result of the assumption that being

fictitious is an attribute. And this is a fallacy of the same order as the fallacy

of supposing that existence is an attribute, and it can be exposed in the same

way.

In  general,  the  postulation  of  real  non-existent  entities  results  from  the

superstition, just now referred to, that, to every word or phrase that can be the

grammatical subject of a sentence, there must somewhere be a real entity

corresponding. For as there is no place in the empirical world for many of

these “entities,” a special non-empirical world is invoked to house them. To

this error must be attributed, not only the utterances of a Heidegger, who

bases his metaphysics on the assumption that “Nothing” is a name which is
                                                        42
used to denote something peculiarly mysterious, but also the prevalence of

such problems as those concerning the reality of propositions and universals

whose senselessness, though less obvious, is no less complete.

  These few examples afford a sufficient indication of the way in which

most metaphysical assertions come to be formulated. They show how easy it

is to write sentences which are literally nonsensical without seeing that they

are  nonsensical.  And  thus  we  see  that  the  view  that  a  number  of  the

traditional  “problems  of  philosophy”  are  metaphysical,  and  consequently

fictitious, does not involve any incredible assumptions about the psychology

of philosophers.

  Among  those  who  recognise  that  if  philosophy  is  to  be  accounted  a

genuine  branch  of  knowledge  it  must  be  defined  in  such  a  way  as  to

distinguish  it  from  metaphysics,  it  is  fashionable  to  speak  of  the

metaphysician as a kind of misplaced poet. As his statements have no literal

meaning, they are not subject to any criteria of truth or falsehood: but they

may still serve to express, or arouse, emotion, and thus be subject to ethical

or aesthetic standards. And it is suggested that they may have considerable

value, as means of moral inspiration, or even as works of art. In this way, an

attempt  is  made  to  compensate  the  metaphysician  for  his  extrusion  from
            43
philosophy.

I am afraid that this compensation is hardly in accordance with his deserts.The view that the metaphysician is to be reckoned among the poets appears to

rest on the assumption that both talk nonsense. But this assumption is false.

In the vast majority of cases the sentences which are produced by poets do

have literal meaning. The difference between the man who uses language

scientifically and the man who uses it emotively is not that the one produces

sentences which are incapable of arousing emotion, and the other sentences

which  have  no  sense,  but  that  the  one  is  primarily  concerned  with  the

expression of true propositions, the other with the creation of a work of art.

Thus, if a work of science contains true and important propositions, its value

as  a  work  of  science  will  hardly  be  diminished  by  the  fact  that  they  are

inelegantly  expressed.  And  similarly,  a  work  of  art  is  not  necessarily  the

worse for the fact that all the propositions comprising it are literally false. But

to say that many literary works are largely composed of falsehoods, is not to

say that they are composed of pseudo-propositions. It is, in fact, very rare for

a literary artist to produce sentences which have no literal meaning. And

where this does occur, the sentences are carefully chosen for their rhythm and

balance.  If  the  author  writes  nonsense,  it  is  because  he  considers  it  most

suitable for bringing about the effects for which his writing is designed.

The metaphysician, on the other hand, does not intend to write nonsense.

He lapses into it through being deceived by grammar, or through committing

errors of reasoning, such as that which leads to the view that the sensible

world is unreal. But it is not the mark of a poet simply to make mistakes of

this  sort.  There  are  some,  indeed,  who  would  see  in  the  fact  that  the

metaphysician’s utterances are senseless a reason against the view that they

have æsthetic value. And, without going so far as this, we may safely say that

it does not constitute a reason for it.

It is true, however, that although the greater part of metaphysics is merely

the embodiment of humdrum errors, there remain a number of metaphysical

passages which are the work of genuine mystical feeling; and they may more

plausibly  be  held  to  have  moral  or  æsthetic  value.  But,  as  far  as  we  are

concerned, the distinction between the kind of metaphysics that is produced

by  a  philosopher  who  has  been  duped  by  grammar,  and  the  kind  that  is

produced by a mystic who is trying to express the inexpressible, is of no great

importance: what is important to us is to realise that even the utterances of the

metaphysician who is attempting to expound a vision are literally senseless;

so that henceforth we may pursue our philosophical researches with as littleregard for them as for the more inglorious kind of metaphysics which comes

from a failure to understand the workings of our language.CHAPTER II









THE FUNCTION OF PHILOSOPHY




AMONG  THE  SUPERSTITIONS  from  which  we  are  freed  by  the

abandonment  of  metaphysics  is  the  view  that  it  is  the  business  of  the

philosopher to construct a deductive system. In rejecting this view we are not,

of  course,  suggesting  that  the  philosopher  can  dispense  with  deductive

reasoning. We are simply contesting his right to posit certain first principles,

and then offer them with their consequences as a complete picture of reality.

To discredit this procedure, one has only to show that there can be no first

principles of the kind it requires.

As it is the function of these first principles to provide a certain basis for

our knowledge, it is clear that they are not to be found among the so-called

laws of nature. For we shall see that the “laws of nature,” if they are not mere

definitions,  are  simply  hypotheses  which  may  be  confuted  by  experience.

And,  indeed,  it  has  never  been  the  practice  of  the  system-builders  in

philosophy to choose inductive generalizations for their premises. Rightly

regarding such generalizations as being merely probable, they subordinate

them to principles which they believe to be logically certain.

This is illustrated most clearly in the system of Descartes. It is commonly

said that Descartes attempted to derive all human knowledge from premises

whose  truth  was  intuitively  certain:  but  this  interpretation  puts  an  unduestress on the element of psychology in his system. I think he realised well

enough that a mere appeal to intuition was insufficient for his purpose, since

men are not all equally credulous, and that what he was really trying to do

was  to  base  all  our  knowledge  on  propositions  which  it  would  be  self-

contradictory  to  deny.  He  thought  he  had  found  such  a  proposition  in

“cogito,”  which  must  not  here  be  understood  in  its  ordinary  sense  of  “I

think,” but rather as meaning “there is a thought now.” In fact he was wrong,

because “non cogito” would be self-contradictory only if it negated itself:

and this no significant proposition can do. But even if it were true that such a

proposition as “there is a thought now” was logically certain, it still would

not serve Descartes’ purpose. For if “cogito” is taken in this sense, his initial

principle, “cogito ergo sum,” is false. “I exist” does not follow from “there is

a thought now.” The fact that a thought occurs at a given moment does not

entail that any other thought has occurred at any other moment, still less that

there has occurred a series of thoughts sufficient to constitute a single self. As

Hume conclusively showed, no one event intrinsically points to any other.

We infer the existence of events which we are not actually observing, with

the  help  of  general  principles.  But  these  principles  must  be  obtained

inductively. By mere deduction from what is immediately given we cannot

advance  a  single  step  beyond.  And,  consequently,  any  attempt  to  base  a

deductive system on propositions which describe what is immediately given

is bound to be a failure.

The  only  other  course  open  to  one  who  wished  to  deduce  all  our

knowledge from “first principles,” without indulging in metaphysics, would

be to take for his premises a set of a priori truths. But, as we have already

mentioned, and shall later show, an a priori truth is a tautology. And from a

set of tautologies, taken by themselves, only further tautologies can be validly

deduced. But it would be absurd to put forward a system of tautologies as

constituting the whole truth about the universe. And thus we may conclude

that it is not possible to deduce all our knowledge from “first principles”; so

that those who hold that it is the function of philosophy to carry out such a

deduction are denying its claim to be a genuine branch of knowledge.

The  belief  that  it  is  the  business  of  the  philosopher  to  search  for  first

principles is bound up with the familiar conception of philosophy as the study

of  reality  as  a  whole.  And  this  conception  is  one  which  it  is  difficult  to

criticize, because it is so vague. If it is taken to imply, as it sometimes is, thatthe  philosopher  somehow  projects  himself  outside  the  world,  and  takes  a

bird’s-eye view of it, then it is plainly a metaphysical conception. And it is

also metaphysical to assert, as some do, that “reality as a whole” is somehow

generically different from the reality which is investigated piecemeal by the

special sciences. But if the assertion that philosophy studies reality as a whole

is understood to imply merely that the philosopher is equally concerned with

the content of every science, then we may accept it, not indeed as an adequate

definition of philosophy, but as a truth about it. For we shall find, when we

come to discuss the relationship of philosophy to science, that it is not, in

principle, related to any one science more closely than to any other.

In  saying  that  philosophy  is  concerned  with  each  of  the  sciences,  in  a
                                      44
manner which we shall indicate, we mean also to rule out the supposition

that philosophy can be ranged alongside the existing sciences, as a special

department  of  speculative  knowledge.  Those  who  make  this  supposition

cherish the belief that there are some things in the world which are possible

objects of speculative knowledge and yet lie beyond the scope of empirical

science. But this belief is a delusion. There is no field of experience which

cannot, in principle, be brought under some form of scientific law, and no

type  of  speculative  knowledge  about  the  world  which  it  is,  in  principle,

beyond the power of science to give. We have already gone some way to

substantiate this proposition by demolishing metaphysics; and we shall justify

it to the full in the course of this book.

  With this we complete the overthrow of speculative philosophy. We are

now in a position to see that the function of philosophy is wholly critical. In

what exactly does its critical activity consist?

One way of answering this question is to say that it is the philosopher’s

business  to  test  the  validity  of  our  scientific  hypotheses  and  everyday

assumptions. But this view, though very widely held, is mistaken. If a man

chooses to doubt the truth of all the propositions he ordinarily believes, it is

not in the power of philosophy to reassure him. The most that philosophy can

do, apart from seeing whether his beliefs are self-consistent, is to show what

are the criteria which are used to determine the truth or falsehood of any

given  proposition:  and  then,  when  the  sceptic  realises  that  certain

observations would verify his propositions, he may also realize that he could

make those observations, and so consider his original beliefs to be justified.

But in such a case one cannot say that it is philosophy which justifies hisbeliefs. Philosophy merely shows him that experience can justify them. We

may  look  to  the  philosopher  to  show  us  what  we  accept  as  constituting

sufficient  evidence  for  the  truth  of  any  given  empirical  proposition.  But

whether the evidence is forthcoming or not is in every case a purely empirical

question.

If anyone thinks that we are here taking too much for granted, let him refer

to  the  chapter  on  “Truth  and  Probability,”  in  which  we  discuss  how  the

validity of synthetic propositions is determined. He will see there that the

only  sort  of  justification  that  is  necessary  or  possible  for  self-consistent

empirical propositions is empirical verification. And this applies just as much

to the laws of science as to the maxims of common sense. Indeed there is no

difference in kind between them. The superiority of the scientific hypothesis

consists merely in its being more abstract, more precise, and more fruitful.

And  although  scientific  objects  such  as  atoms  and  electrons  seem  to  be

fictitious in a way that chairs and tables are not, here, too, the distinction is

only a distinction of degree. For both these kinds of objects are known only

by their sensible manifestations and are definable in terms of them.

It is time, therefore, to abandon the superstition that natural science cannot

be  regarded  as  logically  respectable  until  philosophers  have  solved  the

problem of induction. The problem of induction is, roughly speaking, the

problem  of  finding  a  way  to  prove  that  certain  empirical  generalizations

which are derived from past experience will hold good also in the future.

There are only two ways of approaching this problem on the assumption that

it is a genuine problem, and it is easy to see that neither of them can lead to

its solution. One may attempt to deduce the proposition which one is required

to prove either from a purely formal principle or from an empirical principle.

In the former case one commits the error of supposing that from a tautology it

is possible to deduce a proposition about a matter of fact; in the latter case

one simply assumes what one is setting out to prove. For example, it is often

said that we can justify induction by invoking the uniformity of nature, or by
                                                                    45
postulating a “principle of limited independent variety.” But, in fact, the

principle of the uniformity of nature merely states, in a misleading fashion,

the assumption that past experience is a reliable guide to the future; while the

principle of limited independent variety presupposes it. And it is plain that

any  other  empirical  principle  which  was  put  forward  as  a  justification  of

induction would beg the question in the same way. For the only groundswhich  one  could  have  for  believing  such  a  principle  would  be  inductive

grounds.

  Thus it appears that there is no possible way of solving the problem of

induction, as it is ordinarily conceived. And this means that it is a fictitious

problem, since all genuine problems are at least theoretically capable of being

solved: and the credit of natural science is not impaired by the fact that some

philosophers continue to be puzzled by it. Actually, we shall see that the only

test to which a form of scientific procedure which satisfies the necessary

condition of self-consistency is subject, is the test of its success in practice.

We are entitled to have faith in our procedure just so long as it does the work

which it is designed to do—that is, enables us to predict future experience,

and so to control our environment. Of course, the fact that a certain form of

procedure has always been successful in practice affords no logical guarantee

that it will continue to be so. But then it is a mistake to demand a guarantee

where it is logically impossible to obtain one. This does not mean that it is

irrational to expect future experience to conform to the past. For when we

come to define “rationality” we shall find that for us “being rational” entails

being guided in a particular fashion by past experience.

The task of defining rationality is precisely the sort of task that it is the

business of philosophy to undertake. But in achieving this it does not justify

scientific  procedure.  What  justifies  scientific  procedure,  to  the  extent  to

which it is capable of being justified, is the success of the predictions to

which it gives rise: and this can be determined only in actual experience. By

itself, the analysis of a synthetic principle tells us nothing whatsoever about

its truth.

  Unhappily, this fact is generally disregarded by philosophers who concern

themselves with the so-called theory of knowledge. Thus it is common for

writers on the subject of perception to assume that, unless one can give a

satisfactory analysis of perceptual situations, one is not entitled to believe in

the existence of material things. But this is a complete mistake. What gives

one the right to believe in the existence of a certain material thing is simply

the fact that one has certain sensations: for, whether one realises it or not, to

say  that  the  thing  exists  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  such  sensations  are

obtainable.  It  is  the  philosopher’s  business  to  give  a  correct  definition  of

material things in terms of sensations. But his success or failure in this task

has no bearing whatsoever on the validity of our perceptual judgements. Thatdepends wholly on actual sense-experience.

It  follows  that  the  philosopher  has  no  right  to  despise  the  beliefs  of

common sense. If he does so, he merely displays his ignorance of the true

purpose of his enquiries. What he is entitled to despise is the unreflecting

analysis  of  those  beliefs,  which  takes  the  grammatical  structure  of  the

sentence as a trustworthy guide to its meaning. Thus, many of the mistakes

made in connection with the problem of perception can be accounted for by

the fact, already referred to in connection with the metaphysical notion of

“substance,”  that  it  happens  to  be  impossible  in  an  ordinary  European

language to mention a thing without appearing to distinguish it generically

from  its  qualities  and  states.  But  from  the  fact  that  the  common-sense

analysis  of  a  proposition  is  mistaken  it  by  no  means  follows  that  the

proposition is not true. The philosopher may be able to show us that the

propositions we believe are far more complex than we suppose; but it does

not follow from this that we have no right to believe them.

It should now be sufficiently clear that if the philosopher is to uphold his

claim to make a special contribution to the stock of our knowledge, he must

not attempt to formulate speculative truths, or to look for first principles, or to

make a priori  judgements  about  the  validity  of  our  empirical  beliefs.  He

must, in fact, confine himself to works of clarification and analysis of a sort

which we shall presently describe.

In saying that the activity of philosophising is essentially analytic, we are

not,  of  course,  maintaining  that  all  those  who  are  commonly  called

philosophers have actually been engaged in carrying out analyses. On the

contrary,  we  have  been  at  pains  to  show  that  a  great  deal  of  what  is

commonly  called  philosophy  is  metaphysical  in  character.  What  we  have

been in search of, in enquiring into the function of philosophy, is a definition

of philosophy which should accord to some extent with the practice of those

who are commonly called philosophers, and at the same time be consistent

with  the  common  assumption  that  philosophy  is  a  special  branch  of

knowledge. It is because metaphysics fails to satisfy this second condition

that we distinguish it from philosophy, in spite of the fact that it is commonly

referred to as philosophy. And our justification for making this distinction is

that it is necessitated by our original postulate that philosophy is a special

branch of knowledge, and our demonstration that metaphysics is not.

  Although  this  procedure  is  logically  unassailable,  it  will  perhaps  beattacked on the ground that it is inexpedient. It will be said that the “history

of  philosophy”  is,  almost  entirely,  a  history  of  metaphysics;  and,

consequently, that although there is no actual fallacy involved in our using

the word “philosophy” in the sense in which philosophy is incompatible with

metaphysics, it is dangerously misleading. For all our care in defining the

term  will  not  prevent  people  from  confusing  the  activities  which  we  call

philosophical with the metaphysical activities of those whom they have been

taught to regard as philosophers. And therefore it would surely be advisable

for  us  to  abandon  the  term  “philosophy”  altogether,  as  a  name  for  a

distinctive branch of knowledge, and invent some new description for the

activity which we were minded to call the activity of philosophizing.

Our answer to this is that it is not the case that the “history of philosophy”

is almost entirely a history of metaphysics. That it contains some metaphysics

is undeniable. But I think it can be shown that the majority of those who are

commonly  supposed  to  have  been  great  philosophers  were  primarily  not

metaphysicians  but  analysts.  For  example,  I  do  not  see  how  anyone  who

follows  the  account  which  we  shall  give  of  the  nature  of  philosophical

analysis and then turns to Locke’s Essay Concerning Human Understranding

can fail to conclude that it is essentially an analytic work. Locke is generally

regarded as being one who, like G. E. Moore at the present time, puts forward
                                      46
a philosophy of common sense. But he does not, any more than Moore,

attempt to give an a priori justification of our common-sense beliefs. Rather

does he appear to have seen that it was not his business as a philosopher to

affirm or deny the validity of any empirical propositions, but only to analyse

them. For he is content, in his own words, “to be employed as an under-

labourer in clearing the ground a little, and removing some of the rubbish that

lies in the way of knowledge”; and so devotes himself to the purely analytic

tasks of defining knowledge, and classifying propositions, and displaying the

nature of material things. And the small portion of his work which is not

philosophical,  in  our  sense,  is  not  given  over  to  metaphysics,  but  to

psychology.

Nor is it fair to regard Berkeley as a metaphysician. For he did not, in fact,

deny the reality of material things, as we are still too commonly told. What

he denied was the adequacy of Locke’s analysis of the notion of a material

thing. He maintained that to say of various “ideas of sensation” that they

belonged to a single material thing was not, as Locke thought, to say that theywere related to a single unobservable underlying “somewhat,” but rather that

they  stood  in  certain  relations  to  one  another.  And  in  this  he  was  right.

Admittedly he made the mistake of supposing that what was immediately

given in sensation was necessarily mental; and the use, by him and by Locke,

of the word “idea” to denote an element in that which is sensibly given is

objectionable, because it suggests this false view. Accordingly we replace the

word “idea” in this usage by the neutral word “sense-content,” which we

shall use to refer to the immediate data not merely of “outer” but also of

“introspective” sensation, and say that what Berkeley discovered was that

material things must be definable in terms of sense-contents. We shall see,

when we come finally to settle the conflict between idealism and realism, that

his actual conception of the relationship between material things and sense-

contents  was  not  altogether  accurate.  It  led  him  to  some  notoriously

paradoxical conclusions, which a slight emendation will enable us to avoid.

But the fact that he failed to give a completely correct account of the way in

which  material  things  are  constituted  out  of  sense-contents  does  not

invalidate his contention that they are so constituted. On the contrary, we

know that it must be possible to define material things in terms of sense-

contents, because it is only by the occurrence of certain sense-contents that

the existence of any material thing can ever be in the least degree verified.

And thus we see that we have not to enquire whether a phenomenalist “theory

of perception” or some other sort of theory is correct, but only what form of

phenomenalist theory is correct. For the fact that all causal and representative

theories  of  perception  treat  material  things  as  if  they  were  unobservable

entities  entitles  us,  as  Berkeley  saw,  to  rule  them  out a  priori.  The

unfortunate thing is that, in spite of this, he found it necessary to postulate

God as an unobservable cause of our “ideas”; and he must be criticised also

for  failing  to  see  that  the  argument  which  he  uses  to  dispose  of  Locke’s

analysis of a material thing is fatal to his own conception of the nature of the

self, a point which was effectively seized upon by Hume.

Of  Hume  we  may  say  not  merely  that  he  was  not  in  practice  a

metaphysician,  but  that  he  explicitly  rejected  metaphysics.  We  find  the

strongest evidence of this in the passage with which he concludes his Enquiry

Concerning Human Understanding. “If,” he says, “we take in our hand any

volume; of divinity, or school metaphysics, for instance; let us ask, Does it

contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number? No. Does it

contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence?No. Commit it then to the flames. For it can contain nothing but sophistry and

illusion.”  What  is  this  but  a  rhetorical  version  of  our  own  thesis  that  a

sentence  which  does  not  express  either  a  formally  true  proposition  or  an

empirical hypothesis is devoid of literal significance? It is true that Hume

does not, so far as I know, actually put forward any view concerning the

nature of philosophical propositions themselves, but those of his works which

are  commonly  accounted  philosophical  are,  apart  from  certain  passages

which deal with questions of psychology, works of analysis. If this is not

universally conceded, it is because his treatment of causation, which is the

main feature of his philosophical work, is often misinterpreted. He has been

accused of denying causation, whereas in fact he was concerned only with

defining it. So far is he from asserting that no causal propositions are true that

he is himself at pains to give rules for judging of the existence of causes and
      47
effects  He realised well enough that the question whether a given causal

proposition was true or false was not one that could be settled a priori, and

accordingly confined himself to discussing the analytic question, What is it

that we are asserting when we assert that one event is causally connected with

another? And in answering this question he showed, I think conclusively, first

that the relation of cause and effect was not logical in character, since any

proposition  asserting  a  causal  connection  could  be  denied  without  self-

contradiction, secondly that causal laws were not analytically derived from

experience,  since  they  were  not  deducible  from  any  finite  number  of

experiential  propositions,  and,  thirdly,  that  it  was  a  mistake  to  analyse

propositions  asserting  causal  connections  in  terms  of  a  relation  of

necessitation which held between particular events, since it was impossible to

conceive  of  any  observations  which  would  have  the  slightest  tendency  to

establish the existence of such a relation. He thus laid the way open for the

view, which we adopt, that every assertion of a particular causal connection

involves the assertion of a causal law, and that every general proposition of

the form “C causes E” is equivalent to a proposition of the form “whenever

C, then E,” where the symbol “whenever” must be taken to refer, not to a

finite number of actual instances of C, but to the infinite number of possible

instances. He himself defines a cause as “an object, followed by another, and

where all the objects similar to the first are followed by objects similar to the

second,”  or,  alternatively,  as  “an  object  followed  by  another,  and  whose
                                                                48
appearance always conveys the thought to that other”; but neither of these

definitions is acceptable as it stands. For, even if it is true that we should not,according to our standards of rationality, have good reason to believe that an

event C was the cause of an event E unless we had observed a constant

conjunction  of  events  like  C  with  events  like  E,  still  there  is  no  self-

contradiction involved in asserting the proposition “C is the cause of E” and

at the same time denying that any events like C or like E ever have been

observed; and this would be self-contradictory if the first of the definitions

quoted was correct. Nor is it inconceivable, as the second definition implies,

that there should be causal laws which have never yet been thought of. But

although we are obliged, for these reasons, to reject Hume’s actual definitions

of a cause, our view of the nature of causation remains substantially the same

as his. And we agree with him that there can be no other justification for

inductive reasoning than its success in practice, while insisting more strongly

than he did that no better justification is required. For it is his failure to make

this second point clear that has given his views the air of paradox which has

caused them to be so much undervalued and misunderstood.

  When we consider, also, that Hobbes and Bentham were chiefly occupied

in  giving  definitions,  and  that  the  best  part  of  John  Stuart  Mill’s  work

consists in a development of the analyses carried out by Hume, we may fairly

claim that in holding that the activity of philosophising is essentially analytic

we  are  adopting  a  standpoint  which  has  always  been  implicit  in  English

empiricism. Not that the practice of philosophical analysis has been confined

to  members  of  this  school.  But  it  is  with  them  that  we  have  the  closest

historical affinity.

If I refrain from discussing these questions in detail, and make no attempt

to  furnish  a  complete  list  of  all  the  “great  philosophers”  whose  work  is

predominantly  analytic—a  list  which  would  certainly  include  Plato  and

Aristotle  and  Kant—it  is  because  the  point  to  which  this  discussion  is

relevant  is  one  of  minor  importance  in  our  enquiry.  We  have  been

maintaining that much of “traditional philosophy” is genuinely philosophical,

by our standards, in order to defend ourselves against the charge that our

retention of the word “philosophy” is misleading. But even if it were the case

that  none  of  those  who  are  commonly  called  philosophers  had  ever  been

engaged in what we call the activity of philosophising, it would not follow

that our definition of philosophy was erroneous, given our initial postulates.

We  may  admit  that  our  retention  of  the  word  “philosophy”  is  causally

dependent on our belief in the historical propositions set forth above. But thevalidity of these historical propositions has no logical bearing on the validity

of our definition of philosophy, nor on the validity of the distinction between

philosophy, in our sense, and metaphysics.

It is advisable to stress the point that philosophy, as we understand it, is

wholly  independent  of  metaphysics,  inasmuch  as  the  analytic  method  is

commonly supposed by its critics to have a metaphysical basis. Being misled

by the associations of the word “analysis,” they assume that philosophical

analysis is an activity of dissection; that it consists in “breaking up” objects

into their constituent parts, until the whole universe is ultimately exhibited as

an aggregate of “bare particulars,” united by external relations. If this were

really so, the most effective way of attacking the method would be to show

that its basic presupposition was nonsensical. For to say that the universe was

an aggregate of bare particulars would be as senseless as to say that it was

Fire or Water or Experience. It is plain that no possible observation would

enable one to verify such an assertion. But, so far as I know, this line of

criticism  is  in  fact  never  adopted.  The  critics  content  themselves  with

pointing out that few, if any, of the complex objects in the world are simply

the  sum  of  their  parts.  They  have  a  structure,  an  organic  unity,  which

distinguishes  them,  as  genuine  wholes,  from  mere  aggregates.  But  the

analyst, so it is said, is obliged by his atomistic metaphysics to regard an

object consisting of parts a, b, c, and d in a distinctive configuration as being

simply a+b+c+d, and thus gives an entirely false account of its nature.

If we follow the Gestalt psychologists, who of all men talk most constantly

about  genuine  wholes,  in  defining  such  a  whole  as  one  in  which  the

properties of every part depend to some extent on its position in the whole,

then we may accept it as an empirical fact that there exist genuine, or organic,

wholes. And if the analytic method involved a denial of this fact, it would

indeed be a faulty method. But, actually, the validity of the analytic method is

not dependent on any empirical, much less any metaphysical, presupposition

about the nature of things. For the philosopher, as an analyst, is not directly

concerned with the physical properties of things. He is concerned only with

the way in which we speak about them.

In  other  words,  the  propositions  of  philosophy  are  not  factual,  but

linguistic  in  character—that  is,  they  do  not  describe  the  behaviour  of

physical,  or  even  mental,  objects;  they  express  definitions,  or  the  formal

consequences of definitions. Accordingly, we may say that philosophy is adepartment of logic. For we shall see that the characteristic mark of a purely

logical enquiry is that it is concerned with the formal consequences of our

definitions and not with questions of empirical fact.

It follows that philosophy does not in any way compete with science. The

difference in type between philosophical and scientific propositions is such

that they cannot conceivably contradict one another. And this makes it clear

that the possibility of philosophical analysis is independent of any empirical

assumptions. That it is independent of any metaphysical assumptions should

be even more obvious still. For it is absurd to suppose that the provision of

definitions,  and  the  study  of  their  formal  consequences,  involves  the

nonsensical assertion that the world is composed of bare particulars, or any

other metaphysical dogma.

  What  has  contributed  as  much  as  anything  to  the  prevalent

misunderstanding  of  the  nature  of  philosophical  analysis  is  the  fact  that

propositions and questions which are really linguistic are often expressed in
                                                    49
such a way that they appear to be factual. A striking instance of this is

provided by the proposition that a material thing cannot be in two places at

once. This looks like an empirical proposition, and is constantly invoked by

those who desire to prove that it is possible for an empirical proposition to be

logically certain. But a more critical inspection shows that it is not empirical

at all, but linguistic. It simply records the fact that, as the result of certain

verbal conventions, the proposition that two sense-contents occur in the same

visual or tactual sense-field is incompatible with the proposition that they
                                      50
belong to the same material thing. And this is indeed a necessary fact. But it

has not the least tendency to show that we have certain knowledge about the

empirical properties of objects. For it is necessary only because we happen to

use the relevant words in a particular way. There is no logical reason why we

should not so alter our definitions that the sentence “A thing cannot be in two

places at once” comes to express a self-contradiction instead of a necessary

truth.

  Another  good  example  of  linguistically  necessary  proposition  which

appears to be a record of empirical fact is the proposition, “Relations are not

particulars, but universals.” One might suppose that this was a proposition of

the same order as, “Armenians are not Mohammedans, but Christians”: but

one would be mistaken. For, whereas the latter proposition is an empirical

hypothesis relating to the religious practices of a certain group of people, theformer is not a proposition about “things” at all, but simply about words. It

records the fact that relation-symbols belong by definition to the class of

symbols for characters, and not to the class of symbols for things.

The assertion that relations are universals provokes the question, “What is

a universal?”; and this question is not, as it has traditionally been regarded, a

question  about  the  character  of  certain  real  objects,  but  a  request  for  a

definition of a certain term. Philosophy, as it is written, is full of questions

like this, which seem to be factual but are not. Thus, to ask what is the nature

of a material object is to ask for a definition of “material object,” and this, as

we shall shortly see, is to ask how propositions about material objects are to

be translated into propositions about sense-contents. Similarly, to ask what is

a number is to ask some such question as whether it is possible to translate
                                                                                          51
propositions  about  the  natural  numbers  into  propositions  about  classes. 

And the same thing applies to all the other philosophical questions of the

form, “What is an x?” or, “What is the nature of x?” They are all requests for

definitions, and, as we shall see, for definitions of a peculiar sort.

  Although it is misleading to write about linguistic questions in “factual”

language, it is often convenient for the sake of brevity. And we shall not

always avoid doing it ourselves. But it is important that no one should be

deceived by this practice into supposing that the philosopher is engaged on an

empirical  or  a  metaphysical  enquiry.  We  may  speak  loosely  of  him  as

analysing facts, or notions, or even things. But we must make it clear that

these are simply ways of saying that he is concerned with the definition of the

corresponding words.CHAPTER III









THE NATURE OF PHILOSOPHICAL ANALYSIS




FROM OUR ASSERTION that philosophy provides definitions, it must not

be inferred that it is the function of the philosopher to compile a dictionary, in

the  ordinary  sense.  For  the  definitions  which  philosophy  is  required  to

provide  are  of  a  different  kind  from  those  which  we  expect  to  find  in

dictionaries. In a dictionary we look mainly for what may be called explicit

definitions; in philosophy, for definitions in use. A brief explanation should

suffice to make the nature of this distinction clear.

We define a symbol explicitly when we put forward another symbol, or

symbolic  expression  which  is  synonymous  with  it.  And  the  word

“synonymous” is here used in such a way that two symbols belonging to the

same  language  can  be  said  to  be  synonymous  if,  and  only  if,  the  simple

substitution of one symbol for the other, in any sentence in which either can

significantly occur, always yields a new sentence which is equivalent to the

old. And we say that two sentences of the same language are equivalent if,

and only if, every sentence which is entailed by any given group of sentences

in conjunction with one of them is entailed by the same group in conjunction

with the other. And, in this usage of the word “entail,” a sentence s is said to

entail a sentence t when the proposition expressed by t is deducible from the

proposition expressed by s; while a proposition p is said to be deducible

from, or to follow from, a proposition q when the denial of p contradicts theassertion of q.

The provision of these criteria enables us to see that the vast majority of

the definitions which are given in ordinary discourse are explicit, definitions.

In particular, it is worth remarking that the process of defining per genus et

differentiam,  to  which  Aristotelian  logicians  devote  so  much  attention,

always  yields  definitions  which  are  explicit  in  the  foregoing  sense.  Thus,

when we define an oculist as an eye-doctor, what we are asserting is that, in

the  English  language,  the  two  symbols  “oculist”  and  “eye-doctor”  are

synonymous. And, generally speaking, all the questions that are discussed by

logicians in connection with this mode of definition are concerned with the

possible ways of finding synonyms in a given language for any given term.

We shall not enter into these questions ourselves, because they are irrelevant

to our present purpose, which is to expound the method of philosophy. For

the philosopher, as we have already said, is primarily concerned with the
                                                                        52
provision, not of explicit definitions, but of definitions in use.

We define-a symbol in use, not by saying that it is synonymous with some

other symbol, but by showing how the sentences in which it significantly

occurs can be translated into equivalent sentences, which contain neither the

definiendum  itself,  nor  any  of  its  synonyms.  A  good  illustration  of  this

process  is  provided  by  Bertrand  Russell’s  so-called  theory  of  definite

descriptions,  which  is  not  a  theory  at  all  in  the  ordinary  sense,  but  an

indication of, the way in which all phrases of the form “the so-and-so” are to
            53
be defined.  It  proclaims  that  every  sentence  which  contains  a  symbolic

expression  of  this  form  can  be  translated  into  a  sentence  which  does  not

contain any such expression, but does contain a sub-sentence asserting that

one, and only one, object possesses a certain property, or else that no one

object possesses a certain property. Thus, the sentence “The round square

cannot exist” is equivalent to “No one thing can be both square and round”;

and the sentence “The author of Waverley was Scotch” is equivalent to “One
                                                                                          54
person, and one person only, wrote Waverley, and that person was Scotch.”

The first of these examples provides us with a typical illustration of the way

in which any definite descriptive phrase which occurs as the subject of a

negative existential sentence can be eliminated; and the second, with a typical

illustration of the way in which any definite descriptive phrase which occurs

anywhere  in  any  other  type  of  sentence  can  be  eliminated.  Together,

therefore, they show us how to express what is expressed by any sentencewhich  contains  a  definite  descriptive  phrase  without  employing  any  such

phrase. And thus they furnish us with a definition of these phrases in use.

The  effect  of  this  definition  of  descriptive  phrases,  as  of  all  good

definitions, is to increase our understanding of certain sentences. And this is a

benefit which the author of such a definition confers not only on others, but

also on himself. It might be objected that he must already understand the

sentences in order to be able to define the symbols which occur in them. But

this initial understanding need not amount to anything more than an ability to

tell, in practice, what sort of situations verify the propositions they express.

Such an understanding of sentences containing definite descriptive phrases

may be possessed even by those who believe that there are subsistent entities,

such as the round square, or the present King of France. But the fact that they

do  maintain  this  shows  that  their  understanding  of  these  sentences  is

imperfect.  For  their  lapse  into  metaphysics  is  the  outcome  of  the  naive

assumption that definite descriptive phrases are demonstrative symbols. And

in  the  light  of  the  clearer  understanding  which  is  afforded  by  Russell’s

definition, we see that this assumption is false. Nor could this end have been

achieved  by  an  explicit  definition  of  any  descriptive  phrase.  What  was

required was a translation of sentences containing such phrases which would

reveal what may be called their logical complexity. In general, we may say

that it is the purpose of a philosophical definition to dispel those confusions

which arise from our imperfect understanding of certain types of sentence in

our language, where the need cannot be met by the provision of a synonym

for  any  symbol,  either  because  there  is  no  synonym,  or  else  because  the

available synonyms are unclear in the same fashion as the symbol to which

the confusion is due.

A complete philosophical elucidation of any language would consist, first,

in enumerating the types of sentence that were significant in that language,

and  then  in  displaying  the  relations  of  equivalence  that  held  between

sentences of various types. And here it may be explained that two sentences

are said to be of the same type when they can be correlated in such a way that

to each symbol in one sentence there corresponds a symbol of the same type

in the other; and that two symbols are said to be of the same type when it is

always possible to substitute one for the other without changing a significant

sentence into a piece of nonsense. Such a system of definitions in use would

reveal what may be called the structure of the language in question. And thuswe  may  regard  any  particular  philosophical  “theory,”  such  as  Russell’s

“theory of definite descriptions,” as a revelation of part of the structure of a

given  language.  In  Russell’s  case,  the  language  is  the  everyday  English

language; and any other language, such as French or German, which has the
                              55
same structure as English. And, in this context, it is not necessary to draw a

distinction  between  the  spoken  and  the  written  language.  As  far  as  the

validity of a philosophical definition is concerned, it does not matter whether

we regard the symbol defined as being constituted by visible marks or by

sounds.

A factor which complicates the structure of a language such as English is

the prevalence of ambiguous symbols. A symbol is said to be ambiguous

when it is constituted by signs which are identical in their sensible form, not

only with one another, but also with signs which are elements of some other

symbol.  For  what  makes  two  signs  elements  of  the  same  symbol  is  not

merely an identity of form, but also an identity of usage. Thus, if we were

guided merely by the form of the sign, we should assume that the “is” which

occurs in the sentence “He is the author of that book” was the same symbol

as the “is” which occurs in the sentence “A cat is a mammal.” But, when we

come to translate the sentences, we find that the first is equivalent to “He, and

no one else, wrote that book,” and the second to “The class of mammals

contains the class of cats.” And this shows that, in this instance, each “is” is

an ambiguous symbol which must not be confused with the other, nor with

the ambiguous symbols of existence, and class-membership, and identity, and

entailment, which are also constituted by signs of the form “is.”

To say that a symbol is constituted by signs which are identical with one

another in their sensible form, and in their significance, and that a sign is a

sense-content, or a series of sense-contents, which is used to convey literal

meaning, is not to say that a symbol is a collection, or system, of sense-

contents. For when we speak of certain objects, b, c, d . . . as being elements

of an object e, and of e as being constituted by b, c, d . . . we are not saying

that they form part of e, in the sense in which my arm is a part of my body, or

a particular set of books on my shelf is part of my collection of books. What

we are saying is that all the sentences in which the symbol e occurs can be

translated into sentences which do not contain e itself, or any symbol which

is synonymous with e, but do contain symbols b, c, d . . . In such a case we

say that e is a logical construction out of b, c, d . . . And, in general, we mayexplain the nature of logical constructions by saying that the introduction of

symbols which denote logical constructions is a device which enables us to

state complicated propositions about the elements of these constructions in a

relatively simple form.

  What one must not say is that logical constructions are fictitious objects.

For  while  it  is  true  that  the  English  State,  for  example,  is  a  logical

construction out of individual people, and that the table at which I am writing

is a logical construction out of sense-contents, it is not true that either the

English State or this table is fictitious, in the sense in which Hamlet or a

mirage is fictitious. Indeed, the assertion that tables are logical constructions

out of sense-contents is not a factual assertion at all, in the sense in which the

assertion that tables were fictitious objects would be a factual assertion, albeit

a false one. It is, as our explanation of 63 the notion of a logical construction

should have made clear, a linguistic assertion, to the effect that the symbol

“table”  is  definable  in  terms  of  certain  symbols  which  stand  for  sense-

contents. not explicitly, but in use. And this, as we have seen, is tantamount

to  saying  that  sentences  which  contain  the  symbol  “table,”  or  the

corresponding  symbol  in  any  language  which  has  the  same  structure  as

English, can all be translated into sentences of the same language which do

not  contain  that  symbol,  nor  any  of  its  synonyms,  but  do  contain  certain

symbols  which  stand  for  sense-contents;  a  fact  which  may  be  loosely

expressed  by  saying  that  to  say  anything  about  a  table  is  always  to  say

something about sense-contents. This does not, of course, imply that to say

something  about  a  table  is  ever  to  say  the  same  thing  about  the  relevant

sense-contents. For example, the sentence, “I am now sitting in front of a

table” can, in principle, be translated into a sentence which does not mention

tables, but only sense-contents. But this does not mean that we can simply

substitute  a  sense-content  symbol  for  the  symbol  “table”  in  the  original

sentence. If we do this, our new sentence, so far from being equivalent to the

old,  will  be  a  mere  piece  of  nonsense.  To  obtain  a  sentence  which  is

equivalent  to  the  sentence  about  the  table,  but  refers  to  sense-contents

instead, the whole of the original sentence has to be altered. And this, indeed,

is implied by the fact that to say that tables are logical constructions out of

sense-contents is to say, not that the symbol “table” can be explicitly defined

in terms of symbols which stand for sense-contents, but only that it can be so

defined in use. For, as we have seen, the function of a definition in use is not

to provide us with a synonym for any symbol, but to enable us to translatesentences of a certain type.

The  problem  of  giving  an  actual  rule  for  translating  sentences  about  a

material thing into sentences about sense-contents, which may be called the

problem of the “reduction” of material things to sense-contents, is the main

philosophical  part  of  the  traditional  problem  of  perception.  It  is  true  that

writers on perception who set out to describe “the nature of a material thing”

believe  themselves  to  be  discussing  a  factual  question.  But,  as  we  have

already pointed out, this is a mistake. The question, “What is the nature of a

material thing?” is, like any other question of that form, a linguistic question,

being a demand for a definition. And the propositions which are set forth in

answer  to  it  are  linguistic  64  propositions,  even  though  they  may  be

expressed in such a way that they seem to be factual. They are propositions

about the relationship of symbols, and not about the properties of the things

which the symbols denote. ,

It is necessary to emphasise this point in connection with the “problem of

perception,” since the fact that we are unable, in our everyday language, to

describe the properties of sense-contents with any great precision, for lack of

the  requisite  symbols,  makes  it  convenient  to  give  the  solution  of  this

problem  in  factual  terminology.  We  express  the  fact  that  to  speak  about

material things is, for each of us, a way of speaking about sense-contents, by

saying that each of us “constructs” material things out of sense-contents: and

we reveal the relationship between the two sorts of symbols by showing what

are the principles of this “construction.” In other words, one answers the

question, “What is the nature of a material thing?” by indicating, in general

terms, what are the relations that must hold between any two of one’s sense-

contents for them to be elements of the same material thing. The difficulty,

which here seems to arise, of reconciling the subjectivity of sense-contents

with the objectivity of material things will be dealt with in a later chapter of
          56
this book.

The solution which we shall now give of this “problem of perception” will

serve as a further illustration of the method of philosophical analysis. To

simplify the question, we introduce the following definitions. We say that

two  sense-contents  directly  resemble  one  another  when  there  is  either  no

difference, or only an infinitesimal difference, of quality between them; and

that they resemble one another indirectly when they are linked by a series of

direct  resemblances,  but  are  not  themselves  directly  resemblant,  a                                                                                          57
relationship whose possibility depends on the fact that the relative product

of infinitesimal differences in quality is an appreciable difference in quality.

And we say that two visual, or tactual, sense-contents are directly continuous

when they belong to successive members of a series of actual, or possible,

sense-fields, and there is no difference, or only an infinitesimal difference,

between them, with respect to the position of each in its own sense-field; and

that they are indirectly continuous when they are related by an actual, or

possible, series of such direct continuities. And here it should be explained

that to say of a sense-experience, or a sense-field which is a part of a sense-

experience,  or  a  sense-content  which  is  a  part  of  a  sense-field,  that  it  is

possible, as opposed to actual, is to say, not that it ever has occurred or will

occur in fact, but that it would occur if certain specifiable conditions were

fulfilled. So when it is said that a material thing is constituted by both actual

and possible sense-contents, all that is being asserted is that the sentences

referring  to  sense-contents,  which  are  the  translations  of  the  sentences

referring to any material thing, are both categorical and hypothetical. And

thus  the  notion  of  a  possible  sense-content,  or  sense-experience,  is  as

unobjectionable as the familiar notion of a hypothetical statement.

  Relying on these preliminary definitions, one may assert with regard to any

two of one’s visual sense-contents, or with regard to any two of one’s tactual

sense-contents, that they are elements of the same material thing if, and only

if,  they  are  related  to  one  another  by  a  relation  of  direct,  or  indirect,

resemblance  in  certain  respects,  and  by  a  relation  of  direct,  or  indirect,

continuity. And as each of these relations is symmetrical—that is to say, a

relation which cannot hold between any terms A and B without also holding

between B and A—and also transitive—that is, a relation which cannot hold

between a term A and another term B, and between B and another term C,

without holding between A and C—it follows that the groups of visual and

tactual  sense-contents  which  are  constituted  by  means  of  these  relations

cannot have any members in common. And this means that no visual, or

tactual, sense-content can be an element of more than one material thing.

The next step in the analysis of the notion of a material thing is to show

how these separate groups of visual and tactual sense-contents are correlated.

And this may be effected by saying that any two of one’s visual and tactual

groups belong to the same material thing when every element of the visual

group  which  is  of  minimal  visual  depth  forms  part  of  the  same  sense-experience as an element of the tactual group which is of minimal tactual

depth.  We  cannot  here  define  visual  or  tactual  depth  otherwise  than

ostensively.  The  depth  of  a  visual  or  tactual  sense-content  is  as  much  a
                                                        58
sensible property of it as its length or breadth. But we may describe it by

saying  that  one  visual  or  tactual  sense-content  has  a  greater  depth  than

another when it is farther from the observer’s body, provided that we make it

clear that this is not intended to be a definition. For it would clearly vitiate

any “reduction” of material things to sense-contents if the defining sentences

contained references to human bodies, which are themselves material things.

We,  however,  are  obliged  to  mention  material  things  when  we  wish  to

describe certain sense-contents, because the poverty of our language is such

that we have no other verbal means of explaining what their properties are.

As for the sense-contents of taste, or sound, or smell, which are assigned to

particular  material  things,  they  may  be  classified  by  reference  to  their

association  with  tactual  sense-contents.  Thus,  we  assign  sense-contents  of

taste  to  the  same  material  things  as  the  simultaneously  occurring  sense-

contents of touch which are experienced by the palate, or the tongue. And in

assigning  an  auditory  or  olfactory  sense-content  to  a  material  thing,  we

remark that it is a member of a possible series of temporarily continuous

sounds, or smells, of uniform quality but gradually increasing intensity; the

series,  namely,  which  one  would  ordinarily  be  said  to  experience  in  the

course  of  moving  towards  the  place  from  which  the  sound,  or  the  smell,

came; and we assign it to the same material thing as the tactual sense-content

which  is  experienced  at  the  same  time  as  the  sound,  or  the  smell,  of

maximum intensity in the series.

  What is next required of us, who are attempting to analyse the notion of a

material thing, is the provision of a rule for translating sentences which refer

to the “real” qualities of material things. Our answer is that to say of a certain

quality that it is the real quality of a given material thing is to say that it

characterises those elements of the thing which are the most conveniently

measured of all the elements which possess qualities of the kind in question.

Thus, when I look at a coin and assert that it is really round in shape, I am not

asserting that the shape of the sense-content, which is the element of the coin

that I am actually observing, is round, still less that the shape of all the visual,

or tactual, elements of the coin is round; what I am asserting is that roundness

of shape characterises those elements of the coin which are experienced fromthe point of view from which measurements of shape are most conveniently

carried out. And similarly I assert that the real colour of the paper on which I

am  writing  is  white,  even  though  it  may  not  always  appear  to  be  white,

because whiteness of colour characterises those visual elements of the paper

which are experienced in the conditions in which the greatest discrimination

of colours is possible. And, finally, we define relations of quality, or position,

between material things in terms of the relations of quality, or position, which

obtain between such “privileged” elements.

This definition, or, rather, this outline of a definition, of symbols which

stand for material things is intended to have the same sort of effect as the

definition of descriptive phrases which we gave as our original example of

the process of philosophical analysis. It serves to increase our understanding

of the sentences in which we refer to material things. In this case also, there

is, of course, a sense in which we already understand such sentences. Those

who use the English language have no difficulty, in practice, in identifying

the  situations  which  determine  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  such  simple

statements as “This is a table,” or “Pennies are round.” But they may very

well be unaware of the hidden logical complexity of such statements which

our analysis of the notion of a material thing has just brought to light. And, as

a result, they may be led to adopt some metaphysical belief, such as the belief

in  the  existence  of  material  substances  or  invisible  substrata,  which  is  a

source of confusion in all their speculative thought. And the utility of the

philosophical definition which dispels such confusions is not to be measured

by the apparent triviality of the sentences which it translates.

It is sometimes said that the purpose of such philosophical definitions is to

reveal  the  meaning  of  certain  symbols,  or  combinations  of  symbols.  The

objection to this way of speaking is that it does not give an unequivocal

description of the philosopher’s practice, because it employs, in “meaning,” a

highly ambiguous symbol. It is for this reason that we defined the relation of

equivalence between sentences, without referring to “meaning.” And, indeed,

I  doubt  whether  all  the  sentences  which  are  equivalent,  according  to  our

definition, would ordinarily be said to have the same meaning. For I think

that although a complex sign of the form “the sentences s and t have the same

meaning” is sometimes used, or taken, to express what we express by saying

“the sentences s and t are equivalent,” this is not the way in which such a sign

is most commonly used or interpreted. I think that if we are to use the sign“meaning” in the way in which it is most commonly used, we must not say

that two sentences have the same meaning for anyone, unless the occurrence

of  one  always  has  the  same  effect  on  his  thoughts  and  actions  as  the

occurrence of the other. And, clearly, it is possible for two sentences to be

equivalent, by our criterion, without having the same effect on anyone who

employs the language. For instance, “p is a law of nature” is equivalent to “p

is a general hypothesis which can always be relied on”: but the associations

of the symbol “law” are such that the former sentence tends to produce a very

different psychological effect from its equivalent. It gives rise to a belief in

the orderliness of nature, and even in the existence of a power. “behind” that

orderliness, which is not evoked by the equivalent sentence, and has, indeed,

no rational warrant. Thus there are many people for whom these sentences

do, in this common sense of “meaning,” have different meanings. And this, I

suspect,  accounts  for  the  widespread  reluctance  to  admit  that  the  laws  of

nature  are  merely  hypotheses,  just  as  the  failure  of  some  philosophers  to

recognise that material things are reducible to sense-contents is very largely

due to the fact that no sentence which refers to sense-contents ever has the

same psychological effect on them as a sentence which refers to a material

thing. But, as we have seen, this is not a valid ground for denying that any

two such sentences are equivalent.

  Accordingly, one should avoid saying that philosophy is concerned with

the  meaning  of  symbols,  because  the  ambiguity  of  “meaning”  leads  the

undiscerning  critic  to  judge  the  result  of  a  philosophical  enquiry  by  a

criterion  which  is  not  applicable  to  it,  but  only  to  an  empirical  enquiry

concerning the psychological effect which the occurrence of certain symbols

has on a certain group of people. Such empirical enquiries are, indeed, an

important element in sociology and in the scientific study of a language; but

they are quite distinct from the logical enquiries which constitute philosophy.

It is misleading, also, to say, as some do, that philosophy tells us how

certain symbols are actually used. For this suggests that the propositions of

philosophy  are  factual  propositions  concerning  the  behaviour  of  a  certain

group of people; and this is not the case. The philosopher who asserts that, in

the English language, the sentence “The author of Waverley was Scotch” is

equivalent to “One person, and one person only, wrote Waverley, and that

person was Scotch” is not asserting that all, or most, English-speaking people

use these sentences interchangeably. What he is asserting is that, in virtue ofcertain rules of entailment, namely those which are characteristic of “correct”

English, every sentence which is entailed by “The author of Waverley was

Scotch,” in conjunction with any given group of sentences, is entailed also by

that group, in conjunction with “One person, and one person only, wrote

Waverley, and that person was Scotch.” That English-speaking people should

employ the verbal conventions that they do is, indeed, an empirical fact. But

the deduction of relations of equivalence from the rules of entailment which

characterise the English, or any other, language is a purely logical activity;

and  it  is  in  this  logical  activity,  and  not  in  any  empirical  study  of  the

linguistic  habits  of  any  group  of  people,  that  philosophical  analysis
        59
consists.

  Thus, in specifying the language to which he intends his definitions to

apply, the philosopher is simply describing the conventions from which his

definitions are deduced; and the validity of the definitions depends solely on

their  compatibility  with  these  conventions.  In  most  cases,  indeed,  the

definitions are obtained from conventions which do, in fact, correspond to the

conventions which are actually observed by some group of people. And it is a

necessary  condition  of  the  utility  of  the  definitions,  as  a  means  of

clarification, that this should be so. But it is a mistake to suppose that the

existence  of  such  a  correspondence  is  ever  part  of  what  the  definitions
                60
actually assert.

It is to be remarked that the process of analysing a language is facilitated if

it is possible to use for the classification of its forms an artificial system of

symbols  whose  structure  is  known.  The  best-known  example  of  such  a

symbolism is the so-called system of logistic which was employed by Russell

and Whitehead in their Principia Mathematica. But it is not necessary that

the language in which analysis is carried out should be different from the

language analysed. If it were, we should be obliged to suppose, as Russell

once suggested, “that every language has a structure concerning which, in the

language,  nothing  can  be  said,  but  that  there  may  be  another  language

dealing  with  the  structure  of  the  first  language,  and  having  itself  a  new
                                                                                          61
structure, and that to this hierarchy of languages there may be no limit.”

This  was  written  presumably  in  the  belief  that  an  attempt  to  refer  to  the

structure of a language in the language itself would lead to the occurrence of
                    62
logical paradoxes. But Carnap, by actually carrying out such an analysis,

has subsequently shown that a language can without self-contradiction be                                63
used in the analysis of itself.CHAPTER IV









THE A PRIORI




THE VIEW OF PHILOSOPHY which we have adopted may, I think, fairly

be described as a form of empiricism. For it is characteristic of an empiricist

to eschew metaphysics, on the ground that every factual proposition must

refer to sense-experience. And even if the conception of philosophizing as an

activity  of  analysis  is  not  to  be  discovered  in  the  traditional  theories  of

empiricists, we have seen that it is implicit in their practice. At the same time,

it  must  be  made  clear  that,  in  calling  ourselves  empiricists,  we  are  not

avowing a belief in any of the psychological doctrines which are commonly

associated  with  empiricism.  For,  even  if  these  doctrines  were  valid,  their

validity would be independent of the validity of any philosophical thesis. It

could  be  established  only  by  observation,  and  not  by  the  purely  logical

considerations upon which our empiricism rests.

  Having  admitted  that  we  are  empiricists,  we  must  now  deal  with  the

objection  that  is  commonly  brought  against  all  forms  of  empiricism;  the

objection, namely, that it is impossible on empiricist principles to account for

our knowledge of necessary truths. For, as Hume conclusively showed, no

general proposition whose validity is subject to the test of actual experience

can ever be logically certain. No matter how often it is verified in practice,

there  still  remains  the  possibility  that  it  will  be  confuted  on  some  future

occasion. The fact that a law has been substantiated in n—1 case affords nological guarantee that it will be substantiated in the nth case also, no matter

how  large  we  take  n  to  be.  And  this  means  that  no  general  proposition

referring  to  a  matter  of  fact  can  ever  be  shown  to  be  necessarily  and

universally true. It can at best be a probable hypothesis. And this, we shall

find, applies not only to general propositions, but to all propositions which

have a factual content. They can none of them ever become logically certain.

This conclusion, which we shall elaborate later on, is one which must be

accepted by every consistent empiricist. It is often thought to involve him in

complete scepticism; but this is not the case. For the fact that the validity of a

proposition  cannot  be  logically  guaranteed  in  no  way  entails  that  it  is

irrational for us to believe it. On the contrary, what is irrational is to look for

a  guarantee  where  none  can  be  forthcoming;  to  demand  certainty  where

probability is all that is obtainable. We have already remarked upon this, in

referring to the work of Hume. And we shall make the point clearer when we

come  to  treat  of  probability,  in  explaining  the  use  which  we  make  of

empirical propositions. We shall discover that there is nothing perverse or

paradoxical about the view that all the “truths” of science and common sense

are  hypotheses;  and  consequently  that  the  fact  that  it  involves  this  view

constitutes no objection to the empiricist thesis.

  Where the empiricist does encounter difficulty is in connection with the

truths  of  formal  logic  and  mathematics.  For  whereas  a  scientific

generalisation is readily admitted to be fallible, the truths of mathematics and

logic appear to everyone to be necessary and certain. But if empiricism is

correct  no  proposition  which  has  a  factual  content  can  be  necessary  or

certain. Accordingly the empiricist must deal with the truths of logic and

mathematics in one of the two following ways: he must say either that they

are not necessary truths, in which case he must account for the universal

conviction that they are; or he must say that they have no factual content, and

then he must explain how a proposition which is empty of all factual content

can be true and useful and surprising.

If neither of these courses proves satisfactory, we shall be obliged to give

way to rationalism. We shall be obliged to admit that there are some truths

about the world which we can know independently of experience; that there

are some properties which we can ascribe to all objects, even though we

cannot conceivably observe that all objects have them. And we shall have to

accept it as a mysterious inexplicable fact that our thought has this power toreveal  to  us  authoritatively  the  nature  of  objects  which  we  have  never

observed. Or else we must accept the Kantian explanation which, apart from

the  epistemological  difficulties  which  we  have  already  touched  on,  only

pushes the mystery a stage further back.

It is clear that any such concession to rationalism would upset the main

argument of this book. For the admission that there were some facts about the

world  which  could  be  known  independently  of  experience  would  be

incompatible with our fundamental contention that a sentence says nothing

unless it is empirically verifiable. And thus the whole force of our attack on

metaphysics would be destroyed. It is vital, therefore, for us to be able to

show that one or other of the empiricist accounts of the propositions of logic

and  mathematics  is  correct.  If  we  are  successful  in  this,  we  shall  have

destroyed  the  foundations  of  rationalism.  For  the  fundamental  tenet  of

rationalism is that thought is an independent source of knowledge, and is

moreover a more trustworthy source of knowledge than experience; indeed

some rationalists have gone so far as to say that thought is the only source of

knowledge. And the ground for this view is simply that the only necessary

truths about the world which are known to us are known through thought and

not  through  experience.  So  that  if  we  can  show  either  that  the  truths  in

question are not necessary or that they are not “truths about the world,” we

shall be taking away the support on which rationalism rests. We shall be

making good the empiricist contention that there are no “truths of reason”

which refer to matters of fact.

The course of maintaining that the truths of logic and mathematics are not

necessary  or  certain  was  adopted  by  Mill.  He  maintained  that  these

propositions  were  inductive  generalizations  based  on  an  extremely  large

number of instances. The fact that the number of supporting instances was so

very large accounted, in his view, for our believing these generalizations to

be  necessarily  and  universally  true.  The  evidence  in  their  favour  was  so

strong that it seemed incredible to us that a contrary instance should ever

arise. Nevertheless it was in principle possible for such generalizations to be

confuted. They were highly probable, but, being inductive generalizations,

they were not certain. The difference between them and the hypotheses of

natural science was a difference in degree and not in kind. Experience gave

us very good reason to suppose that a “truth” of mathematics or logic was

true universally; but we were not possessed of a guarantee. For these “truths”were only empirical hypotheses which had worked particularly well in the

past; and, like all empirical hypotheses, they were theoretically fallible.

I do not think that this solution of the empiricist’s difficulty with regard to

the propositions of logic and mathematics is acceptable. In discussing it, it is

necessary to make a distinction which is perhaps already enshrined in Kant’s

famous dictum that, although there can be no doubt that all our knowledge

begins with experience, it does not follow that it all arises out of experience.
64
  When  we  say  that  the  truths  of  logic  are  known  independently  of

experience, we are not of course saying that they are innate, in the sense that

we are born knowing them. It is obvious that mathematics and logic have to

be learned in the same way as chemistry and history have to be learned. Nor

are  we  denying  that  the  first  person  to  discover  a  given  logical  or

mathematical  truth  was  led  to  it  by  an  inductive  procedure.  It  is  very

probable, for example, that the principle of the syllogism was formulated not

before but after the validity of syllogistic reasoning had been observed in a

number of particular cases. What we are discussing, however, when we say

that logical and mathematical truths are known independently of experience,

is not a historical question concerning the way in which these truths were

originally discovered, nor a psychological question concerning the way in

which each of us comes to learn them, but an epistemological question. The

contention of Mill’s which we reject is that the propositions of logic and

mathematics have the same status as empirical hypotheses; that their validity

is determined in the same way. We maintain that they are independent of

experience  in  the  sense  that  they  do  not  owe  their  validity  to  empirical

verification. We may come to discover them through an inductive process;

but once we have apprehended them we see that they are necessarily true, that

they hold good for every conceivable instance. And this serves to distinguish

them from empirical generalizations. For we know that a proposition whose

validity  depends  upon  experience  cannot  be  seen  to  be  necessarily  and

universally true.

In rejecting Mill’s theory, we are obliged to be somewhat dogmatic. We

can do no more than state the issue clearly and then trust that his contention

will be seen to be discrepant with the relevant logical facts. The following

considerations may serve to show that of the two ways of dealing with logic

and  mathematics  which  are  open  to  the  empiricist,  the  one  which  Mill

adopted is not the one which is correct.The best way to substantiate our assertion that the truths of formal logic

and pure mathematics are necessarily true is to examine cases in which they

might seem to be confuted. It might easily happen, for example, that when I

came to count what I had taken to be five pairs of objects, I found that they

amounted only to nine. And if I wished to mislead people I might say that on

this occasion twice five was not ten. But in that case I should not be using the

complex sign “2 X 5 = 10” in the way in which it is ordinarily used. I should

be taking it not as the expression of a purely mathematical proposition, but as

the expression of an empirical generalization, to the effect that whenever I

counted what appeared to me to be five pairs of objects I discovered that they

were ten in number. This generalization may very well be false. But if it

proved  false  in  a  given  case,  one  would  not  say  that  the  mathematical

proposition ”2 × 5 = 10” had been confuted. One would say that I was wrong

in supposing that there were five pairs of objects to start with, or that one of

the objects had been taken away while I was counting, or that two of them

had  coalesced,  or  that  I  had  counted  wrongly.  One  would  adopt  as  an

explanation whatever empirical hypothesis fitted in best with the accredited

facts. The one explanation which would in no circumstances be adopted is

that ten is not always the product of two and five.

To take another example: if what appears to be a Euclidean triangle is

found by measurement not to have angles totalling 180 degrees, we do not

say that we have met with an instance which invalidates the mathematical

proposition that the sum of the three angles of a Euclidean triangle is 180

degrees. We say that we have measured wrongly, or, more probably, that the

triangle we have been measuring is not Euclidean. And this is our procedure

in every case in which a mathematical truth might appear to be confuted. We

always  preserve  its  validity  by  adopting  some  other  explanation  of  the

occurrence.

The same thing applies to the principles of formal logic. We may take an

example relating to the so-called law of excluded middle, which states that a

proposition  must  be  either  true  or  false,  or,  in  other  words,  that  it  is

impossible that a proposition and its contradictory should neither of them be

true. One might suppose that a proposition of the form “x has stopped doing

y” would in certain cases constitute an exception to this law. For instance, if

my friend has never yet written to me, it seems fair to say that it is neither

true nor false that he has stopped writing to me. But in fact one would refuseto accept such an instance as an invalidation of the law of excluded middle.

One would point out that the proposition “My friend has stopped writing to

me” is not a simple proposition, but the conjunction of the two propositions

“My friend wrote to me in the past” and “My friend does not write to me

now”:  and,  furthermore,  that  the  proposition  “My  friend  has  not  stopped

writing to me” is not, as it appears to be, contradictory to “My friend has

stopped writing to me,” but only contrary to it. For it means “My friend wrote

to me in the past, and he still writes to me.” When, therefore, we say that

such a proposition as “My friend has stopped writing to me” is sometimes

neither true nor false, we are speaking inaccurately. For we seem to be saying

that neither it nor its contradictory is true. Whereas what we mean, or anyhow

should mean, is that neither it nor its apparent contradictory is true. And its

apparent contradictory is really only its contrary. Thus we preserve the law of

excluded middle by showing that the negating of a sentence does not always

yield the contradictory of the proposition originally expressed.

  There is no need to give further examples. Whatever instance we care to

take,  we  shall  always  find  that  the  situations  in  which  a  logical  or

mathematical principle might appear to be confuted are accounted for in such

a way as to leave the principle unassailed. And this indicates that Mill was

wrong in supposing that a situation could arise which would overthrow a

mathematical  truth.  The  principles  of  logic  and  mathematics  are  true

universally simply because we never allow them to be anything else. And the

reason  for  this  is  that  we  cannot  abandon  them  without  contradicting

ourselves,  without  sinning  against  the  rules  which  govern  the  use  of

language, and so making our utterances self stultifying. In other words, the

truths of logic and mathematics are analytic propositions or tautologies. In

saying this we are making what will be held to be an extremely controversial

statement, and we must now proceed to make its implications clear.

The most familiar definition of an analytic proposition, or judgement, as he
                                              65
called it, is that given by Kant. He said that an analytic judgement was one

in which the predicate B belonged to the subject A as something which was

covertly contained in the concept of A. He contrasted analytic with synthetic

judgements, in which the predicate B lay outside the subject A, although it

did  stand  in  connection  with  it.  Analytic  judgements,  he  explains,  “add

nothing through the predicate to the concept of the subject, but merely break

it up into those constituent concepts that have all along been thought in it,although confusedly.” Synthetic judgements, on the other hand, “add to the

concept of the subject a predicate which has not been in any wise thought in

it, and which no analysis could possibly extract from it.” Kant gives “all

bodies are extended” as an example of an analytic judgement, on the ground

that the required predicate can be extracted from the concept of “body,” “in

accordance with the principle of contradiction”; as an example of a synthetic

judgement, he gives “all bodies are heavy.” He refers also to “7 + 5 = 12” as

a synthetic judgement, on the ground that the concept of twelve is by no

means already thought in merely thinking the union of seven and five. And

he appears to regard this as tantamount to saying that the judgement does not

rest  on  the  principle  of  contradiction  alone.  He  holds,  also,  that  through

analytic judgements our knowledge is not extended as it is through synthetic

judgements. For in analytic judgements “the concept which I already have is

merely set forth and made intelligible to me.”

I think that this is a fair summary of Kant’s account of the distinction

between  analytic  and  synthetic  propositions,  but  I  do  not  think  that  it

succeeds  in  making  the  distinction  clear.  For  even  if  we  pass  over  the

difficulties which arise out of the use of the vague term “concept,” and the

unwarranted assumption that every judgement, as well as every German or

English sentence, can be said to have a subject and a predicate, there remains

still this crucial defect. Kant does not give one straightforward criterion for

distinguishing  between  analytic  and  synthetic  propositions;  he  gives  two

distinct  criteria,  which  are  by  no  means  equivalent.  Thus  his  ground  for

holding that the proposition “7 + 5 = 12” is synthetic is, as we have seen, that

the subjective intension of “7+5” does not comprise the subjective intension

of “12”; whereas his ground for holding that “all bodies are extended” is an

analytic proposition is that it rests on the principle of contradiction alone.

That is, he employs a psychological criterion in the first of these examples,

and a logical criterion in the second, and takes their equivalence for granted,

But, in fact, a proposition which is synthetic according to the former criterion

may very well be analytic according to the latter. For, as we have already

pointed out, it is possible for symbols to be synonymous without having the

same intensional meaning for anyone: and accordingly from the fact that one

can think of the sum of seven and five without necessarily thinking of twelve,

it by no means follows that the proposition ”7+5 = 12” can be denied without

self-contradiction. From the rest of his argument, it is clear that it is this

logical proposition, and not any psychological proposition, that Kant is reallyanxious to establish. His use of the psychological criterion leads him to think

that he has established it, when he has not.

I  think  that  we  can  preserve  the  logical  import  of  Kant’s  distinction

between analytic and synthetic propositions, while avoiding the confusions

which mar his actual account of it, if we say that a proposition is analytic

when its validity depends solely on the definitions of the symbols it contains,

and synthetic when its validity is determined by the facts of experience. Thus,

the proposition “There are ants which have established a system of slavery”

is a synthetic proposition. For we cannot tell whether it is true or false merely

by considering the definitions of the symbols which constitute it. We have to

resort to actual observation of the behaviour of ants. On the other hand, the

proposition  “Either  some  ants  are  parasitic  or  none  are”  is  an  analytic

proposition.  For  one  need  not  resort  to  observation  to  discover  that  there

either  are  or  are  not  ants  which  are  parasitic.  If  one  knows  what  is  the

function of the words “either,” “or,” and “not,” then one can see that any

proposition  of  the  form  “Either p  is  true  or p  is  not  true”  is  valid,

independently of experience. Accordingly, all such propositions are analytic.

It is to be noticed that the proposition “Either some ants are parasitic or

none are” provides no information whatsoever about the behaviour of ants,

or,  indeed,  about  any  matter  of  fact.  And  this  applies  to  all  analytic

propositions. They none of them provide any information about any matter of

fact. In other words, they are entirely devoid of factual content. And it is for

this reason that no experience can confute them.

  When we say that analytic propositions are devoid of factual content, and

consequently  that  they  say  nothing,  we  are  not  suggesting  that  they  are

senseless in the way that metaphysical utterances are senseless. For, although

they give us no information about any empirical situation, they do enlighten

us by illustrating the way in which we use certain symbols. Thus if I say,

“Nothing can be coloured in different ways at the same time with respect to

the same part of itself,” I am not saying anything about the properties of any

actual  thing;  but  I  am  not  talking  nonsense.  I  am  expressing  an  analytic

proposition, which records our determination to call a colour expanse which

differs in quality from a neighbouring colour expanse a different part of a

given thing. In other words, I am simply calling attention to the implications

of  a  certain  linguistic  usage.  Similarly,  in  saying  that  if  all  Bretons  are

Frenchmen, and all Frenchmen Europeans, then all Bretons are Europeans, Iam not describing any matter of fact. But I am showing that in the statement

that all Bretons are Frenchmen, and all Frenchmen Europeans, the further

statement that all Bretons are Europeans is implicitly contained. And I am

thereby indicating the convention which governs our usage of the words “if”

and “all.”

We see, then, that there is a sense in which analytic propositions do give us

new knowledge. They call attention to linguistic usages, of which we might

otherwise not be conscious, and they reveal unsuspected implications in our

assertions and beliefs. But we can see also that there is a sense in which they

may be said to add nothing to our knowledge. For they tell us only what we

may be said to know already. Thus, if I know that the existence of May

Queens is a relic of tree-worship, and I discover that May Queens still exist in

England, I can employ the tautology “If p implies q, and p is true, q is true”

to show that there still exists a relic of tree-worship in England. But in saying

that there are still May Queens in England, and that the existence of May

Queens is a relic of tree-worship, I have already asserted the existence in

England of a relic of tree-worship. The use of the tautology does, indeed,

enable me to make this concealed assertion explicit. But it does not provide

me with any new knowledge, in the sense in which empirical evidence that

the election of May Queens had been forbidden by law would provide me

with  new  knowledge.  If  one  had  to  set  forth  all  the  information  one

possessed, with regard to matters of fact, one would not write down any

analytic propositions. But one would make use of analytic propositions in

compiling one’s encyclopaedia, and would thus come to include propositions

which one would otherwise have overlooked. And, besides enabling one to

make  one’s  list  of  information  complete,  the  formulation  of  analytic

propositions would enable one to make sure that the synthetic propositions of

which the list was composed formed a self-consistent system. By showing

which ways of combining propositions resulted in contradictions, they would

prevent one from including incompatible propositions and so making the list

self-stultifying. But in so far as we had actually used such words as “all” and

“or”  and  “not”  without  falling  into  self-contradiction,  we  might  be  said

already  to  know  what  was  revealed  in  the  formulation  of  analytic

propositions illustrating the rules which govern our usage of these logical

particles.  So  that  here  again  we  are  justified  in  saying  that  analytic

propositions do not increase our knowledge.The analytic character of the truths of formal logic was obscured in the

traditional logic through its being insufficiently formalized. For in speaking

always  of  judgements,  instead  of  propositions,  and  introducing  irrelevant

psychological questions, the traditional logic gave the impression of being

concerned  in  some  specially  intimate  way  with  the  workings  of  thought.

What it was actually concerned with was the formal relationship of classes, as

is shown by the fact that all its principles of inference are subsumed in the

Boolean class-calculus, which is subsumed in its turn in the propositional
                                          66
calculus of Russell and Whitehead. Their system, expounded in Principia

Mathematica,  makes  it  clear  that  formal  logic  is  not  concerned  with  the

properties of men’s minds, much less with the properties of material objects,

but simply with the possibility of combining propositions by means of logical

particles into analytic propositions, and with studying the formal relationship

of  these  analytic  propositions,  in  virtue  of  which  one  is  deducible  from

another. Their procedure is to exhibit the propositions of formal logic as a

deductive system, based on five primitive propositions, subsequently reduced

in number to one. Hereby the distinction between logical truths and principles

of inference, which was maintained in the Aristotelian logic, very properly

disappears. Every principle of inference is put forward as a logical truth and

every  logical  truth  can  serve  as  a  principle  of  inference.  The  three

Aristotelian  “laws  of  thought,”  the  law  of  identity,  the  law  of  excluded

middle, and the law of non-contradiction, are incorporated in the system, but

they are not considered more important than the other analytic propositions.

They are not reckoned among the premises of the system. And the system of

Russell  and  Whitehead  itself  is  probably  only  one  among  many  possible

logics, each of which is composed of tautologies as interesting to the logician
                                                                  67
as the arbitrarily selected Aristotelian “laws of thought.”

A point which is not sufficiently brought out by Russell, if indeed it is

recognised by him at all, is that every logical proposition is valid in its own

right. Its validity does not depend on its being incorporated in a system, and

deduced  from  certain  propositions  which  are  taken  as  self-evident.  The

construction  of  systems  of  logic  is  useful  as  a  means  of  discovering  and

certifying analytic propositions, but it is not in principle essential even for

this purpose. For it is possible to conceive of a symbolism in which every

analytic proposition could be seen to be analytic in virtue of its form alone.

The fact that the validity of an analytic proposition in no way depends onits being deducible from other analytic propositions is our justification for

disregarding  the  question  whether  the  propositions  of  mathematics  are
                                                                                          68
reducible to propositions of formal logic, in the way that Russell supposed.

For even if it is the case that the definition of a cardinal number as a class of

classes similar to a given class is circular, and it is not possible to reduce

mathematical notions to purely logical notions, it will still remain true that

the propositions of mathematics are analytic propositions. They will form a

special class of analytic propositions, containing special terms, but they will

be none the less analytic for that. For the criterion of an analytic proposition

is  that  its  validity  should  follow  simply  from  the  definition  of  the  terms

contained in it, and this condition is fulfilled by the propositions of pure

mathematics.

The mathematical propositions which one might most pardonably suppose

to be synthetic are the propositions of geometry. For it is natural for us to

think, as Kant thought, that geometry is the study of the properties of physical

space, and consequently that its propositions have factual content. And if we

believe this, and also recognise that the truths of geometry are necessary and

certain, then we may be inclined to accept Kant’s hypothesis that space is the

form of intuition of our outer sense, a form imposed by us on the matter of

sensation, as the only possible explanation of our a priori knowledge of these

synthetic propositions. But while the view that pure geometry is concerned

with physical space was plausible enough in Kant’s day, when the geometry

of Euclid was the only geometry known, the subsequent invention of non-

Euclidean  geometries  has  shown  it  to  be  mistaken.  We  see  now  that  the

axioms  of  a  geometry  are  simply  definitions,  and  that  the  theorems  of  a
                                                                                      69
geometry  are  simply  the  logical  consequences  of  these  definitions.  A

geometry is not in itself about physical space; in itself it cannot be said to be

“about” anything. But we can use a geometry to reason about physical space.

That is to say, once we have given the axioms a physical interpretation, we

can proceed to apply the theorems to the objects which satisfy the axioms.

Whether a geometry can be applied to the actual physical world or not, is an

empirical question which falls outside the scope of the geometry itself. There

is no sense, therefore, in asking which of the various geometries known to us

are false and which are true. In so far as they are all free from contradiction,

they are all true. What one can ask is which of them is the most useful on any

given occasion, which of them can be applied most easily and most fruitfully

to an actual empirical situation. But the proposition which states that a certainapplication  of  a  geometry  is  possible  is  not  itself  a  proposition  of  that

geometry.  All  that  the  geometry  itself  tells  us  is  that  if  anything  can  be

brought under the definitions, it will also satisfy the theorems. It is therefore a

purely logical system, and its propositions are purely analytic propositions.

It might be objected that the use made of diagrams in geometrical treatises

shows  that  geometrical  reasoning  is  not  purely  abstract  and  logical,  but

depends on our intuition of the properties of figures. In fact, however, the use

of diagrams is not essential to completely rigorous geometry. The diagrams

are introduced as an aid to our reason. They provide us with a particular

application of the geometry, and so assist us to perceive the more general

truth that the axioms of the geometry involve certain consequences. But the

fact that most of us need the help of an example to make us aware of those

consequences does not show that the relation between them and the axioms is

not a purely logical relation. It shows merely that our intellects are unequal to

the  task  of  carrying  out  very  abstract  processes  of  reasoning  without  the

assistance of intuition. In other words, it has no bearing on the nature of

geometrical  propositions,  but  is  simply  an  empirical  fact  about  ourselves.

Moreover, the appeal to intuition, though generally of psychological value, is

also a source of danger to the geometer. He is tempted to make assumptions

which  are  accidentally  true  of  the  particular  figure  he  is  taking  as  an

illustration, but do not follow from his axioms. It has, indeed, been shown

that Euclid himself was guilty of this, and consequently that the presence of
                                                    70
the figure is essential to some of his proofs. This shows that his system is

not, as he presents it, completely rigorous, although of course it can be made

so. It does not show that the presence of the figure is essential to a truly

rigorous  geometrical  proof.  To  suppose  that  it  did  would  be  to  take  as  a

necessary feature of all geometries what is really only an incidental defect in

one particular geometrical system.

We conclude, then, that the propositions of pure geometry are analytic.

And this leads us to reject Kant’s hypothesis that geometry deals with the

form of intuition of our outer sense. For the ground for this hypothesis was

that it alone explained how the propositions of geometry could be both true a

priori and synthetic: and we have seen that they are not synthetic. Similarly

our view that the propositions of arithmetic are not synthetic but analytic
                                                71
leads us to reject the Kantian hypothesis that arithmetic is concerned with

our pure intuition of time, the form of our inner sense. And thus we are ableto dismiss Kant’s transcendental æsthetic without having to bring forward the

epistemological difficulties which it is commonly said to involve. For the

only argument which can be brought in favour of Kant’s theory is that it

alone explains certain “facts.” And now we have found that the “facts” which

it purports to explain are not facts at all. For while it is true that we have a

priori knowledge of necessary propositions, it is not true, as Kant supposed,

that  any  of  these  necessary  propositions  are  synthetic.  They  are  without

exception analytic propositions, or, in other words, iautologies.

We have already explained how it is that these analytic propositions are

necessary and certain. We saw that the reason why they cannot be confuted in

experience is that they do not make any assertion about the empirical world.

They simply record our determination to use words in a certain fashion. We

cannot deny them without infringing the conventions which are presupposed

by our very denial, and so falling into self-contradiction. And this is the sole

ground of their necessity. As Wittgenstein puts it, our justification for holding

that the world could not conceivably disobey the laws of logic is simply that
                                                                      72
we could not say of an unlogical world how it would look. And just as the

validity of an analytic proposition is independent of the nature of the external

world;  so  is  it  independent  of  the  nature  of  our  minds.  It  is  perfectly

conceivable that we should have employed different linguistic conventions

from those which we actually do employ. But whatever these conventions

might  be,  the  tautologies  in  which  we  recorded  them  would  always  be

necessary. For any denial of them would be self-stultifying.

We  see,  then,  that  there  is  nothing  mysterious  about  the  apodeictic

certainty of logic and mathematics. Our knowledge that no observation can

ever confute the proposition “7+5 = 12” depends simply on the fact that the

symbolic expression “7+5” is synonymous with “12,” just as our knowledge

that every oculist is an eye-doctor depends on the fact that the symbol “eye-

doctor” is synonymous with “oculist.” And the same explanation holds good

for every other a priori truth.

  What  is  mysterious  at  first  sight  is  that  these  tautologies  should  on

occasion be so surprising, that there should be in mathematics and logic the

possibility of invention and discovery. As Poincaré says: “If all the assertions

which mathematics puts forward can be derived from one another by formal

logic,  mathematics  cannot  amount  to  anything  more  than  an  immense

tautology.  Logical  inference  can  teach  us  nothing  essentially  new,  and  ifeverything is to proceed from the principle of identity, everything must be

reducible to it. But can we really allow that these theorems which fill so

many books serve no other purpose than to say in a roundabout fashion ‘A
      73
=A’?” Poincaré finds this incredible. His own theory is that the sense of

invention  and  discovery  in  mathematics  belongs  to  it  in  virtue  of

mathematical induction, the principle that what is true for the number 1, and
                                      74
true for n+1 when it is true for n, is true for all numbers. And he claims that

this  is  a  synthetic a priori  principle.  It  is,  in  fact, a priori,  but  it  is  not

synthetic.  It  is  a  defining  principle  of  the  natural  numbers,  serving  to

distinguish  them  from  such  numbers  as  the  infinite  cardinal  numbers,  to
                                75
which it cannot be applied. Moreover, we must remember that discoveries

can be made, not only in arithmetic, but also in geometry and formal logic,

where no use is made of mathematical induction. So that even if Poincaré

were  right  about  mathematical  induction,  he  would  not  have  provided  a

satisfactory explanation of the paradox that a mere body of tautologies can be

so interesting and so surprising.

The true explanation is very simple. The power of logic and mathematics

to surprise us depends, like their usefulness, on the limitations of our reason.

A being whose intellect was infinitely powerful would take no interest in
                          76
logic and mathematics. For he would be able to see at a glance everything

that  his  definitions  implied,  and,  accordingly,  could  never  learn  anything

from logical inference which he was not fully conscious of already. But our

intellects  are  not  of  this  order.  It  is  only  a  minute  proportion  of  the

consequences of our definitions that we are able to detect at a glance. Even so

simple a tautology as “91 x 79 =7189” is beyond the scope of our immediate

apprehension. To assure ourselves that ”7189” is synonymous with “91x79”

we have to resort to calculation, which is simply a process of tautological

transformation—that  is,  a  process  by  which  we  change  the  form  of

expressions without altering their significance. The multiplication tables are

rules for carrying out this process in arithmetic, just as the laws of logic are

rules  for  the  tautological  transformation  of  sentences  expressed  in  logical

symbolism or in ordinary language. As the process of calculation is carried

out  more  or  less  mechanically,  it  is  easy  for  us  to  make  a  slip  and  so

unwittingly  contradict  ourselves.  And  this  accounts  for  the  existence  of

logical  and  mathematical  “falsehoods,”  which  otherwise  might  appear

paradoxical. Clearly the risk of error in logical reasoning is proportionate tothe length and the complexity of the process of calculation. And in the same

way, the more complex an analytic proposition is, the more chance it has of

interesting and surprising us.

It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  danger  of  error  in  logical  reasoning  can  be

minimized  by  the  introduction  of  symbolic  devices,  which  enable  us  to

express highly complex tautologies in a conveniently simple form. And this

gives us an opportunity for the exercise of invention in the pursuit of logical

enquiries.  For  a  well-chosen  definition  will  call  our  attention  to  analytic

truths,  which  would  otherwise  have  escaped  us.  And  the  framing  of

definitions which are useful and fruitful may well be regarded as a creative

act.

  Having thus shown that there is no inexplicable paradox involved in the

view that the truths of logic and mathematics are all of them analytic, we may

safely adopt it as the only satisfactory explanation of their a priori necessity.

And in adopting it we vindicate the empiricist claim that there can be no a

priori knowledge of reality. For we show that the truths of pure reason, the

propositions which we know to be valid independently of all experience, are

so only in virtue of their lack of factual content. To say that a proposition is

true a priori is to say that it is a tautology. And tautologies, though they may

serve to guide us in our empirical search for knowledge, do not in themselves

contain any information about any matter of fact.CHAPTER V









TRUTH AND PROBABILITY




HAVING SHOWN how the validity of a priori propositions is determined,

we shall now put forward the criterion which is used to determine the validity

of empirical propositions. In this way we shall complete our theory of truth.

For  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  purpose  of  a  “theory  of  truth”  is  simply  to

describe the criteria by which the validity of the various kinds of propositions

is determined. And as all propositions are either empirical or a priori, and we

have already dealt with the a priori, all that is now required to complete our

theory of truth is an indication of the way in which we determine the validity

of empirical propositions. And this we shall shortly proceed to give.

But first of all we ought, perhaps, to justify our assumption that the object

of a “theory of truth” can only be to show how propositions are validated. For

it is commonly supposed that the business of the philosopher who concerns

himself with “truth” is to answer the question “What is truth?” and that it is

only an answer to this question that can fairly be said to constitute a “theory

of truth.” But when we come to consider what this famous question actually

entails,  we  find  that  it  is  not  a  question  which  gives  rise  to  any  genuine

problem; and consequently that no theory can be required to deal with it.

We have already remarked that all questions of the form, “What is the

nature of x?” are requests for a definition of a symbol in use, and that to askfor a definition of a symbol x in use is to ask how the sentences in which x

occurs are to be translated into equivalent sentences, which do not contain x

or any of its synonyms. Applying this to the case of “truth” we find that to

ask, “What is truth?” is to ask for such a translation of the sentence “(the

proposition) p is true.”

It may be objected here that we are ignoring the fact that it is not merely

propositions  that  can  be  said  to  be  true  or  false,  but  also  statements  and

assertions and judgements and assumptions and opinions and beliefs. But the

answer to this is that to say that a belief, or a statement, or a judgement, is

true is always an elliptical way of ascribing truth to a proposition, which is

believed, or stated, or judged. Thus, if I say that the Marxist’s belief that

capitalism  leads  to  war  is  true,  what  I  am  saying  is  that  the  proposition,

believed by Marxists, that capitalism leads to war is true; and the illustration

holds good when the word “opinion” or “assumption,” or any of the others in

the list, is substituted for the word “belief.” And, further, it must be made

clear  that  we  are  not  hereby  committing  ourselves  to  the  metaphysical
                                                77
doctrine that propositions are real entities. Regarding classes as a species of

logical constructions, we may define a proposition as a class of sentences

which have the same intensional significance for anyone who understands

them. Thus, the sentences, “I am ill,” “Ich bin krank,” “Je suis malade,” are

all elements of the proposition “I am ill.” And what we have previously said

about logical constructions should make it clear that we are not asserting that

a proposition is a collection of sentences, but rather that to speak about a

given proposition is a way of speaking about certain sentences, just as to

speak about sentences, in this usage, is a way of speaking about particular

signs.

  Reverting to the analysis of truth, we find that in all sentences of the form

“p is true,” the phrase “is true” is logically superfluous. When, for example,

one says that the proposition “Queen Anne is dead” is true, all that one is

saying is that Queen Anne is dead. And similarly, when one says that the

proposition “Oxford is the capital of England” is false, all that one is saying

is that Oxford is not the capital of England. Thus, to say that a proposition is

true  is  just  to  assert  it,  and  to  say  that  it  is  false  is  just  to  assert  its

contradictory. And this indicates that the terms “true” and “false” connote

nothing, but function in the sentence simply as marks of assertion and denial.

And in that case there can be no sense in asking us to analyse the concept of“truth.”

This point seems almost too obvious to mention, yet the preoccupation of

philosophers with the “problem of truth” shows that they have overlooked it.

Their excuse is that references to truth generally occur in sentences whose

grammatical forms suggest that the word “true” does stand for a genuine

quality or relation. And a superficial consideration of these sentences might

lead one to suppose that there was something more in the question “What is

truth?” than a demand for the analysis of the sentence “p is true.” But when

one comes to analyse the sentences in question, one always finds that they

contain sub-sentences of the form “p is true” or “p is false,” and that when

they are translated in such a way as to make these sub-sentences explicit, they

contain no other mention of truth. Thus, to take two typical examples, the

sentence “A proposition is not made true by being believed” is equivalent to

“for no value of p or x, is ‘p is true’ entailed by ‘x believes p’ ”: and the

sentence “Truth is sometimes stranger than fiction” is equivalent to “There

are values of p and q such that p is true and q is false and p is more surprising

than q.” And the same result would be yielded by any other example one

cared to take. In every case the analysis of the sentence would confirm our

assumption that the question “What is truth?” is reducible to the question

“What is the analysis of the sentence ‘p is true’?” And it is plain that this

question raises no genuine problem, since we have shown that to say that p is
                                        78
true is simply a way of asserting p.

We conclude, then, that there is no problem of truth as it is ordinarily

conceived. The traditional conception of truth as a “real quality” or a “real

relation”  is  due,  like  most  philosophical  mistakes,  to  a  failure  to  analyse

sentences  correctly.  There  are  sentences,  such  as  the  two  we  have  just

analysed, in which the word “truth” seems to stand for something real; and

this leads the speculative philosopher to enquire what this “something” is.

Naturally  he  fails  to  obtain  a  satisfactory  answer,  since  his  question  is

illegitimate. For our analysis has shown that the word “truth” does not stand

for anything, in the way which such a question requires.

It follows that if all theories of truth were theories about the “real quality”

or the “real relation,” which the word “truth” is naively supposed to stand for,

they would be all nonsense. But in fact they are for the most part theories of

an entirely different sort. Whatever question their authors may think that they

are  discussing,  what  they  are  really  discussing  most  of  the  time  is  thequestion “What makes a proposition true or false?” And this is a loose way of

expressing  the  question  “With  regard  to  any  proposition p,  what  are  the

conditions in which p (is true) and what are the conditions in which not?” In

other words, it is a way of asking how propositions are validated. And this is

the  question  which  we  were  considering  when  we  embarked  on  our

digression about the analysis of truth.

In saying that we propose to show “how propositions are validated,” we do

not of course mean to suggest that all propositions are validated in the same

way. On the contrary we lay stress on the fact that the criterion by which we

determine the validity of an a priori or analytic proposition is not sufficient to

determine  the  validity  of  an  empirical  or  synthetic  proposition.  For  it  is

characteristic of empirical propositions that their validity is not purely formal.

To  say  that  a  geometrical  proposition,  or  a  system  of  geometrical

propositions, is false is to say that it is self-contradictory. But an empirical

proposition,  or  a  system  of  empirical  propositions,  may  be  free  from

contradiction, and still be false. It is said to be false, not because it is formally

defective, but because it fails to satisfy some material criterion. And it is our

business to discover what this criterion is.

We have been assuming so far that empirical propositions, though they

differ from a priori propositions in their method of validation, do not differ in

this respect among themselves. Having found that all a priori propositions

are validated in the same way, we have taken it for granted that this holds

good of empirical propositions also. But this assumption would be challenged
                                                                                          79
by a great many philosophers who agree with us in most other respects.

They would say that among empirical propositions, there was a special class

of propositions whose validity consisted in the fact that they directly recorded

an immediate experience. They maintain that these propositions, which we

may call “ostensive” propositions, are not mere hypotheses but are absolutely

certain. For they are supposed to be purely demonstrative in character, and so

incapable of being refuted by any subsequent experience. And they are, on

this view, the only empirical propositions which are certain. The rest are

hypotheses which derive what validity they have from their relationship to

the ostensive propositions. For their probability is held to be determined by

the number and variety of the ostensive propositions which can be deduced

from them.

That  no  synthetic  proposition  which  is  not  purely  ostensive  can  belogically indubitable, may be granted without further ado. What we cannot
                                                                              80
admit is that any synthetic proposition can be purely ostensive. For the

notion of an ostensive proposition appears to involve a contradiction in terms.

It  implies  that  there  could  be  a  sentence  which,  consisted  of  purely

demonstrative symbols and was at the same time intelligible. And this is not

even  a  logical  possibility.  A  sentence  which  consisted  of  demonstrative

symbols  would  not  express  a  genuine  proposition.  It  would  be  a  mere
                                                                                        81
ejaculation, in no way characterizing that to which it was supposed to refer.

The  fact  is  that  one  cannot  in  language  point  to  an  object  without

describing it. If a sentence is to express a proposition, it cannot merely name

a situation; it must say something about it. And in describing a situation, one

is not merely “registering” a sense-content; one is classifying it in some way

or other, and this means going beyond what is immediately given. But a

proposition  would  be  ostensive  only  if  it  recorded  what  was  immediately

experienced, without referring in any way beyond. And as this is not possible,

it  follows  that  no  genuine  synthetic  proposition  can  be  ostensive,  and

consequently that none can be absolutely certain.

  Accordingly we hold not merely that no ostensive propositions ever are

expressed, but that it is inconceivable that any ostensive proposition ever

should be expressed. That no ostensive propositions ever are expressed might

be admitted even by those who believe in them. They might allow that in

actual  practice  one  never  limits  oneself  to  describing  the  qualities  of  an

immediately  presented  sense-content,  but  always  treats  it  as  if  it  were  a

material thing. And it is obvious that the propositions in which we formulate

our ordinary judgements about material things are not ostensive, referring as

they do to an infinite series of actual and possible sense-contents. But it is in

principle  possible  to  formulate  propositions  which  simply  describe  the

qualities of sense-contents without expressing perceptual judgements. And it

is claimed that these artificial propositions would be genuinely ostensive. It

should be clear from what we have already said that this claim is unjustified.

And if any doubt on this point still remains, we may remove it with the help

of an example.

Let us suppose that I assert the proposition “This is white,” and my words

are taken to refer, not, as they normally would, to some material thing, but to

a sense-content. Then what I am saying about this sense-content is that it is

an element in the class of sense-contents which constitutes “white” for me; orin  other  words  that  it  is  similar  in  colour  to  certain  other  sense-contents,

namely those which I should call, or actually have called, white. And I think I

am  saying  also  that  it  corresponds  in  some  fashion  to  the  sense-contents

which go to constitute “white” for other people: so that if I discovered that I

had  an  abnormal  colour-sense,  I  should  admit  that  the  sense-content  in

question was not white. But even if we exclude all reference to other people,

it is still possible to think of a situation which would lead me to suppose that

my classification of a sense-content was mistaken. I might, for example, have

discovered that whenever I sensed a sense-content of a certain quality, I made

some distinctive overt bodily movement; and I might on one occasion be

presented with a sense-content which I asserted to be of that quality, and then

fail to make the bodily reaction which I had come to associate with it. In such

a case I should probably abandon the hypothesis that sense-contents of that

quality always called out in me the bodily reaction in question. But I should

not, logically, be obliged to abandon it. If I found it more convenient, I could

save this hypothesis by assuming that I really did make the reaction, although

I did not notice it, or, alternatively, that the sense-content did not have the

quality I asserted it to have. The fact that this course is a possible one, that it

involves no logical contradiction, proves that a proposition which describes

the quality of a presented sense-content may as legitimately be doubted as
                                      82
any other empirical proposition. And this shows that such a proposition is

not  ostensive,  for  we  have  seen  that  an  ostensive  proposition  could  not

legitimately be doubted. But propositions describing the actual qualities of

presented  sense-contents  are  the  only  examples  of  ostensive  propositions

which  those  who  believe  in  ostensive  propositions  have  ever  ventured  to

give. And if these propositions are not ostensive, it is certain that none are.

In denying the possibility of ostensive propositions, we are not of course

denying  that  there  really  is  a  “given”  element  in  each  of  our  sense-

experiences.  Nor  are  we  suggesting  that  our  sensations  are  themselves

doubtful. Indeed such a suggestion would be nonsensical. A sensation is not

the sort of thing which can be doubtful or not doubtful. A sensation simply

occurs. What are doubtful are the propositions which refer to our sensations,

including the propositions which describe the qualities of a presented sense-

content,  or  assert  that  a  certain  sense-content  has  occurred.  To  identify  a

proposition of this sort with the sensation itself would clearly be a gross

logical blunder. Yet I fancy that the doctrine of ostensive propositions is the

outcome of such a tacit identification. It is difficult to account for it in any          83
other way.

  However, we shall not waste time speculating about the origins of this

false philosophical doctrine. Such questions may be left to the historian. Our

business is to show that the doctrine is false, and this we may fairly claim to

have  done.  It  should  now  be  clear  that  there  are  no  absolutely  certain

empirical  propositions.  It  is  only  tautologies  that  are  certain.  Empirical

propositions  are  one  and  all  hypotheses,  which  may  be  confirmed  or

discredited  in  actual  sense-experience.  And  the  propositions  in  which  we

record  the  observations  that  verify  these  hypotheses  are  themselves

hypotheses which are subject to the test of further sense-experience. Thus

there are no final propositions. When we set about verifying a hypothesis we

may make an observation which satisfies us at the time. But the very next

moment we may doubt whether the observation really did take place, and

require a fresh process of verification in order to be reassured. And, logically,

there is no reason why this procedure should not continue indefinitely, each

act of verification supplying us with a new hypothesis, which in turn leads to

a further series of acts of verification. In practice we assume that certain types

of  observation  are  trustworthy,  and  admit  the  hypothesis  that  they  have

occurred without bothering to embark on a process of verification. But we do

this, not from obedience to any logical necessity, but from a purely pragmatic

motive, the nature of which will shortly be explained.

  When  one  speaks  of  hypotheses  being  verified  in  experience,  it  is

important to bear in mind that it is never just a single hypothesis which an

observation  confirms  or  discredits,  but  always  a  system  of  hypotheses.

Suppose that we have devised an experiment to test the validity of a scientific

“law.” The law states that in certain conditions a certain type of observation

will always be forthcoming. It may happen in this particular instance that we

make the observation as our law predicts. Then it is not only the law itself

that is substantiated, but also the hypotheses which assert the existence of the

requisite  conditions.  For  it  is  only  by  assuming  the  existence  of  these

conditions  that  we  can  hold  that  our  observation  is  relevant  to  the  law.

Alternatively, we may fail to make the expected observation. And in that case

we may conclude that the law is invalidated by our experiment. But we are

not obliged to adopt this conclusion. If we wish to preserve our law, we may

do so by abandoning one or more of the other relevant hypotheses. We may

say that the conditions were really not what they seemed to be, and constructa theory to explain how we came to be mistaken about them; or we may say

that some factor which we had dismissed as irrelevant was really relevant,

and support this view with supplementary hypotheses. We may even assume

that  the  experiment  was  really  not  unfavourable,  and  that  our  negative

observation was hallucinatory. And in that case we must bring the hypotheses

which record the conditions that are deemed necessary for the occurrence of a

hallucination into line with the hypotheses which describe the conditions in

which this observation is supposed to have taken place. Otherwise we shall

be maintaining incompatible hypotheses. And this is the one thing that we

may not do. But, so long as we take suitable steps to keep our system of

hypotheses free from self-contradiction, we may adopt any explanation .of

our observations that we choose. In practice our choice of an explanation is

guided  by  certain  considerations,  which  we  shall  presently  describe.  And

these considerations have the effect of limiting our freedom in the matter of

preserving and rejecting hypotheses. But logically our freedom is unlimited.

Any procedure which is self-consistent will satisfy the requirements of logic.

It appears, then, that the “facts of experience” can never compel us to

abandon a hypothesis. A man can always sustain his convictions in the face

of apparently hostile evidence if he is prepared to make the necessary ad hoc

assumptions.  But  although  any  particular  instance  in  which  a  cherished

hypothesis appears to be refuted can always be explained away, there must

still remain the possibility that the hypothesis will ultimately be abandoned.

Otherwise it is not a genuine hypothesis. For a proposition whose validity we

are resolved to maintain in the face of any experience is not a hypothesis at

all,  but  a  definition.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  a  synthetic  but  an  analytic

proposition.

That some of our most hallowed “laws of nature” are merely disguised

definitions is, I think, incontestable, but this is not a question that we can go
          84
into  here.  It  is  sufficient  for  us  to  point  out  that  there  is  a  danger  of

mistaking  such  definitions  for  genuine  hypotheses,  a  danger  which  is

increased by the fact that the same form of words may at one time, or for one

set of people, express a synthetic proposition, and at another time, or for

another set of people, express a tautology. For our definitions of things are

not immutable. And if experience leads us to entertain a very strong belief

that everything of the kind A has the property of being a B, we tend to make

the  possession  of  this  property  a  defining  characteristic  of  the  kind.Ultimately we may refuse to call anything A unless it is also a B. And in that

case the sentence 95 “All A’s are B’s,” which originally expressed a synthetic

generalization, would come to express a plain tautology.

One good reason for drawing attention to this possibility is that the neglect

of it by philosophers is responsible for much of the confusion that infects

their treatment of general propositions. Consider the stock example, “All men

are  mortal.”  We  are  told  that  this  is  not  a  doubtful  hypothesis,  as  Hume

maintained, but an instance of a necessary connection. And if we ask what it

is that is here necessarily connected, the only answer that appears possible to

us is that it is the concept of “man” and the concept of “being mortal.” But

the only meaning which we attach to the statement that two concepts are

necessarily connected is that the sense of one concept is contained in that of

the other. Thus to say that “All men are mortal” is an instance of a necessary

connection  is  to  say  that  the  concept  of  being  mortal  is  contained  in  the

concept of man, and this amounts to saying that “All men are mortal” is a

tautology. Now the philosopher may use the word “man” in such a way that

he would refuse to call anything a man unless it were mortal. And in that case

the sentence “All men are mortal” will, as far as he is concerned, express a

tautology. But this does not mean that the proposition which we ordinarily

express by that sentence is a tautology. Even for our philosopher, it remains a

genuine empirical hypothesis. Only he cannot now express it in the form,

“All men are mortal.” Instead, he must say that everything which has the

other defining properties of a man also has the property of being mortal, or

something  to  that  effect.  Thus  we  may  create  tautologies  by  a  suitable

adjustment of our definitions: but we cannot solve empirical problems merely

by juggling with the meanings of words.

Of  course,  when  a  philosopher  says  that  the  proposition  “All  men  are

mortal” is an instance of a necessary connection, he does not intend to say

that it is a tautology. It is left to us to point out that this is all he can be

saying, if his words are to bear their ordinary sense and at the same time

express a significant proposition. But I think that he finds it possible to hold

that this general proposition is both synthetic and necessary, only because he

identifies  it  tacitly  with  the  tautology  which  might,  given  suitable

conventions, be expressed by the same form of words. And the same applies

to all other general propositions of law. We may turn the sentences which

now express them into expressions of definitions. And then these sentenceswill express necessary propositions. But these will be different propositions

from  the  original  generalizations.  They,  as  Hume  saw,  can  never  be

necessary. However firmly we believe them, it is always conceivable that a

future experience will lead us to abandon them.

This brings us once more to the question, What are the considerations that

determine in any given situation which of the relevant hypotheses shall be

preserved and which shall be abandoned? It is sometimes suggested that we

are guided solely by the principle of economy, or, in other words, by our

desire to make the least possible alteration in our previously accepted system

of  hypotheses.  But  though  we  undoubtedly  have  this  desire,  and  are

influenced by it to some extent, it is not the sole, or even the dominant, factor

in our procedure. If our concern was simply to keep our existing system of

hypotheses  intact,  we  should  not  feel  obliged  to  take  any  notice  of  an

unfavourable observation. We should not feel the need to account for it in

any way whatsoever —not even by introducing the hypothesis that we had

just had a hallucination. We should simply ignore it. But, in fact, we do not

disregard inconvenient observations. Their occurrence always causes us to

make some alteration in our system of hypotheses in spite of our desire to

keep it intact. Why is this so? If we can answer this question, and show why

we find it necessary to alter our systems of hypotheses at all, we shall be in a

better position to decide what are the principles according to which such

alterations are actually carried out.

  What we must do to solve this problem is to ask ourselves, What is the

purpose of formulating hypotheses? Why do we construct these systems in

the first place? The answer is that they are designed to enable us to anticipate

the course of our sensations. The function of a system of hypotheses is to

warn us beforehand what will be our experience in a certain field—to enable

us to make accurate predictions. The hypotheses may therefore be described

as rules which govern our expectation of future experience. There is no need

to say why we require such rules. It is plain that on our ability to make

successful predictions depends the satisfaction of even our simplest desires,

including the desire to survive.

Now the essential feature of our procedure with regard to the formulation

of these rules is the use of past experience as a guide to the future. We have

already  remarked  upon  this,  when  discussing  the  so-called  problem  of

induction, and we have seen that there is no sense in asking for a theoreticaljustification of this policy. The philosopher must be content to record the

facts of scientific procedure. If he seeks to justify it, beyond showing that it is

self-consistent, he will find himself involved in spurious problems. This is a

point which we stressed earlier on, and we shall not trouble to argue it over

again.

We remark, then, as a fact that our forecasts of future experience are in

some way determined by what we have experienced in the past. And this fact

explains why science, which is essentially predictive, is also to some extent a
                                  85
description of our experience. But it is noticeable that we tend to ignore

those features of our experience which cannot be made the basis of fruitful

generalizations. And, furthermore, that which we do describe, we describe

with  some  latitude.  As  Poincaré  puts  it:  “One  does  not  limit  oneself  to

generalizing experience, one corrects it; and the physicist who consented to

abstain from these corrections and really be satisfied with bare experience
                                                                        86
would be obliged to promulgate the most extraordinary laws.”

But  even  if  we  do  not  follow  past  experience  slavishly  in  making  our

predictions, we are guided by it to a very large extent. And this explains why

we do not simply disregard the conclusion of an unfavourable experiment.

We assume that a system of hypotheses which has broken down once is likely

to break down again. We could, of course, assume that it had not broken

down at all, but we believe that this assumption would not pay us so well as

the recognition that the system had really failed us, and therefore required

some alteration if it was not to fail us again. We alter our system because we

think that by altering it we shall make it a more efficient instrument for the

anticipation  of  experience.  And  this  belief  is  derived  from  our  guiding

principle that, broadly speaking, the future course of our sensations will be in

accordance with the past.

This desire of ours to have an efficient set of rules for our predictions,

which causes us to take notice of unfavourable observations, is also the factor

which primarily determines how we adjust our system to cover the new data.

It is true that we are infected with a spirit of conservatism and would rather

make small alterations than large ones. It is disagreeable and troublesome for

us to admit that our existing system is radically defective. And it is true that,

other things being equal, we prefer simple to complex hypotheses, again from

the desire to save ourselves trouble. But if experience leads us to suppose that

radical  changes  are  necessary,  then  we  are  prepared  to  make  them,  eventhough they do complicate our system, as the recent history of physics shows.

When an observation runs counter to our most confident expectations, the

easiest course is to ignore it, or at any rate to explain it away. If we do not do

this, it is because we think that, if we leave our system as it is, we shall suffer

further  disappointments.  We  think  it  will  increase  the  efficiency  of  our

system  as  an  instrument  of  prediction  if  we  make  it  compatible  with  the

hypothesis that the unexpected observation occurred. Whether we are right in

thinking this is a question which cannot be settled by argument. We can only

wait and see if our new system is successful in practice. If it is not, we alter it

once again.

We have now obtained the information we required in order to answer our

original question, “What is the criterion by which we test the validity of an

empirical proposition?” The answer is that we test the validity of an empirical

hypothesis  by  seeing  whether  it  actually  fulfils  the  function  which  it  is

designed  to  fulfil.  And  we  have  seen  that  the  function  of  an  empirical

hypothesis  is  to  enable  us  to  anticipate  experience.  Accordingly,  if  an

observation  to  which  a  given  proposition  is  relevant  conforms  to  our

expectations, the truth of that proposition is confirmed. One cannot say that

the proposition has been proved absolutely valid, because it is still possible

that a future observation will discredit it. But one can say that its probability

has been increased. If the observation is contrary to our expectations, then the

status of the proposition is jeopardised. We may preserve it by adopting or

abandoning other hypotheses: or we may consider it to have been confuted.

But even if it is rejected in consequence of an unfavourable observation, one

cannot say that it has been invalidated absolutely. For it is still possible that

future  observations  will  lead  us  to  reinstate  it.  One  can  say  only  that  its

probability has been diminished.

It is necessary now to make clear what is meant in this context by the term

“probability.” In referring to the probability of a proposition, we are not, as is

sometimes supposed, referring to an intrinsic property of it, or even to an

unanalysable logical relation which holds between it and other propositions.

Roughly speaking, all that we mean by saying that an observation increases

the  probability  of  a  proposition  is  that  it  increases  our  confidence  in  the

proposition, as measured by our willingness to rely on it in practice as a

forecast of our sensations, and to retain it in preference to other hypotheses in

face of an unfavourable experience. And, similarly, to say of an observationthat it diminishes the probability of a proposition is to say that it decreases

our  willingness  to  include  the  proposition  in  the  system  of  accepted
                                                          87
hypotheses which serve us as guides to the future.

As it stands, this account of the notion of probability is somewhat over-

simplified. For it assumes that we deal with all hypotheses in a uniform self-

consistent fashion, and this is unfortunately not the case. In practice, we do

not  always  relate  belief  to  observation  in  the  way  which  is  generally

recognized to be the most reliable. Although we acknowledge that certain

standards of evidence ought always to be observed in the formation of our

beliefs, we do not always observe them. In other words, we are not always

rational. For to be rational is simply to employ a self-consistent accredited

procedure in the formation of all one’s beliefs. The fact that the procedure, by

reference  to  which  we  now  determine  whether  a  belief  is  rational,  may

subsequently forfeit our confidence, does not in any way detract from the

rationality of adopting it now. For we define a rational belief as one which is

arrived  at  by  the  methods  which  we  now  consider  reliable.  There  is  no

absolute standard of rationality, just as there is no method of constructing

hypotheses  which  is  guaranteed  to  be  reliable.  We  trust  the  methods  of

contemporary science because they have been successful in practice. If in the

future  we  were  to  adopt  different  methods,  then  beliefs  which  are  now

rational might become irrational from the standpoint of these new methods.

But the fact that this is possible has no bearing on the fact that these beliefs

are rational now.

This definition of rationality enables us to amend our account of what is

meant  by  the  term  “probability,”  in  the  usage  with  which  we  are  now

concerned.  To  say  that  an  observation  increases  the  probability  of  a

hypothesis is not always equivalent to saying that it increases the degree of

confidence with which we actually entertain the hypothesis, as measured by

our  readiness  to  act  upon  it:  for  we  may  be  behaving  irrationally.  It  is

equivalent to saying that the observation increases the degree of confidence

with which it is rational to entertain the hypothesis. And here we may repeat

that the rationality of a belief is defined, not by reference to any absolute

standard, but by reference to part of our own actual practice.

The obvious objection to our original definition of probability was that it

was incompatible with the fact that one is sometimes mistaken about the

probability  of  a  proposition—that  one  can  believe  it  to  be  more  or  lessprobable than it really is. It is plain that our amended definition escapes this

objection. For, according to it, the probability of a proposition is determined

both by the nature of our observations and by our conception of rationality.

So  that  when  a  man  relates  belief  to  observation  in  a  way  which  is

inconsistent with the accredited scientific method of evaluating hypotheses, it

is compatible with our definition of probability to say that he is mistaken

about the probability of the propositions which he believes.

  With this account of probability we complete our discussion of the validity

of empirical propositions. The point which we must finally stress is that our

remarks apply to all empirical propositions without exception, whether they

are singular, or, particular, or universal. Every synthetic proposition is a rule

for the anticipation of future experience, and is distinguished in content from

other  synthetic  propositions  by  the  fact  that  it  is  relevant  to  different

situations. So that the fact that propositions referring to the past have the

same hypothetical character as those which refer to the present, and those

which  refer  to  the  future,  in  no  way  entails  that  these  three  types  of

proposition are not distinct. For they are verified by, and so serve to predict,

different experiences.

It may be their failure to appreciate this point which has caused certain

philosophers to deny that propositions about the past are hypotheses in the

same sense as the laws of a natural science are hypotheses. For they have not

been able to support their view by any substantial arguments, or to say what

propositions about the past are, if they are not hypotheses, of the sort we have

just  described.  For  my  own  part,  I  do  not  find  anything  excessively

paradoxical  in  the  view  that  propositions  about  the  past  are  rules  for  the

prediction  of  those  “historical”  experiences  which  are  commonly  said  to
            88
verify them, and I do not see how else “our knowledge of the past” is to be

analysed. And I suspect, moreover, that those who object to our pragmatic

treatment of history are really basing their objections on a tacit, or explicit,

assumption that the past is somehow “objectively there” to be corresponded

to—that it is “real” in the metaphysical sense of the term. And from what we

have remarked concerning the metaphysical issue of idealism and realism, it
                                                                      89
is clear that such an assumption is not a genuine hypothesis.CHAPTER VI









CRITIQUE OF ETHICS AND THEOLOGY




THERE  IS  STILL  one  objection  to  be  met  before  we  can  claim  to  have

justified our view that all synthetic propositions are empirical hypotheses.

This  objection  is  based  on  the  common  supposition  that  our  speculative

knowledge  is  of  two  distinct  kinds—that  which  relates  to  questions  of

empirical fact, and that which relates to questions of value. It will be said that

“statements of value” are genuine synthetic propositions, but that they cannot

with any show of justice be represented as hypotheses, which are used to

predict the course of our sensations; and, accordingly, that the existence of

ethics  and  aesthetics  as  branches  of  speculative  knowledge  presents  an

insuperable objection to our radical empiricist thesis.

In  face  of  this  objection,  it  is  our  business  to  give  an  account  of

“judgements of value” which is both satisfactory in itself and consistent with

our general empiricist principles. We shall set ourselves to show that in so far

as  statements  of  value  are  significant,  they  are  ordinary  “scientific”

statements; and that in so far as they are not scientific, they are not in the

literal sense significant, but are simply expressions of emotion which can be

neither true nor false. In maintaining this view, we may confine ourselves for

the present to the case of ethical statements. What is said about them will be
                                                                                      90
found to apply, mutatis mutandis, to the case of aesthetic statements also.The  ordinary  system  of  ethics,  as  elaborated  in  the  works  of  ethical

philosophers, is very far from being a homogeneous whole. Not only is it apt

to contain pieces of metaphysics, and analyses of non-ethical concepts: its

actual ethical contents are themselves of very different kinds. We may divide

them,  indeed,  into  four  main  classes.  There  are,  first  of  all,  propositions

which  express  definitions  of  ethical  terms,  or  judgements  about  the

legitimacy  or  possibility  of  certain  definitions.  Secondly,  there  are

propositions describing the phenomena of moral experience, and their causes.

Thirdly, there are exhortations to moral virtue. And, lastly, there are actual

ethical judgements. It is unfortunately the case that the distinction between

these four classes, plain as it is, is commonly ignored by ethical philosophers;

with the result that it is often very difficult to tell from their works what it is

that they are seeking to discover or prove.

In fact, it is easy to see that only the first of our four classes, namely that

which comprises the propositions relating to the definitions of ethical terms,

can be said to constitute ethical philosophy. The propositions which describe

the phenomena of moral experience, and their causes, must be assigned to the

science of psychology, or sociology. The exhortations to moral virtue are not

propositions  at  all,  but  ejaculations  or  commands  which  are  designed  to

provoke the reader to action of a certain sort. Accordingly, they do not belong

to any branch of philosophy or science. As for the expressions of ethical

judgements, we have not yet determined how they should be classified. But

inasmuch  as  they  are  certainly  neither  definitions  nor  comments  upon

definitions, nor quotations, we may say decisively that they do not belong to

ethical philosophy. A strictly philosophical treatise on ethics should therefore

make  no  ethical  pronouncements.  But  it  should,  by  giving  an  analysis  of

ethical terms, show what is the category to which all such pronouncements

belong. And this is what we are now about to do.

A question which is often discussed by ethical philosophers is whether it is

possible to find definitions which would reduce all ethical terms to one or

two fundamental terms. But this question, though it undeniably belongs to

ethical philosophy, is not relevant to our present enquiry. We are not now

concerned to discover which term, within the sphere of ethical terms, is to be

taken as fundamental; whether, for example, “good” can be defined in terms

of “right” or “right” in terms of “good,” or both in terms of “value.” What we

are interested in is the possibility of reducing the whole sphere of ethicalterms to non-ethical terms. We are enquiring whether statements of ethical

value can be translated into statements of empirical fact.

That  they  can  be  so  translated  is  the  contention  of  those  ethical

philosophers who are commonly called subjectivists, and of those who are

known as utilitarians. For the utilitarian defines the rightness of actions, and

the goodness of ends, in terms of the pleasure, or happiness, or satisfaction, to

which they give rise; the subjectivist, in terms of the feelings of approval

which a certain person, or group of people, has towards them. Each of these

types of definition makes moral judgements into a sub-class of psychological

or sociological judgements; and for this reason they are very attractive to us.

For, if either was correct, it would follow that ethical assertions were not

generically  different  from  the  factual  assertions  which  are  ordinarily

contrasted  with  them;  and  the  account  which  we  have  already  given  of

empirical hypotheses would apply to them also.

  Nevertheless we shall not adopt either a subjectivist or a utilitarian analysis

of ethical terms. We reject the subjectivist view that to call an action right, or

a thing good, is to say that it is generally approved of, because it is not self-

contradictory to assert that some actions which are generally approved of are

not right, or that some things which are generally approved of are not good.

And we reject the alternative subjectivist view that a man who asserts that a

certain action is right, or that a certain thing is good, is saying that he himself

approves of it, on the ground that a man who confessed that he sometimes

approved of what was bad or wrong would not be contradicting himself. And

a similar argument is fatal to utilitarianism. We cannot agree that to call an

action right is to say that of all the actions possible in the circumstances it

would cause, or be likely to cause, the greatest happiness, or the greatest

balance  of  pleasure  over  pain,  or  the  greatest  balance  of  satisfied  over

unsatisfied desire, because we find that it is not self-contradictory to say that

it  is  sometimes  wrong  to  perform  the  action  which  would  actually  or

probably cause the greatest happiness, or the greatest balance of pleasure over

pain,  or  of  satisfied  over  unsatisfied  desire.  And  since  it  is  not  self-

contradictory to say that some pleasant things are not good, or that some bad

things  are  desired,  it  cannot  be  the  case  that  the  sentence  “x  is  good”  is

equivalent to “x is pleasant,” or to “x is desired.” And to every other variant

of utilitarianism with which I am acquainted the same objection can be made.

And  therefore  we  should,  I  think,  conclude  that  the  validity  of  ethicaljudgements is not determined by the felicific tendencies of actions, any more

than  by  the  nature  of  people’s  feelings;  but  that  it  must  be  regarded  as

“absolute” or “intrinsic,” and not empirically calculable.

If we say this, we are not, of course, denying that it is possible to invent a

language in which all ethical symbols are definable in non-ethical terms, or

even that it is desirable to invent such a language and adopt it in place of our

own; what we are denying is that the suggested reduction of ethical to non-

ethical statements is consistent with the conventions of our actual language.

That is, we reject utilitarianism and subjectivism, not as proposals to replace

our  existing  ethical  notions  by  new  ones,  but  as  analyses  of  our  existing

ethical  notions.  Our  contention  is  simply  that,  in  our  language,  sentences

which  contain  normative  ethical  symbols  are  not  equivalent  to  sentences

which express psychological propositions, or indeed empirical propositions

of any kind.

It  is  advisable  here  to  make  it  plain  that  it  is  only  normative  ethical

symbols,  and  not  descriptive  ethical  symbols,  that  are  held  by  us  to  be

indefinable in factual terms. There is a danger of confusing these two types of

symbols,  because  they  are  commonly  constituted  by  signs  of  the  same

sensible form. Thus a complex sign of the form “x is wrong” may constitute a

sentence which expresses a moral judgement concerning a certain type of

conduct, or it may constitute a sentence which states that a certain type of

conduct is repugnant to the moral sense of a particular society. In the latter

case, the symbol “wrong” is a descriptive ethical symbol, and the sentence in

which it occurs expresses an ordinary sociological proposition; in the former

case, the symbol “wrong” is a normative ethical symbol, and the sentence in

which it occurs does not, we maintain, express an empirical proposition at all.

It is only with normative ethics that we are at present concerned; so that

whenever ethical symbols are used in the course of this argument without

qualification, they are always to be interpreted as symbols of the normative

type.

In admitting that normative ethical concepts are irreducible to empirical

concepts, we seem to be leaving the way clear for the “absolutist” view of

ethics—that  is,  the  view  that  statements  of  value  are  not  controlled  by

observation, as ordinary empirical propositions are, but only by a mysterious

“intellectual intuition.” A feature of this theory, which is seldom recognized

by its advocates, is that it makes statements of value unverifiable. For it isnotorious  that  what  seems  intuitively  certain  to  one  person  may  seem

doubtful, or even false, to another. So that unless it is possible to provide

some criterion by which one may decide between conflicting intuitions, a

mere appeal to intuition is worthless as a test of a proposition’s validity. But

in  the  case  of  moral  judgements,  no  such  criterion  can  be  given.  Some

moralists claim to settle the matter by saying that they “know” that their own

moral  judgements  are  correct.  But  such  an  assertion  is  of  purely

psychological interest, and has not the slightest tendency to prove the validity

of any moral judgement. For dissentient moralists may equally well “know”

that their ethical views are correct. And, as far as subjective certainty goes,

there  will  be  nothing  to  choose  between  them.  When  such  differences  of

opinion arise in connection with an ordinary empirical proposition, one may

attempt  to  resolve  them  by  referring  to,  or  actually  carrying  out,  some

relevant empirical test. But with regard to ethical statements, there is, on the

“absolutist”  or  “intuitionist”  theory,  no  relevant  empirical  test.  We  are

therefore justified in saying that on this theory ethical statements are held to

be  unverifiable.  They  are,  of  course,  also  held  to  be  genuine  synthetic

propositions.

  Considering the use which we have made of the principle that a synthetic

proposition is significant only if it is empirically verifiable, it is clear that the

acceptance of an “absolutist” theory of ethics would undermine the whole of

our  main  argument.  And  as  we  have  already  rejected  the  “naturalistic”

theories  which  are  commonly  supposed  to  provide  the  only  alternative  to

“absolutism” in ethics, we seem to have reached a difficult position. We shall

meet the difficulty by showing that the correct treatment of ethical statements

is afforded by a third theory, which is wholly compatible with our radical

empiricism.

We  begin  by  admitting  that  the  fundamental  ethical  concepts  are

unanalysable, inasmuch as there is no criterion by which one can test the

validity of the judgements in which they occur. So far we are in agreement

with  the  absolutists.  But,  unlike  the  absolutists,  we  are  able  to  give  an

explanation of this fact about ethical concepts. We say that the reason why

they are unanalysable is that they are mere pseudo-concepts. The presence of

an ethical symbol in a proposition adds nothing to its factual content. Thus if

I say to someone, “You acted wrongly in stealing that money,” I am not

stating anything more than if I had simply said, “You stole that money.” Inadding that this action is wrong I am not making any further statement about

it. I am simply evincing my moral disapproval of it. It is as if I had said,

“You stole that money,” in a peculiar tone of horror, or written it with the

addition of some special exclamation marks. The tone, or the exclamation

marks, adds nothing to the literal meaning of the sentence. It merely serves to

show that the expression of it is attended by certain feelings in the speaker.

If now I generalise my previous statement and say, “Stealing money is

wrong,”  I  produce  a  sentence  which  has  no  factual  meaning—that  is,

expresses no proposition which can be either true or false. It is as if I had

written  “Stealing  money!!”—where  the  shape  and  thickness  of  the

exclamation  marks  show,  by  a  suitable  convention,  that  a  special  sort  of

moral disapproval is the feeling which is being expressed. It is clear that there

is nothing said here which can be true or false. Another man may disagree

with me about the wrongness of stealing, in the sense that he may not have

the same feelings about stealing as I have, and he may quarrel with me on

account of my moral sentiments. But he cannot, strictly speaking, contradict

me. For in saying that a certain type of action is right or wrong, I am not

making any factual statement, not even a statement about my own state of

mind. I am merely expressing certain moral sentiments. And the man who is

ostensibly contradicting me is merely expressing his moral sentiments. So

that there is plainly no sense in asking which of us is in the right. For neither

of us is asserting a genuine proposition.

  What we have just been saying about the symbol “wrong” applies to all

normative ethical symbols. Sometimes they occur in sentences which record

ordinary empirical facts besides expressing ethical feeling about those facts:

sometimes they occur in sentences which simply express ethical feeling about

a certain type of action, or situation, without making any statement of fact.

But in every case in which one would commonly be said to be making an

ethical  judgement,  the  function  of  the  relevant  ethical  word  is  purely

“emotive.” It is used to express feeling about certain objects, but not to make

any assertion about them.

It  is  worth  mentioning  that  ethical  terms  do  not  serve  only  to  express

feeling. They are calculated also to arouse feeling, and so to stimulate action.

Indeed some of them are used in such a way as to give the sentences in which

they occur the effect of commands. Thus the sentence “It is your duty to tell

the truth” may be regarded both as the expression of a certain sort of ethicalfeeling about truthfulness and as the expression of the command “Tell the

truth.” The sentence “You ought to tell the truth” also involves the command

“Tell the truth,” but here the tone of the command is less emphatic. In the

sentence “It is good to tell the truth” the command has become little more

than a suggestion. And thus the “meaning” of the word “good,” in its ethical

usage, is differentiated from that of the word “duty” or the word “ought.” In

fact we may define the meaning of the various ethical words in terms both of

the  different  feelings  they  are  ordinarily  taken  to  express,  and  also  the

different responses which they are calculated to provoke.

We can now see why it is impossible to find a criterion for determining the

validity  of  ethical  judgements.  It  is  not  because  they  have  an  “absolute”

validity which is mysteriously independent of ordinary sense-experience, but

because they have no objective validity whatsoever. If a sentence makes no

statement at all, there is obviously no sense in asking whether what it says is

true or false. And we have seen that sentences which simply express moral

judgements do not say anything. They are pure expressions of feeling and as

such  do  not  come  under  the  category  of  truth  and  falsehood.  They  are

unverifiable for the same reason as a cry of pain or a word of command is

unverifiable—because they do not express genuine propositions.

  Thus, although our theory of ethics might fairly be said to be radically

subjectivist,  it  differs  in  a  very  important  respect  from  the  orthodox

subjectivist theory. For the orthodox subjectivist does not deny, as we do, that

the sentences of a moralizer express genuine propositions. All he denies is

that they express propositions of a unique non-empirical character. His own

view is that they express propositions about the speaker’s feelings. If this

were so, ethical judgements clearly would be capable of being true or false.

They would be true if the speaker had the relevant feelings, and false if he

had not. And this is a matter which is, in principle, empirically verifiable.

Furthermore they could be significantly contradicted. For if I say, “Tolerance

is a virtue,” and someone answers, “You don’t approve of it,” he would, on

the  ordinary  subjectivist  theory,  be  contradicting  me.  On  our  theory,  he

would not be contradicting me, because, in saying that tolerance was a virtue,

I  should  not  be  making  any  statement  about  my  own  feelings  or  about

anything else. I should simply be evincing my feelings, which is not at all the

same thing as saying that I have them.

The  distinction  between  the  expression  of  feeling  and  the  assertion  offeeling is complicated by the fact that the assertion that one has a certain

feeling often accompanies the expression of that feeling, and is then, indeed,

a factor in the expression of that feeling. Thus I may simultaneously express

boredom and say that I am bored, and in that case my utterance of the words,

“I am bored,” is one of the circumstances which make it true to say that I am

expressing or evincing boredom. But I can express boredom without actually

saying  that  I  am  bored.  I  can  express  it  by  my  tone  and  gestures,  while

making a statement about something wholly unconnected with it, or by an

ejaculation, or without uttering any words at all. So that even if the assertion

that one has a certain feeling always involves the expression of that feeling,

the expression of a feeling assuredly does not always involve the assertion

that one has it. And this is the important point to grasp in considering the

distinction  between  our  theory  and  the  ordinary  subjectivist  theory.  For

whereas  the  subjectivist  holds  that  ethical  statements  actually  assert  the

existence of certain feelings, we hold that ethical statements are expressions

and excitants of feeling which do not necessarily involve any assertions.

We  have  already  remarked  that  the  main  objection  to  the  ordinary

subjectivist theory is that the validity of ethical judgements is not determined

by the nature of their author’s feelings. And this is an objection which our

theory escapes. For it does not imply that the existence of any feelings is a

necessary and sufficient condition of the validity of an ethical judgement. It

implies, on the contrary, that ethical judgements have no validity.

  There  is,  however,  a  celebrated  argument  against  subjectivist  theories

which our theory does not escape. It has been pointed out by Moore that if

ethical  statements  were  simply  statements  about  the  speaker’s  feelings,  it
                                                                  91
would be impossible to argue about questions of value. To take a typical

example: if a man said that thrift was a virtue, and another replied that it was

a vice, they would not, on this theory, be disputing with one another. One

would be saying that he approved of thrift, and the other that he didn’t; and

there is no reason why both these statements should not be true. Now Moore

held  it  to  be  obvious  that  we  do  dispute  about  questions  of  value,  and

accordingly concluded that the particular form of subjectivism which he was

discussing was false.

It  is  plain  that  the  conclusion  that  it  is  impossible  to  dispute  about

questions of value follows from our theory also. For as we hold that such

sentences  as  “Thrift  is  a  virtue”  and  “Thrift  is  a  vice”  do  not  expresspropositions at all, we clearly cannot hold that they express incompatible

propositions. We must therefore admit that if Moore’s argument really refutes

the ordinary subjectivist theory, it also refutes ours. But, in fact, we deny that

it does refute even the ordinary subjectivist theory. For we hold that one

really never does dispute about questions of value.

This may seem, at first sight, to be a very paradoxical assertion. For we

certainly  do  engage  in  disputes  which  are  ordinarily  regarded  as  disputes

about questions of value. But, in all such cases, we find, if we consider the

matter closely, that the dispute is not really about a question of value, but

about a question of fact. When someone disagrees with us about the moral

value  of  a  certain  action  or  type  of  action,  we  do  admittedly  resort  to

argument in order to win him over to our way of thinking. But we do not

attempt to show by our arguments that he has the “wrong” ethical feeling

towards  a  situation  whose  nature  he  has  correctly  apprehended.  What  we

attempt to show is that he is mistaken about the facts of the case. We argue

that he has misconceived the agent’s motive: or that he has misjudged the

effects of the action, or its probable effects in view of the agent’s knowledge;

or that he has failed to take into account the special circumstances in which

the agent was placed. Or else we employ more general arguments about the

effects which actions of a certain type tend to produce, or the qualities which

are usually manifested in their performance. We do this in the hope that we

have  only  to  get  our  opponent  to  agree  with  us  about  the  nature  of  the

empirical facts for him to adopt the same moral attitude towards them as we

do. And as the people with whom we argue have generally received the same

moral  education  as  ourselves,  and  live  in  the  same  social  order,  our

expectation  is  usually  justified.  But  if  our  opponent  happens  to  have

undergone  a  different  process  of  moral  “conditioning”  from  ourselves,  so

that, even when he acknowledges all the facts, he still disagrees with us about

the moral value of the actions under discussion, then we abandon the attempt

to convince him by argument. We say that it is impossible to argue with him

because  he  has  a  distorted  or  undeveloped  moral  sense;  which  signifies

merely that he employs a different set of values from our own. We feel that

our own system of values is superior, and therefore speak in such derogatory

terms of his. But we cannot bring forward any arguments to show that our

system is superior. For our judgement that it is so is itself a judgement of

value, and accordingly outside the scope of argument. It is because argument

fails us when we come to deal with pure questions of value, as distinct fromquestions of fact, that we finally resort to mere abuse.

In short, we find that argument is possible on moral questions only if some

system  of  values  is  presupposed.  If  our  opponent  concurs  with  us  in

expressing moral disapproval of all actions of a given type t, then we may get

him  to  condemn  a  particular  action  A,  by  bringing  forward  arguments  to

show that A is of type t. For the question whether A does or does not belong

to that type is a plain question of fact. Given that a man has certain moral

principles, we argue that he must, in order to be consistent, react morally to

certain things in a certain way. What we do not and cannot argue about is the

validity of these moral principles. We merely praise or condemn them in the

light of our own feelings.

If anyone doubts the accuracy of this account of moral disputes, let him try

to construct even an imaginary argument on a question of value which does

not  reduce  itself  to  an  argument  about  a  question  of  logic  or  about  an

empirical matter of fact. I am confident that he will not succeed in producing

a single example. And if that is the case, he must allow that its involving the

impossibility of purely ethical arguments is not, as Moore thought, a ground

of objection to our theory, but rather a point in favour of it.

  Having upheld our theory against the only criticism which appeared to

threaten it, we may now use it to define the nature of all ethical enquiries. We

find that ethical philosophy consists simply in saying that ethical concepts are

pseudo-concepts and therefore unanalysable. The further task of describing

the different feelings that the different ethical terms are used to express, and

the  different  reactions  that  they  customarily  provoke,  is  a  task  for  the

psychologist. There cannot be such a thing as ethical science, if by ethical

science one means the elaboration of a “true” system of morals. For we have

seen that, as ethical judgements are mere expressions of feeling, there can be

no way of determining the validity of any ethical system, and, indeed, no

sense  in  asking  whether  any  such  system  is  true.  All  that  one  may

legitimately enquire in this connection is, What are the moral habits of a

given person or group of people, and what causes them to have precisely

those habits and feelings? And this enquiry falls wholly within the scope of

the existing social sciences.

It appears, then, that ethics, as a branch of knowledge, is nothing more than

a department of psychology and sociology. And in case anyone thinks that we

are overlooking the existence of casuistry, we may remark that casuistry isnot a science, but is a purely analytical investigation of the structure of a

given moral system. In other words, it is an exercise in formal logic.

  When one comes to pursue the psychological enquiries which constitute

ethical science, one is immediately enabled to account for the Kantian and

hedonistic theories of morals. For one finds that one of the chief causes of

moral  behaviour  is  fear,  both  conscious  and  unconscious,  of  a  god’s

displeasure, and fear of the enmity of society. And this, indeed, is the reason

why  moral  precepts  present  themselves  to  some  people  as  “categorical”

commands. And one finds, also, that the moral code of a society is partly

determined by the beliefs of that society concerning the conditions of its own

happiness—or,  in  other  words,  that  a  society  tends  to  encourage  or

discourage a given type of conduct by the use of moral sanctions according as

it appears to promote or detract from the contentment of the society as a

whole. And this is. the reason why altruism is recommended in most moral

codes and egotism condemned. It is from the observation of this connection

between morality and happiness that hedonistic or eudaemonistic theories of

morals ultimately spring, just as the moral theory of Kant is based on the fact,

previously explained, that moral precepts have for some people the force of

inexorable commands. As each of these theories ignores the fact which lies at

the root of the other, both may be criticized as being one-sided; but this is not

the main objection to either of them. Their essential defect is that they treat

propositions which refer to the causes and attributes of our ethical feelings as

if they were definitions of ethical concepts. And thus they fail to recognise

that ethical concepts are pseudo-concepts and consequently indefinable.

As we have already said, our conclusions about the nature of ethics apply

to aesthetics also. Æsthetic terms are used in exactly the same way as ethical

terms. Such aesthetic words as “beautiful” and “hideous” are employed, as

ethical words are employed, not to make statements of fact, but simply to

express certain feelings and evoke a certain response. It follows, as in ethics,

that there is no sense in attributing objective validity to aesthetic judgements,

and no possibility of arguing about questions of value in aesthetics, but only

about questions of fact. A scientific treatment of aesthetics would show us

what in general were the causes of aesthetic feeling, why various societies

produced and admired the works of art they did, why taste varies as it does

within a given society, and so forth. And these are ordinary psychological or

sociological  questions.  They  have,  of  course,  little  or  nothing  to  do  withæsthetic criticism as we understand it. But that is because the purpose of

æsthetic  criticism  is  not  so  much  to  give  knowledge  as  to  communicate

emotion. The critic, by calling attention to certain features of the work under

review, and expressing his own feelings about them, endeavours to make us

share his attitude towards the work as a whole. The only relevant propositions

that he formulates are propositions describing the nature of the work. And

these are plain records of fact. We conclude, therefore, that there is nothing in

aesthetics,  any  more  than  there  is  in  ethics,  to  justify  the  view  that  it

embodies a unique type of knowledge.

It should now be clear that the only information which we can legitimately

derive from the study of our aesthetic and moral experiences is information

about  our  own  mental  and  physical  make-up.  We  take  note  of  these

experiences  as  providing  data  for  our  psychological  and  sociological

generalisations. And this is the only way in which they serve to increase our

knowledge.  It  follows  that  any  attempt  to  make  our  use  of  ethical  and

æsthetic concepts the basis of a metaphysical theory concerning the existence

of a world of values, as distinct from the world of facts, involves a false

analysis of these concepts. Our own analysis has shown that the phenomena

of  moral  experience  cannot  fairly  be  used  to  support  any  rationalist  or

metaphysical doctrine whatsoever. In particular, they cannot, as Kant hoped,

be used to establish the existence of a transcendent god.

This mention of God brings us to the question of the possibility of religious

knowledge. We shall see that this possibility has already been ruled out by

our treatment of metaphysics. But, as this is a point of considerable interest,

we may be permitted to discuss it at some length.

It is now generally admitted, at any rate by philosophers, that the existence

of a being having the attributes which define the god of any non-animistic

religion cannot be demonstratively proved. To see that this is so, we have

only to ask ourselves what are the premises from which the existence of such

a  god  could  be  deduced.  If  the  conclusion  that  a  god  exists  is  to  be

demonstratively  certain,  then  these  premises  must  be  certain;  for,  as  the

conclusion of a deductive argument is already contained in the premises, any

uncertainty there may be about the truth of the premises is necessarily shared

by it. But we know that no empirical proposition can ever be anything more

than probable. It is only a priori propositions that are logically certain. But

we cannot deduce the existence of a god from an a priori proposition. For weknow that the reason why a priori propositions are certain is that they are

tautologies. And from a set of tautologies nothing but a further tautology can

be validly deduced. It follows that there is no possibility of demonstrating the

existence of a god.

  What is not so generally recognised is that there can be no way of proving

that the existence of a god, such as the God of Christianity, is even probable.

Yet  this  also  is  easily  shown.  For  if  the  existence  of  such  a  god  were

probable,  then  the  proposition  that  he  existed  would  be  an  empirical

hypothesis. And in that case it would be possible to deduce from it, and other

empirical  hypotheses,  certain  experiential  propositions  which  were  not

deducible from those other hypotheses alone. But in fact this is not possible.

It  is  sometimes  claimed,  indeed,  that  the  existence  of  a  certain  sort  of

regularity in nature constitutes sufficient evidence for the existence of a god.

But if the sentence “God exists” entails no more than that certain types of

phenomena occur in certain sequences, then to assert the existence of a god

will be simply equivalent to asserting that there is the requisite regularity in

nature; and no religious man would admit that this was all he intended to

assert in asserting the existence of a god. He would say that in talking about

God, he was talking about a transcendent being who might be known through

certain empirical manifestations, but certainly could not be defined in terms

of those manifestations. But in that case the term “god” is a metaphysical

term. And if “god” is a metaphysical term, then it cannot be even probable

that a god exists. For to say that “God exists” is to make a metaphysical

utterance which cannot be either true or false. And by the same criterion, no

sentence which purports to describe the nature of a transcendent god can

possess any literal significance.

It is important not to confuse this view of religious assertions with the view
                                                  92
that  is  adopted  by  atheists,  or  agnostics.  For  it  is  characteristic  of  an

agnostic to hold that the existence of a god is a possibility in which there is

no good reason either to believe or disbelieve; and it is characteristic of an

atheist to hold that it is at least probable that no god exists. And our view that

all utterances about the nature of God are nonsensical, so far from being

identical  with,  or  even  lending  any  support  to,  either  of  these  familiar

contentions, is actually incompatible with them. For if the assertion that there

is a god is nonsensical, then the atheist’s assertion that there is no god is

equally  nonsensical,  since  it  is  only  a  significant  proposition  that  can  besignificantly  contradicted.  As  for  the  agnostic,  although  he  refrains  from

saying either that there is or that there is not a god, he does not deny that the

question whether a transcendent god exists is a genuine question. He does not

deny that the two sentences “There is a transcendent god” and “There is no

transcendent god” express propositions one of which is actually true and the

other false. All he says is that we have no means of telling which of them is

true, and therefore ought not to commit ourselves to either. But we have seen

that the sentences in question do not express propositions at all. And this

means that agnosticism also is ruled out.

  Thus we offer the theist the same comfort as we gave to the moralist. His

assertions cannot possibly be valid, but they cannot be invalid either. As he

says nothing at all about the world, he cannot justly be accused of saying

anything false, or anything for which he has insufficient grounds. It is only

when the theist claims that in asserting the existence of a transcendent god he

is expressing a genuine proposition that we are entitled to disagree with him.

It is to be remarked that in cases where deities are identified with natural

objects, assertions concerning them may be allowed to be significant. If, for

example,  a  man  tells  me  that  the  occurrence  of  thunder  is  alone  both

necessary and sufficient to establish the truth of the proposition that Jehovah

is angry, I may conclude that, in his usage of words, the sentence “Jehovah is

angry”  is  equivalent  to  “It  is  thundering.”  But  in  sophisticated  religions,

though they may be to some extent based on men’s awe of natural process

which they cannot sufficiently understand, the “person” who is supposed to

control  the  empirical  world  is  not  himself  located  in  it;  he  is  held  to  be

superior to the empirical world, and so outside it; and he is endowed with

super-empirical  attributes.  But  the  notion  of  a  person  whose  essential

attributes are non-empirical is not an intelligible notion at all. We may have a

word which is used as if it named this “person,” but, unless the sentences in

which  it  occurs  express  propositions  which  are  empirically  verifiable,  it

cannot be said to symbolize anything. And this is the case with regard to the

word “god,” in the usage in which it is intended to refer to a transcendent

object. The mere existence of the noun is enough to foster the illusion that

there is a real, or at any rate a possible entity corresponding to it. It is only

when we enquire what God’s attributes are that we discover that “God,” in

this usage, is not a genuine name.

It is common to find belief in a transcendent god conjoined with belief inan after-life. But, in the form which it usually takes, the content of this belief

is not a genuine hypothesis. To say that men do not ever die, or that the state

of death is merely a state of prolonged insensibility, is indeed to express a

significant proposition, though all the available evidence goes to show that it

is false. But to say that there is something imperceptible inside a man, which

is his soul or his real self, and that it goes on living after he is dead, is to

make a metaphysical assertion which has no more factual content than the

assertion that there is a transcendent god.

It is worth mentioning that, according to the account which we have given

of religious assertions, there is no logical ground for antagonism between

religion and natural science. As far as the question of truth or falsehood is

concerned, there is no opposition between the natural scientist and the theist

who believes in a transcendent god. For since the religious utterances of the

theist are not genuine propositions at all, they cannot stand in any logical

relation to the propositions of science. Such antagonism as there is between

religion and science appears to consist in the fact that science takes away one

of the motives which make men religious. For it is acknowledged that one of

the  ultimate  sources  of  religious  feeling  lies  in  the  inability  of  men  to

determine their own destiny; and science tends to destroy the feeling of awe

with which men regard an alien world, by making them believe that they can

understand and anticipate the course of natural phenomena, and even to some

extent  control  it.  The  fact  that  it  has  recently  become  fashionable  for

physicists themselves to be sympathetic towards religion is a point in favour

of this hypothesis. For this sympathy towards religion marks the physicists’

own lack of confidence in the validity of their hypotheses, which is a reaction

on  their  part  from  the  anti-religious  dogmatism  of  nineteenth-century

scientists, and a natural outcome of the crisis through which physics has just

passed.

It is not within the scope of this enquiry to enter more deeply into the

causes of religious feeling, or to discuss the probability of the continuance of

religious belief. We are concerned only to answer those questions which arise

out of our discussion of the possibility of religious knowledge. The point

which we wish to establish is that there cannot be any transcendent truths of

religion. For the sentences which the theist uses to express such “truths” are

not literally significant.

An interesting feature of this conclusion is that it accords with what manytheists are accustomed to say themselves. For we are often told that the nature

of God is a mystery which transcends the human understanding. But to say

that  something  transcends  the  human  understanding  is  to  say  that  it  is

unintelligible. And what is unintelligible cannot significantly be described.

Again, we are told that God is not an object of reason but an object of faith.

This may be nothing more than an admission that the existence of God must

be taken on trust, since it cannot be proved. But it may also be an assertion

that God is the object of a purely mystical intuition, and cannot therefore be

defined in terms which are intelligible to the reason. And I think there are

many theists who would assert this. But if one allows that it is impossible to

define God in intelligible terms, then one is allowing that it is impossible for

a sentence both to be significant and to be about God. If a mystic admits that

the object of his vision is something which cannot be described, then he must

also admit that he is bound to talk nonsense when he describes it.

For his part, the mystic may protest that his intuition does reveal truths to

him, even though he cannot explain to others what these truths are; and that

we  who  do  not  possess  this  faculty  of  intuition  can  have  no  ground  for

denying that it is a cognitive faculty. For we can hardly maintain a priori that

there are no ways of discovering true propositions except those which we

ourselves employ. The answer is that we set no limit to the number of ways

in which one may come to formulate a true proposition. We do not in any

way  deny  that  a  synthetic  truth  may  be  discovered  by  purely  intuitive

methods as well as by the rational method of induction. But we do say that

every synthetic proposition, however it may have been arrived at, must be

subject to the test of actual experience. We do not deny a priori that the

mystic is able to discover truths by his own special methods. We wait to hear

what  are  the  propositions  which  embody  his  discoveries,  in  order  to  see

whether they are verified or confuted by our empirical observations. But the

mystic, so far from producing propositions which are empirically verified, is

unable to produce any intelligible propositions at all. And therefore we say

that his intuition has not revealed to him any facts. It is no use his saying that

he has apprehended facts but is unable to express them. For we know that if

he really had acquired any information, he would be able to express it. He

would be able to indicate in some way or other how the genuineness of his

discovery might be empirically determined. The fact that he cannot reveal

what he “knows,” or even himself devise an empirical test to validate his

“knowledge,” shows that his state of mystical intuition is not a genuinelycognitive state. So that in describing his vision the mystic does not give us

any  information  about  the  external  world;  he  merely  gives  us  indirect

information about the condition of his own mind.

  These considerations dispose of the argument from religious experience,

which many philosophers still regard as a valid argument in favour of the

existence  of  a  god.  They  say  that  it  is  logically  possible  for  men  to  be

immediately acquainted with God, as they are immediately acquainted with a

sense-content, and that there is no reason why one should be prepared to

believe a man when he says that he is seeing a yellow patch, and refuse to

believe him when he says that he is seeing God. The answer to this is that if

the  man  who  asserts  that  he  is  seeing  God  is  merely  asserting  that  he  is

experiencing a peculiar kind of sense-content, then we do not for a moment

deny that his assertion may be true. But, ordinarily, the man who says that he

is  seeing  God  is  saying  not  merely  that  he  is  experiencing  a  religious

emotion, but also that there exists a transcendent being who is the object of

this  emotion;  just  as  the  man  who  says  that  he  sees  a  yellow  patch  is

ordinarily  saying  not  merely  that  his  visual  sense-field  contains  a  yellow

sense-content, but also that there exists a yellow object to which the sense-

content belongs. And it is not irrational to be prepared to believe a man when

he asserts the existence of a yellow object, and to refuse to believe him when

he  asserts  the  existence  of  a  transcendent  god.  For  whereas  the  sentence

“There  exists  here  a  yellow-coloured  material  thing”  expresses  a  genuine

synthetic  proposition  which  could  be  empirically  verified,  the  sentence

“There  exists  a  transcendent  god”  has,  as  we  have  seen,  no  literal

significance.

We  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  argument  from  religious  experience  is

altogether  fallacious.  The  fact  that  people  have  religious  experiences  is

interesting from the psychological point of view, but it does not in any way

imply that there is such a thing as religious knowledge, any more than our

having  moral  experiences  implies  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  moral

knowledge. The theist, like the moralist, may believe that his experiences are

cognitive  experiences,  but,  unless  he  can  formulate  his  “knowledge”  in

propositions  that  are  empirically  verifiable,  we  may  be  sure  that  he  is

deceiving himself. It follows that those philosophers who fill their books with

assertions that they intuitively “know” this or that moral or religious “truth”

are merely providing material for the psycho-analyst. For no act of intuitioncan  be  said  to  reveal  a  truth  about  any  matter  of  fact  unless  it  issues  in

verifiable propositions. And all such propositions are to be incorporated in

the system of empirical propositions which constitutes science.CHAPTER VII









THE SELF AND THE COMMON WORLD




IT IS CUSTOMARY for the authors of epistemological treatises to assume

that our empirical knowledge must have a basis of certainty, and that there

must therefore be objects whose existence is logically indubitable. And they

believe, for the most part, that it is their business, not merely to describe these

objects, which they regard as being immediately “given” to us, but also to

provide a logical proof of the existence of objects which are not so “given.”

For they think that without such a proof the greater part of our so-called

empirical knowledge will lack the certification which it logically requires.

To those who have followed the argument of this book it will, however, be

clear that these familiar assumptions are mistaken. For we have seen that our

claims to empirical knowledge are not susceptible of a logical, but only of a

pragmatic, justification. It is futile, and therefore illegitimate, to demand an a

priori proof of the existence of objects which are not immediately “given.”

For, unless they are metaphysical objects, the occurrence of certain sense-

experiences will itself constitute the only proof of their existence which is

requisite  or  obtainable;  and  the  question  whether  the  appropriate  sense-

experiences do or do not occur in the relevant circumstances is one that must

be decided in actual practice, and not by any a priori argumentation. We have

already applied these considerations to the so-called problem of perception,

and we shall shortly be applying them also to the traditional “problems” ofour knowledge of our own existence, and of the existence of other people. In

the  case  of  the  problem  of  perception,  we  found  that  in  order  to  avoid

metaphysics we were obliged to adopt a phenomenalist standpoint, and we

shall find that the same treatment must be accorded to the other problems to

which we have just now referred.

We have seen, furthermore, that there are no objects whose existence is

indubitable. For, since existence is not a predicate, to assert that an object

exists is always to assert a synthetic proposition; and it has been shown that

no synthetic propositions are logically sacrosanct. All of them, including the

propositions  which  describe  the  content  of  our  sensations,  are  hypotheses

which, however great their probability, we may eventually find it expedient

to abandon. And this means that our empirical knowledge cannot have a basis

of  logical  certainty.  It  follows,  indeed,  from  the  definition  of  a  synthetic

proposition that it cannot be either proved or disproved by formal logic. The

man  who  denies  such  a  proposition  may  be  acting  irrationally,  by

contemporary standards of rationality, but he is not necessarily contradicting

himself. And we know that the only propositions that are certain are those

which  cannot  be  denied  without  self-contradiction,  inasmuch  as  they  are

tautologies.

It must not be thought that in denying that our empirical knowledge has a

basis of certainty we are denying that any objects are really “given.” For to

say that an object is immediately “given” is to say merely that it is the content

of a sense-experience, and we are very far from maintaining that our sense-

experiences have no real content, or even that their content is in any way

indescribable.  All  that  we  are  maintaining  in  this  connection  is  that  any

description of the content of any sense-experience is an empirical hypothesis

of  whose  validity  there  can  be  no  guarantee.  And  this  is  by  no  means

equivalent to maintaining that no such hypothesis can actually be valid. We

shall  not,  indeed,  attempt  to  formulate  any  such  hypotheses  ourselves,

because  the  discussion  of  psychological  questions  is  out  of  place  in  a

philosophical enquiry; and we have already made it clear that our empiricism

is not logically dependent on an atomistic psychology, such as Hume and

Mach adopted, but is compatible with any theory whatsoever concerning the

actual  characteristics  of  our  sensory  fields.  For  the  empiricist  doctrine  to

which  we  are  committed  is  a  logical  doctrine  concerning  the  distinction

between  analytic  propositions,  synthetic  propositions,  and  metaphysicalverbiage; and as such it has no bearing on any psychological question of fact.

It  is  not  possible,  however,  to  set  aside  all  the  questions  which

philosophers  have  raised  in  connection  with  the  “given”  as  being

psychological  in  character,  and  so  outside  the  scope  of  this  enquiry.  In

particular,  it  is  impossible  to  deal  in  this  way  with  the  question  whether

sense-contents are mental or physical, or with the question whether they are

in any sense private to a single self, or with the question whether they can

exist without being experienced. For none of these three questions is capable

of being solved by an empirical test. They must, if they are soluble at all, be

soluble a priori. And as they are all questions which have given rise to much

dispute among philosophers, we shall in fact attempt to provide for each of

them a definitive a priori solution.

To begin with, we must make it clear that we do not accept the realist

analysis of our sensations in terms of subject, act, and object. For neither the

existence of the substance which is supposed to perform the so-called act of

sensing nor the existence of the act itself, as an entity distinct from the sense-

contents on which it is supposed to be directed, is in the least capable of

being  verified.  We  do  not  deny,  indeed,  that  a  given  sense-content  can

legitimately be said to be experienced by a particular subject; but we shall see

that this relation of being experienced by a particular subject is to be analysed

in terms of the relationship of sense-contents to one another, and not in terms

of a substantival ego and its mysterious acts. Accordingly we define a sense-

content not as the object, but as a part of a sense-experience. And from this it

follows that the existence of a sense-content always entails the existence of a

sense-experience.

It is necessary, at this point, to remark that when one says that a sense-

experience,  or  a  sense-content,  exists,  one  is  making  a  different  type  of

statement from that which one makes when one says that a material thing

exists. For the existence of a material thing is defined in terms of the actual

and possible occurrence of the sense-contents which constitute it as a logical

construction, and one cannot significantly speak of a sense-experience, which

is a whole composed of sense-contents, or of a sense-content itself as if it

were a logical construction out of sense-contents. And in fact when we say

that a given sense-content or sense-experience exists, we are saying no more

than that it occurs. And, accordingly, it seems advisable always to speak of

the “occurrence” of sense-contents and sense-experiences in preference tospeaking of their “existence,” and so to avoid the danger of treating sense-

contents as if they were material things.

The answer to the question whether sense-contents are mental or physical

is that they are neither; or rather, that the distinction between what is mental

and  what  is  physical  does  not  apply  to  sense-contents.  It  applies  only  to

objects which are logical constructions out of them. But what differentiates

one such logical construction from another is the fact that it is constituted by

different sense-contents or by sense-contents differently related. So that when

we  distinguish  a  given  mental  object  from  a  given  physical  object,  or  a

mental object from another mental object, or a physical object from another

physical object, we are in every case distinguishing between different logical

constructions whose elements cannot themselves be said to be either mental

or physical. It is, indeed, not impossible for a sense-content to be an element

both of a mental and of a physical object; but it is necessary that some of the

elements, or some of the relations, should be different in the two logical

constructions. And it may be advisable here to repeat that, when we refer to

an object as a logical construction out of certain sense-contents, we are not

saying that it is actually constructed out of those sense-contents, or that the

sense-contents are in any way parts of it, but are merely expressing, in a

convenient,  if  somewhat  misleading,  fashion,  the  syntactical  fact  that  all

sentences referring to it are translatable into sentences referring to them.

The  fact  that  the  distinction  between  mind  and  matter  applies  only  to

logical constructions and that all distinctions between logical constructions

are  reducible  to  distinctions  between  sense-contents,  proves  that  the

difference between the entire class of mental objects and the entire class of

physical objects is not in any sense more fundamental than the difference

between any two subclasses of mental objects, or the difference between any

two subclasses of physical objects. Actually, the distinguishing feature of the

objects belonging to the category of “one’s own mental states” is the fact that

they are mainly constituted by “introspective” sense-contents and by sense-

contents  which  are  elements  of  one’s  own  body;  and  the  distinguishing

feature  of  the  objects  belonging  to  the  category  of  “the  mental  states  of

others” is the fact that they are mainly constituted by sense-contents which

are elements of other living bodies; and what makes one unite these two

classes of objects to form the single class of mental objects is the fact that

there is a high degree of qualitative similarity between many of the sense-contents which are elements of other living bodies and many of the elements

of one’s own. But we are not now concerned with the provision of an exact

definition of “mentality.” We are interested only in making it plain that the

distinction  between  mind  and  matter,  applying  as  it  does  to  logical

constructions  out  of  sense-contents,  cannot  apply  to  sense-contents

themselves.  For  a  distinction  between  logical  constructions  which  is

constituted  by  the  fact  that  there  are  certain  distinctions  between  their

elements is clearly of a different type from any distinction that can obtain

between the elements.

It should be clear, also, that there is no philosophical problem concerning

the relationship of mind and matter, other than the linguistic problems of

defining  certain  symbols  which  denote  logical  constructions  in  terms  of

symbols which denote sense-contents. The problems with which philosophers

have vexed themselves in the past, concerning the possibility of bridging the

“gulf” between mind and matter in knowledge or in action, are all fictitious

problems arising out of the senseless metaphysical conception of mind and

matter,  or  minds  and  material  things,  as  “substances.”  Being  freed  from

metaphysics, we see that there can be no a priori objections to the existence

either  of  causal  or  of  epistemological  connections  between  minds  and

material things. For, roughly speaking, all that we are saying when we say

that the mental state of a person A at a time t is a state of awareness of a

material  thing  X,  is  that  the  sense-experience  which  is  the  element  of  A

occurring at time t contains a sense-content which is an element of X, and

also  certain  images  which  define  A’s  expectation  of  the  occurrence  in

suitable  circumstances  of  certain  further  elements  of  X,  and  that  this

expectation is correct: and what we are saying when we assert that a mental

object M and a physical object X are causally connected is that, in certain

conditions,  the  occurrence  of  a  certain  sort  of  sense-content,  which  is  an

element of M, is a reliable sign of the occurrence of a certain sort of sense-

content, which is an element of X, or vice versa, And the question whether

any  propositions  of  these  kinds  are  true  or  not  is  clearly  an  empirical

question. It cannot be decided, as metaphysicians have attempted to decide it,

a priori.

We turn now to consider the question of the subjectivity of sense-contents

—that is, to consider whether it is or is not logically possible for a sense-

content to occur in the sense-history of more than a single self. And in orderto decide this question we must proceed to give an analysis of the notion of a

self.

The  problem  which  now  confronts  us  is  analogous  to  the  problem  of

perception with which we have already dealt. We know that a self, if it is not

to  be  treated  as  a  metaphysical  entity,  must  be  held  to  be  a  logical

construction out of sense-experiences. It is, in fact, a logical construction out

of  the  sense-experiences  which  constitute  the  actual  and  possible  sense-

history of a self. And, accordingly, if we ask what is the nature of the self, we

are  asking  what  is  the  relationship  that  must  obtain  between  sense-

experiences for them to belong to the sense-history of the same self. And the

answer to this question is that for any two sense-experiences to belong to the

sense-history of the same self it is necessary and sufficient that they should
                                                                                  93
contain organic sense-contents which are elements of the same body. But,

as it is logically impossible for any organic sense-content to be an element of

more than one body, the relation of “belonging to the sense-history of the
                                                                            94
same self” turns out to be a symmetrical and transitive relation. And, from

the fact that the relation of belonging to the sense-history of the same self is

symmetrical and transitive, it follows necessarily that the series of sense-

experiences  which  constitute  the  sense-histories  of  different  selves  cannot

have any members in common. And this is tantamount to saying that it is

logically impossible for a sense-experience to belong to the sense-history of

more than a single self. But if all sense-experiences are subjective, then, all

sense-contents are subjective. For it is necessary by definition for a sense-

content to be contained in a single sense-experience.

To many people, the account of the self, on which this conclusion depends,

will no doubt appear paradoxical. For it is still fashionable to regard the self

as  a  substance.  But,  when  one  comes  to  enquire  into  the  nature  of  this

substance,  one  finds  that  it  is  an  entirely  unobservable  entity.  It  may  be

suggested that it is revealed in self-consciousness but this is not the case. For

all that is involved in self-consciousness is the ability of a self to remember

some of its earlier states. And to say that a self A is able to remember some

of its earlier states is to say merely that some of the sense-experiences which

constitute  A  contain  memory  images  which  correspond  to  sense-contents
                                                                    95
which have previously occurred in the sense-history of A. And thus we find

that the possibility of self-consciousness in no way involves the existence of

a  substantive  ego.  But  if  the  substantive  ego  is  not  revealed  in  self-consciousness, it is not revealed anywhere. The existence of such an entity is

completely  unverifiable.  And  accordingly,  we  must  conclude  that  the

assumption of its existence is no less metaphysical than Locke’s discredited

assumption of the existence of a material substratum. For it is clearly no more

significant  to  assert  that  an  “unobservable  somewhat”  underlies  the

sensations which are the sole empirical manifestations of the self than it is to

assert that an “unobservable somewhat” underlies the sensations which are

the  sole  empirical  manifestations  of  a  material  thing.  The  considerations

which make it necessary, as Berkeley saw, to give a phenomenalist account

of material things, make it necessary also, as Berkeley did not see, to give a

phenomenalist account of the self.

Our reasoning on this point, as on so many others, is in conformity with

Hume’s. He, too, rejected the notion of a substantive ego on the ground that

no  such  entity  was  observable.  For,  he  said,  whenever  he  entered  most

intimately into what he called himself, he always stumbled on some particular

perception or other—of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or

pleasure. He never could catch himself at any time without a perception, and

never could observe anything but the perception. And this led him to assert
                                                                                          96
that a self was “nothing but a bundle or collection of different perceptions.“

But, having asserted this, he found himself unable to discover the principle

on which innumerable distinct perceptions among which it was impossible to

perceive any “real connection” were united to form a single self. He saw that

the memory must be regarded not as producing, but rather as discovering,

personal identity—or, in other words, that, whereas self-consciousness has to

be defined in terms of memory, self-identity cannot be; for the number of my

perceptions which I can remember at any time always falls far short of the

number of those which have actually occurred in my history, and those which

I cannot remember are no less constitutive of my self than those which I can.

But having, on this ground, rejected the claim of memory to be the unifying

principle of the self, Hume was obliged to confess that he did not know what

was the connection between perceptions in virtue of which they formed a
          97
single self. And this confession has often been taken by rationalist authors

as  evidence  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  consistent  empiricist  to  give  a

satisfactory account of the self.

For  our  part,  we  have  shown  that  this  charge  against  empiricism  is

unfounded.  For  we  have  solved  Hume’s  problem  by  defining  personalidentity in terms of bodily identity, and bodily identity is to be defined in

terms  of  the  resemblance  and  continuity  of  sense-contents.  And  this

procedure  is  justified  by  the  fact  that  whereas  it  is  permissible,  in  our

language, to speak of a man as surviving a complete loss of memory, or a

complete change of character, it is self-contradictory to speak of a man as
                                                98
surviving  the  annihilation  of  his  body.  For  that  which  is  supposed  to

survive by those who look forward to a “life after death” is not the empirical

self,  but  a  metaphysical  entity—the  soul.  And  this  metaphysical  entity,

concerning which no genuine hypothesis can be formulated, has no logical

connection whatsoever with the self.

It must, however, be remarked that, although we have vindicated Hume’s

contention that it is necessary to give a phenomenalist account of the nature

of the self, our actual definition of the self is not a mere restatement of his.

For we do not hold, as he apparently did, that the self is an aggregate of

sense-experiences, or that the sense-experiences which constitute a particular

self are in any sense parts of it. What we hold is that the self is reducible to

sense-experiences, in the sense that to say anything about the self is always to

say  something  about  sense-experiences;  and  our  definition  of  personal

identity is intended to show how this reduction could be made.

In  thus  combining  a  thoroughgoing  phenomenalism  with  the  admission

that all sense-experiences, and the sense-contents which form part of them,

are private to a single self, we are pursuing a course to which the following

objection is likely to be raised. It will be said that anyone who maintains both

that all empirical knowledge resolves itself on analysis into knowledge of the

relationships of sense-contents, and also that the whole of a man’s sense-

history is private to himself, is logically obliged to be a solipsist—that is, to

hold that no other people besides himself exist, or at any rate that there is no

good reason to suppose that any other people beside himself exist. For it

follows from his premises, so it will be argued, that the sense-experiences of

another  person  cannot  possibly  form  part  of  his  own  experience,  and

consequently that he cannot have the slightest ground for believing in their

occurrence; and, in that case, if people are nothing but logical constructions

out  of  their  sense-experiences,  he  cannot  have  the  slightest  ground  for

believing in the existence of any other people. And it will be said that even if

such  a  solipsistic  doctrine  cannot  be  shown  to  be  self-contradictory,  it  is
                                  99
nevertheless known to be falseI propose to meet this objection, not by denying that solipsism is known to

be  false,  but  by  denying  that  it  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  our

epistemology. I am, indeed, prepared to admit that if the personality of others

was  something  that  I  could  not  possibly  observe,  then  I  should  have  no

reason to believe in the existence of anyone else. And in admitting this I am

conceding a point which would not, I think, be conceded by the majority of

those philosophers who hold, as we do, that a sense-content cannot belong to

the sense-history of more than a single self. They would maintain, on the

contrary, that, although one cannot in any sense observe the existence of

other people, one can nevertheless infer their existence with a high degree of

probability from one’s own experiences. They would say that my observation

of a body whose behaviour resembled the behaviour of my own body entitled

me to think it probable that that body was related to a self which I could not

observe, in the same way as my body was related to my own observable self.

And in saying this, they would be attempting to answer not the psychological

question, What causes me to believe in the existence of other people? but the

logical question, What good reason have I for believing in the existence of

other people? So that their view cannot be refuted, as is sometimes supposed,

by an argument which shows that infants come by their belief in the existence

of  other  people  intuitively,  and  not  through  a  process  of  inference.  For

although my belief in a certain proposition may in fact be causally dependent

on my apprehension of the evidence which makes the belief rational, it is not

necessary that it should be. It is not self contradictory to say that beliefs for

which there are rational grounds are frequently arrived at by irrational means.

The  correct  way  to  refute  this  view  that  I  can  use  an  argument  from

analogy, based on the fact that there is a perceptible resemblance between the

behaviour  of  other  bodies  and  that  of  my  own,  to  justify  a  belief  in  the

existence of other people whose experiences I could not conceivably observe,

is  to  point  out  that  no  argument  can  render  probable  a  completely

unverifiable hypothesis. I can legitimately use an argument from analogy to

establish  the  probable  existence  of  an  object  which  has  never  in  fact

manifested itself in my experience, provided that the object is such that it

could conceivably be manifested in my experience. If this condition is not

fulfilled, then, as far as I am concerned, the object is a metaphysical object,

and the assertion that it exists and has certain properties is a metaphysical

assertion. And, since a metaphysical assertion is senseless, no argument can

possibly render it probable. But, on the view which we are discussing, I mustregard  other  people  as  metaphysical  objects;  for  it  is  assumed  that  their

experiences are completely inaccessible to my observation.

The conclusion to be drawn from this is not that the existence of other

people is for me a metaphysical, and so fictitious, hypothesis, but that the

assumption that other people’s experiences are completely inaccessible to my

observation is false; just as the conclusion to be drawn from the fact that

Locke’s notion of a material substratum is metaphysical is not that all the

assertions  which  we  make  about  material  things  are  nonsensical,  but  that

Locke’s analysis of the concept of a material thing is false. And just as I must

define  material  things  and  my  own  self  in  terms  of  their  empirical

manifestations,  so  I  must  define  other  people  in  terms  of  their  empirical

manifestations—that  is,  in  terms  of  the  behaviour  of  their  bodies,  and

ultimately in terms of sense-contents. The assumption that “behind” these

sense-contents there are entities which are not even in principle accessible to

my observation can have no more significance for me than the admittedly

metaphysical  assumption  that  such  entities  “underlie”  the  sense-contents

which constitute material things for me, or my own self. And thus I find that I

have as good a reason to believe in the existence of other people as I have to

believe in the existence of material things. For in each case my hypothesis is

verified by the occurrence in my sense-history of the appropriate series of
                100
sense-contents.

It must not be thought that this reduction of other people’s experiences to

one’s own in any way involves a denial of their reality. Each of us must

define  the  experiences  of  the  others  in  terms  of  what  he  can  at  least  in

principle observe, but this does not mean that each of us must regard all the

others  as  so  many  robots.  On  the  contrary,  the  distinction  between  a

conscious man and an unconscious machine resolves itself into a distinction

between different types of perceptible behaviour. The only ground I can have

for asserting that an object which appears to be a conscious being is not really

a conscious being, but only a dummy or a machine, is that it fails to satisfy

one of the empirical tests by which the presence or absence of consciousness

is determined. If I know that an object behaves in every way as a conscious

being must, by definition, behave, then I know that it is really conscious. And

this is an analytical proposition. For when I assert that an object is conscious

I am asserting no more than that it would, in response to any conceivable test,

exhibit  the  empirical  manifestations  of  consciousness.  I  am  not  making  ametaphysical postulate concerning the occurrence of events which I could

not, even in principle, observe.

It appears, then, that the fact that a man’s sense-experiences are private to

himself, inasmuch as each of them contains an organic sense-content which

belongs to his body and to no other, is perfectly compatible with his having

good reason to believe in the existence of other men. For, if he is to avoid

metaphysics, he must define the existence of other men in terms of the actual

and hypothetical occurrence of certain sense-contents, and then the fact that

the requisite sense-contents do occur in his sense-history gives him a good

reason for believing that there are other conscious beings besides himself.

And thus we see that the philosophical problem of “our knowledge of other

people” is not the insoluble, and, indeed, fictitious, problem of establishing

by argument the existence of entities which are altogether unobservable, but

is  simply  the  problem  of  indicating  the  way  in  which  a  certain  type  of
                                      101
hypothesis is empirically verified.

It must be made clear, finally, that our phenomenalism is compatible not

merely with the fact that each of us has good reason to believe that there exist

a number of conscious beings of the same kind as himself, but also with the

fact that each of us has good reason to believe that these beings communicate

with one another and with him, and inhabit a common world. For it might

appear, at first sight, as if the view that all synthetic propositions ultimately

referred to sense-contents, coupled with the view that no sense-content could

belong to the sense-history of more than one person, implied that no one

could have any good reason to believe that a synthetic proposition ever had

the same literal meaning for any other person as it had for himself. That is, it

might be thought that if each person’s experiences were private to himself, no

one could have good reason to believe that any other person’s experiences

were qualitatively the same as his own, and consequently that no one could

have  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  propositions  which  he  understood,

referring as they did to the contents of his own sense-experiences, were ever
                                                      102
understood in the same way by anybody else. But this reasoning would be

fallacious. It does not follow from the fact that each man’s experiences are

private to himself that no one ever has good reason to believe that another

man’s experiences are qualitatively the same as his own. For we define the

qualitative identity and difference of two people’s sense-experiences in terms

of the similarity and dissimilarity of their reactions to empirical tests. Todetermine, for instance, whether two people have the same colour sense we

observe whether they classify all the colour expanses with which they are

confronted in the same way; and, when we say that a man is colour-blind,

what  we  are  asserting  is  that  he  classifies  certain  colour  expanses  in  a

different way from that in which they would be classified by the majority of

people.  It  may  be  objected  that  the  fact  that  two  people  classify  colour

expanses in the same way proves only that their colour worlds have the same

structure,  and  not  that  they  have  the  same  content;  that  it  is  possible  for

another man to assent to every proposition which I make about colours on the

basis of entirely different colour sensations, although, since the difference is

systematic, neither of us is ever in a position to detect it. But the answer to

this  is  that  each  of  us  has  to  define  the  content  of  another  man’s  sense-

experiences  in  terms  of  what  he  can  himself  observe.  If  he  regards  the

experiences of others as essentially unobservable entities, whose nature has

somehow to be inferred from the subjects’ perceptible behaviour, then, as we

have seen, even the proposition that there are other conscious beings becomes

for him a metaphysical hypothesis. Accordingly, it is a mistake to draw a

distinction between the structure and the content of people’s sensations—

such as that the structure alone is accessible to the observation of others, the

content inaccessible. For if the contents of other people’s sensations really

were inaccessible to my observation, then I could never say anything about

them. But, in fact, I do make significant statements about them; and that is

because I define them, and the relations between them, in terms of what I can

myself observe.

In the same way, each of us has good reason to suppose that other people

understand him, and that he understands them, because he observes that his

utterances have the effect on their actions which he regards as appropriate,

and that they also regard as appropriate the effect which their utterances have

on his actions; and mutual understanding is defined in terms of such harmony

of behaviour. And, since to assert that two people inhabit a common world is

to assert that they are capable, at least in principle, of understanding one

another, it follows that each of us, although his sense-experiences are private

to himself, has good reason to believe that he and other conscious beings

inhabit a common world. For each of us observes the behaviour, on the part

of  himself  and  others,  which  constitutes  the  requisite  understanding.  And

there is nothing in our epistemology which involves a denial of this fact.CHAPTER VIII









SOLUTIONS OF OUTSTANDING

PHILOSOPHICAL DISPUTES




ONE OF THE MAIN OBJECTS of this treatise has been to show that there is

nothing in the nature of philosophy to warrant the existence of conflicting

philosophical parties or “schools.” For it is only when the available evidence

is insufficient to determine the probability of a proposition that a difference

of opinion concerning it is justifiable. But with regard to the propositions of

philosophy this can never be the case. For, as we have seen, the function of

the  philosopher  is  not  to  devise  speculative  theories  which  require  to  be

validated  in  experience,  but  to  elicit  the  consequences  of  our  linguistic

usages. That is to say, the questions with which philosophy is concerned are

purely logical questions; and although people do in fact dispute about logical

questions, such disputes are always unwarranted. For they involve either the

denial  of  a  proposition  which  is  necessarily  true,  or  the  assertion  of  a

proposition which is necessarily false. In all such cases, therefore, we may be

sure that one party to the dispute has been guilty of a miscalculation which a

sufficiently close scrutiny of the reasoning will enable us to detect. So that if

the dispute is not immediately resolved, it is because the logical error of

which one party is guilty is too subtle to be easily detected, and not because

the question at issue is irresoluble on the available evidence.  Accordingly, we who are interested in the condition of philosophy can no

longer acquiesce in the existence of party divisions among philosophers. For

we know that if the questions about which the parties contend are logical in

character, they can be definitively answered. And, if they are not logical, they

must either be dismissed as metaphysical, or made the subject of an empirical

enquiry.  I  propose,  therefore,  to  examine  in  turn  the  three  great  issues

concerning  which  philosophers  have  differed  in  the  past,  to  sort  out  the

problems of which these issues consist, and to provide for each problem a

solution appropriate to its nature. It will be found that some of these problems

have already been dealt with in the course of this book, and in such cases we

shall be content to recapitulate our solution without repeating the argument

on which it was founded.

The questions which we are now about to consider are those that lie at

issue between rationalists and empiricists, between realists and idealists, and

between monists and pluralists. In each case, we shall find that the thesis

which  is  maintained  by  one  school  and  controverted  by  another  is  partly

logical, partly metaphysical, and partly empirical, and that there is no strict

logical connection between its constituent parts; so that it is legitimate to

accept some portions of it and reject others. And, indeed, we do not claim

that  for  anyone  to  be  accounted  a  member  of  a  particular  school  it  is

necessary  for  him  to  adhere  to  all  the  doctrines  which  we  hold  to  be

characteristic of the school, but rather that it is sufficient if he adheres to any

of them. It is advisable for us to say this in order to protect ourselves against

a possible charge of historical inaccuracy. But it must be understood from the

outset that we are not concerned to vindicate any one set of philosophers at

the expense of any other, but simply to settle certain questions which have

played a part in the history of philosophy which is out of all proportion to

their difficulty or their importance. We shall now begin with the questions

which enter into the rationalist-empiricist controversy.


RATIONALISM AND EMPIRICISM




The metaphysical doctrine which is upheld by rationalists, and rejected by

empiricists, is that there exists a supra-sensible world which is the object of a

purely intellectual intuition and is alone wholly real. We have already dealt

with this doctrine explicitly in the course of our attack on metaphysics, andseen that it is not even false but senseless. For no empirical observation could

have  the  slightest  tendency  to  establish  any  conclusion  concerning  the

properties, or even the existence, of a supra-sensible world. And therefore we

are  entitled  to  deny  the  possibility  of  such  a  world  and  to  dismiss  as

nonsensical the descriptions which have been given of it.

  With the logical aspect of the rationalist-empiricist controversy we have

also dealt very fully, and pronounced, it will be remembered, in favour of the

empiricists. For we showed that a proposition only had factual content if it

was  empirically  verifiable,  and,  consequently,  that  the  rationalists  were

mistaken  in  supposing  that  there  could  be a  priori  propositions  which

referred  to  matters  of  fact.  At  the  same  time  we  disagreed  with  those

empiricists  who  maintain  that  the  distinction  which  is  ordinarily  drawn

between a priori propositions and empirical propositions is an illegitimate

distinction,  and  that  all  significant  propositions  are  empirical  hypotheses,

whose truth may be in the highest degree probable but can never be certain.

We admitted that there were propositions which were necessarily valid apart

from all experience, and that there was a difference in kind between these

propositions  and  empirical  hypotheses.  But  we  did  not  account  for  their

necessity by saying, as a rationalist might, that they were speculative “truths

of reason.” We accounted for it by saying that they were tautologies. And we

showed  that  the  fact  that  we  sometimes  make  mistakes  in  our a  priori

reasonings, and that even when we have not made any mistake we may arrive

at an interesting and unexpected conclusion, is in no way incompatible with

the fact that such reasonings are purely analytic. And thus we found that our

rejection of the logical thesis of rationalism, and of all forms of metaphysics,

did not oblige us to deny that there could be necessary truths.

An explicit rejection of metaphysics, as distinct from a mere abstention

from  metaphysical  utterances,  is  characteristic  of  the  type  of  empiricism

which is known as positivism. But we have found ourselves unable to accept

the  criterion  which  the  positivists  employ  to  distinguish  a  metaphysical

utterance  from  a  genuine  synthetic  proposition.  For  they  require  of  a

synthetic  proposition  that  it  should,  in  principle  at  least,  be  conclusively

verifiable. And as, for reasons which we have already given, no proposition is

capable, even in principle, of being verified conclusively, but only at best of

being rendered highly probable, the positivist criterion, so far from marking

the distinction between literal sense and nonsense, as it is intended to do,makes  every  utterance  nonsensical.  And  therefore,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is

necessary to adopt a weakened form of the positivist verification principle, as

a criterion of literal significance, and to allow a proposition to be genuinely

factual  if  any  empirical  observations  would  be  relevant  to  its  truth  or

falsehood. So that an utterance is by us accounted metaphysical only if it is

neither  a  tautology  nor  yet  capable  of  being  substantiated  to  any  degree

whatsoever by any possible observation. In practice, indeed, very little of

what is allowed to_ be significant by this criterion would not be allowed also

by the positivists. But that is because they do not apply their own criterion

consistently.

It should be added that we dissent also from the positivist doctrine with

regard to the significance of particular symbols. For it is characteristic of a

positivist to hold that all symbols, other than logical constants, must either

themselves stand for sense-contents or else be explicitly definable in terms of

symbols which stand for sense-contents. It is plain that such physical symbols

as “atom” or “molecule” or “electron” fail to satisfy this condition, and some

positivists, including Mach, have been prepared on this account to regard the
                                103
use of them as illegitimate. They would not have been so ruthless if they

had  realised  that  they  ought  also,  if  they  were  to  be  consistent  in  the

application of their criterion, to have condemned the use of symbols which

stand for material things. For, as we have seen, even such familiar symbols as

“table” or “chair” or “coat” cannot be defined explicitly in terms of symbols

which stand for sense-contents, but only in use. And, accordingly, we must

allow that the employment of a symbol is legitimate if it is possible, at any

rate in principle, to give a rule for translating the sentences in which it occurs

into  sentences  which  refer  to  sense-contents—or,  in  other  words,  if  it  is

possible to indicate how the propositions which it helps to express may be

empirically  substantiated.  And  this  condition  is  as  well  satisfied  by  the

physical symbols which positivists have condemned as by the symbols which

stand for familiar material things.

  Finally, it must again be emphasized that we are not committed by our

logical thesis to any of the factual doctrines which have been propounded by

empiricist authors. We have, indeed, already expressed our dissent from the

psychological atomism of Mach and Hume; and we may add that, although

we  agree  in  the  main  with  Hume’s  epistemological  views  concerning  the

validity of general propositions of law, we do not accept his account of theway in which such propositions actually come to be formulated. We do not

hold,  as  he  apparently  did,  that  every  general  hypothesis  is,  in  fact,  a

generalization  from  a  number  of  observed  instances.  We  agree  with  the

rationalists that the process by which scientific theories come into being is

often deductive rather than inductive. The scientist does not formulate his

laws  only  as  the  result  of  seeing  them  exemplified  in  particular  cases.

Sometimes he considers the possibility of the law before he is in possession

of the evidence which justifies it. It “occurs” to him that a certain hypothesis

or set of hypotheses may be true. He employs deductive reasoning to discover

what he ought to experience in a given situation if the hypothesis is true; and

if he makes the required observations, or has reason to believe that he could

make  them,  he  accepts  the  hypothesis.  He  does  not,  as  Hume  implied,

passively wait for nature to instruct him; rather, as Kant saw, does he force

nature to answer the questions which he puts to her. So that there is a sense in

which  the  rationalists  are  right  in  asserting  that  the  mind  is  active  in

knowledge. It is not true, indeed, that the validity of a proposition is ever

logically dependent upon the mental attitude of anyone towards it, nor is it

true that every physical fact is either logically or causally dependent upon a

mental fact, nor yet that observation of a physical object necessarily causes

any change in it, although it may in fact do so in some cases. But it is true

that the activity of theorizing is, in its subjective aspect, a creative activity,

and that the psychological theories of empiricists concerning “the origins of

our knowledge” are vitiated by their failure to take this into account.

But while it must be recognised that scientific laws are often discovered

through a process of intuition, this does not mean that they can be intuitively

validated. As we have said many times already, it is essential to distinguish

the  psychological  question,  How  does  our  knowledge  originate?  from  the

logical question, How is it certified as knowledge? Whatever may be the

correct  answers  to  these  two  questions,  it  is  clear  that  they  are  logically

independent of one another. And, accordingly, we can consistently allow that

the  psychological  theories  of  rationalists  concerning  the  part  played  by

intuition in the acquisition of our knowledge are very probably true, while at

the same time we reject as self-contradictory their logical thesis that there are

synthetic propositions of whose validity we have an a priori guarantee.


REALISM AND IDEALISM  Whereas  the  main  points  in  the  dispute  between  rationalists  and

empiricists, of which we have now finally disposed, have been referred to

constantly throughout this book, comparatively little attention has yet been

paid  to  the  realist-idealist  controversy,  which,  to  the  historian  of  modern

philosophy at any rate, is almost equally important. All that we have done so

far in connection with it is to rule out its metaphysical aspect, and to assert

that  the  logical  questions  which  it  involves  are  questions  concerning  the

analysis of existential propositions. We have seen that the dispute between

idealists and realists becomes a metaphysical dispute when it is assumed that

the question whether an object is real or ideal is an empirical question which

cannot be settled by any possible observation. We showed that in the ordinary

sense of the term “real,” the sense in which “being real” is opposed to “being

illusory,”  there  were  definite  empirical  tests  for  determining  whether  an

object was real or not; but that those who, agreeing that an object was real in

this  sense,  went  on  to  dispute  whether  it  had  a  completely  undetectable

property, which they called also the property of being real, or an equally

undetectable property of being ideal, were debating an altogether fictitious

question. And to this we need not now add anything further, but may proceed

at once to consider the realist-idealist controversy in its logical aspect.

The logical doctrines which are maintained by idealists and controverted

by realists are all concerned with the question, What is entailed by sentences

of the form “x is real”? Thus, it is the contention of Berkeleyan idealists that

the sentence “x is real” or “x exists,” where x stands for a thing and not for a

person, is equivalent to “x is perceived,” so that it is self-contradictory to

assert that anything exists unperceived; and they hold, furthermore, that “x is

perceived” entails “x is mental,” and so conclude that everything that exists is

mental. Both these propositions are denied by realists, who maintain for their

part that the concept of reality is unanalysable, so that there is no sentence

referring to perceptions which is equivalent to the sentence “x is real.” In

fact, we shall find that the realists are right in what they deny, but wrong in

what they affirm.

  Briefly, the grounds on which Berkeley held that no material thing could

exist unperceived were these. He maintained, first, that a thing was nothing

more than the sum of its sensible qualities, and, secondly, that it was self-

contradictory to assert that a sensible quality existed unsensed. And fromthese premises it does follow that a thing cannot without self-contradiction be

said to exist unperceived. But since he recognized that the common-sense

assumption that things did exist when no human being was perceiving them

was certainly not self-contradictory, and, indeed, himself believed it to be

true, Berkeley allowed that a thing might exist unperceived by any human

being, inasmuch as it could still be perceived by God. And he appears to have

regarded the fact that he was obliged to rely on the perceptions of God to

bring his doctrine into harmony with the fact that things very probably do

exist at times when no human being is perceiving them as constituting a proof

of the existence of a personal god: whereas, in truth, what it proves is that

there is an error in Berkeley’s reasoning. For, since propositions which assert

the existence of material things have an undisputed factual significance, it

cannot be correct to analyse them in terms of such metaphysical entities as

the perceptions of a transcendent god.

We must now consider exactly where the error in Berkeley’s reasoning

lies. It is customary for realists to deny his proposition that a sensible quality

cannot possibly exist unsensed. Taking him, I think rightly, to be using the

terms “sensible quality” and “idea of sensation,” as we have been using the

term “sense-content,” to refer to an entity which is sensibly given, they assert

that he makes a faulty analysis of sensation through failing to distinguish

between the object sensed and the act of consciousness which is directed

upon  it,  and  that  there  is  no  contradiction  involved  in  supposing  that  the
                                                    104
object may exist independently of the act. But I do not think that this

criticism is just. For these acts of sensing, which realists reproach Berkeley

for  having  ignored,  appear  to  me  to  be  completely  inaccessible  to  any

observation. And I suggest that those who believe in them have been misled

by the grammatical fact that the sentences which they use to describe their

sensations contain a transitive verb, just as those who believe that the self is

given in sensation are misled by the fact that the sentences which people use

to describe their sensations contain a grammatical subject: while what those

who claim to detect the presence of such acts of sensing in their visual and

tactual experiences are, I think, really detecting is the fact that their visual
                                                                                105
and  tactual  sense-fields  have  the  sensible  property  of  depth.  And,

therefore, although Berkeley made a psychological error in supposing that the

succession of “ideas” which constituted a person’s sense-history was sensibly

discrete, I believe that he was right to regard these “ideas” as the contents

rather than the objects of sensations, and consequently that he was justified inasserting  that  a  “sensible  quality”  could  not  conceivably  exist  unsensed.

Accordingly we may allow that his dictum, “Esse est percipi,” is true with

regard to sense-contents, for to speak of the existence of sense-contents is, as

we have seen, merely a misleading way of speaking of their occurrence, and a

sense-content cannot without self-contradiction be said to occur except as

part of a sense-experience.

But although it is a fact that a sense-content cannot by definition occur

without being experienced, and that material things are constituted by sense-

contents, it is a mistake to conclude, as Berkeley did, that a material thing

cannot exist unperceived. And the mistake is due to his misconception of the

relationship between material things and the sense-contents which constitute

them. If a material thing were really the sum of its “sensible qualities”—that

is to say, an aggregate of sense-contents, or even a whole composed of sense-

contents—then it would follow from the definitions of a material thing and a

sense-content that no thing could exist unperceived. But, in fact, we have

seen that sense-contents are not in any way parts of the material things which

they constitute; the sense in which a material thing is reducible to sense-

contents is simply that it is a logical construction and they are its elements;

and this, as we have previously made clear, is a linguistic proposition which

states that to say anything about it is always equivalent to saying something

about  them.  Moreover  the  elements  of  any  given  material  thing  are  not

merely actual but also possible sense-contents—that is to say, the sentences

referring  to  sense-contents,  which  are  the  translations  of  the  sentences

referring  to  a  material  thing,  need  not  necessarily  express  categorical

propositions; they may be hypothetical. And this explains how it is possible

for a material thing to exist throughout a period when none of its elements are

actually experienced: it is sufficient that they should be capable of being

experienced—that is, that there should be a hypothetical fact to the effect

that, if certain conditions were fulfilled, certain sense-contents, belonging to

the  thing  in  question,  would  be  experienced.  There  is,  indeed,  no

contradiction involved in asserting the existence of a material thing which is

never actually perceived. For in asserting that the thing existed, one would be

asserting only that certain sense-contents would occur if a particular set of

conditions  relating  to  the  faculties  and  the  position  of  an  observer  was

fulfilled; and such a hypothetical proposition may very well be true, even

though the relevant conditions never are fulfilled. And, as we shall show later

on, we may in some cases not merely have to recognise the existence of anunperceived material thing as a logical possibility, but may actually possess

good inductive grounds for believing in it.

This  analysis  of  propositions  asserting  the  existence  of  material  things,

which  is  in  conformity  with  Mill’s  conception  of  a  material  thing  as  “a

permanent possibility of sensation,” enables us not merely to dispense with

the perceptions of God, but also to allow that people can be said to exist in

the same sense as material things. It is, I think, a serious defect in Berkeley’s

theory  that  it  does  not  allow  this.  For,  failing  to  give  the  phenomenalist

account of the self which, as Hume saw, his empiricism demanded, he found

himself unable either to hold that the existence of people consisted, like the

existence of material things, in their being perceived, or to put forward any

other analysis of it. We, on the contrary, maintain that a man must define his

own existence, and the existence of other people, no less than that of material

things, in terms of the hypothetical occurrence of sense-contents. And I think

we  have  succeeded  in  proving  the  necessity  of  such  a  thoroughgoing

phenomenalism, and in meeting the objections to which it seems at first sight

to be exposed.

The proposition that whatever is perceived is necessarily mental, which

forms the second stage in the argument of the Berkeleyan idealist, rests on

the  assumption  that  the  immediate  data  of  sense  are  necessarily  mental,

together with the assumption that a thing is literally the sum of its “sensible

qualities.” And these are both assumptions which we have rejected. We have

seen that a thing is to be defined, not as a collection of sense-contents, but as

a logical construction out of them. And we have seen that the terms “mental”

and “physical” apply only to logical constructions, and not to the immediate

data of sense themselves. Sense-contents themselves cannot significantly be

said either to be or not to be mental. And while it is certainly significant to

assert that all the things which we ordinarily take to be unconscious are really

conscious, we shall find that this is a proposition which we have very good

reason to disbelieve.

I  think  that  the  idealist  view  that  what  is  immediately  given  in  sense-

experience must necessarily be mental derives historically from an error of

Descartes. For he, believing that he could deduce his own existence from the

existence of a mental entity, a thought, without assuming the existence of any

physical entity, concluded that his mind was a substance which was wholly

independent of anything physical; so that it could directly experience onlywhat  belonged  to  itself.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  premise  of  this

argument is false; and, in any case, the conclusion does not follow from it.

For, in the first place, the assertion that the mind is a substance, being a

metaphysical assertion, cannot follow from anything. Secondly, if the term

“thought”  is  used,  as  Descartes  apparently  used  it,  to  refer  to  a  single

introspective sense-content, then a thought cannot, as in the ordinary usage,

properly  be  said  to  be  mental.  And,  finally,  even  if  it  were  true  that  the

existence of a conscious being could be validly deduced from an isolated

mental datum, it would not in the least follow that such a being could not, in

fact, stand in direct causal and epistemological relations to material things.

And, indeed, we have previously shown that the proposition that mind and

matter  are  completely  independent  is  one  which  we  have  good  empirical

grounds for disbelieving, and one which no a priori argument could possibly

serve to prove.

  Although the responsibility for the view that it is possible to experience

directly  only  what  is  mental  rests  ultimately  with  Descartes,  subsequent

philosophers have supported it with arguments of their own. One of these is

the so-called argument from illusion. This argument proceeds from the fact

that the sensible appearances of a material thing vary with the point of view

of the observer, or with his physical and psychological condition, or with the

nature of the attendant circumstances such as the presence or absence of light.

Each of these appearances is, it is argued, in itself as “good” as any other,

but,  since  they  are  in  many  cases  mutually  incompatible,  they  cannot  all

really characterize the material thing; and thence it is concluded that none of

them  are  “in  the  thing,”  but  that  they  are  all  “in  the  mind.”  But  this

conclusion is plainly unwarranted. All that this argument from illusion proves

is that the relationship of a sense-content to the material thing to which it

belongs is not that of part to whole. It does not have the least tendency to

show that any sense-content is “in the mind.” Nor does the fact that a sense-

content is partly dependent for its quality on the psychological state of an

observer in any way go to prove that it is a mental entity itself.

  Another argument of Berkeley’s is superficially more plausible. He points

out that sensations of all kinds are in some degree pleasant or painful, and

argues that, as the sensation is not phenomenally distinguishable from the

pleasure or the pain, the two must be identified. But pleasure and pain, he

thinks, are indubitably mental, and so he concludes that the objects of sense            106
are mental.  The  error  in  this  argument  consists  in  the  identification  of

pleasures and pains with particular sense-contents. It is true that the word

“pain”  is  sometimes  used  to  denote  an  organic  sense-content,  as  in  the

sentence, “I feel a pain in my shoulder,” but in this usage a pain cannot

properly  be  said  to  be  mental;  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  there  is  no

corresponding usage of the word “pleasure.” And in the usage in which pains

and pleasures can properly be said to be mental, as in the sentence, “Domitian

took pleasure in torturing flies,” the terms denote, not sense-contents, but

logical constructions. For to refer to pains and pleasures, in this usage, is a

way of referring to people’s behaviour, and so ultimately to sense-contents,

which are themselves, as always, neither mental nor physical.

It is characteristic of some idealists, who are not Berkeleyans, to hold that

“x is real,” where x stands for a thing and not for a person, is equivalent to “x

is thought of,” so that it is self-contradictory to hold that anything exists

unthought of, or that anything which is thought of is unreal. In support of the

first  of  these  consequences,  it  is  argued  that  if  I  make  any  judgement

whatsoever about a thing I must necessarily be thinking of it. But while it is

true that the sentence “I judge that x exists” entails “x is thought of,” it does

not  follow  from  this  that  it  is  self-contradictory  to  assert  that  anything

unthought of exists. For the sentence “I judge that x exists” is plainly not

equivalent to “x exists,” nor does it entail it, nor is it entailed by it. I may very

well judge that a thing exists which in fact does not exist, and a thing may

very well exist without my judging that it does, or, indeed, without anybody’s

judging that it does, or without anybody’s ever thinking of it. It is true that

the fact that I assert that a thing exists shows that I am thinking of it, or have

thought of it, but this does not mean that part of what I assert when I say that

a thing exists is that I am thinking of it. It is essential here to distinguish

between that of which the occurrence of a sentence is in fact evidence, and

that which the sentence formally entails. Having made this distinction we can

see  that  there  is  no  formal  contradiction  involved  in  asserting  that  things

which are unthought of exist.

The  view  that  whatever  is  thought  of  must  necessarily  be  real  is  not
                                                                107
confined to idealists. It depends, as Moore has shown, upon the mistaken

assumption that such a sentence as “Unicorns are thought of” is of the same

logical form as “Lions are killed.” “Lions are killed” does indeed entail “lions

are  real”;  and  so  it  is  supposed  that  “unicorns  are  thought  of”  mustanalogously entail “unicorns are real.” But, in fact, “being thought of” is not

an attribute like “being killed,” and there is, accordingly, no contradiction

involved in asserting that such things as unicorns, or centaurs, although they

are thought of, do not actually exist. The realist view that such imaginary

objects “have real being,” even though they do not exist, has already been

shown to be metaphysical, and need not be further discussed.

It may be added that even if it were true that “x is real” was equivalent to

“x is thought of,” which we have shown not to be the case, the idealists’

belief that everything that exists is mental would not thereby be justified. For

“x is mental,” is not entailed by “x is thought of,” any more than by “x is

perceived.” Nor does this proposition that everything that exists is mental

appear capable of being substantiated in any other way. For the fact that “x is

real” does not formally entail “x is mental” proves that it is not an a priori

truth. And while it is logically possible that all the things, such as houses and

pens and books, which we believe to be unconscious are really conscious, it

is  highly  improbable.  For  these  things  have  never  yet  been  observed  to

behave in the way which is characteristic of conscious beings. Chairs do not

show any signs of purposive activity, nor do clothes appear to be sensitive to

pain. And, in general, there is no empirical ground for supposing that what

we ordinarily take to be material things are all conscious beings in disguise.

  There remains still to be considered one empirical question which is a

subject of controversy between realists and idealists. We have seen that the

realists are justified in maintaining that it is not self-contradictory to assert

that a thing exists unperceived; and we must now consider whether they have

the right to maintain also that things do so exist in fact. Against them it has

been argued that, even if things do in fact continue to exist when no one is
                                                                                        108
perceiving them, we cannot have any good reason to suppose that they do.

For  it  is  plainly  impossible  for  anyone  ever  to  observe  a  thing  existing

unobserved.  But  this  argument  is  plausible  only  so  long  as  the  notion  of

unperceived existence is left unanalysed. As soon as we analyse it, we find

that there can be a good inductive ground for believing that a thing exists

unperceived. For what we are asserting when we say of a thing that it exists

although  no  one  is  perceiving  it  is,  as  we  have  seen,  that  certain  sense-

contents would occur if certain conditions relating mainly to the faculties and

position of an observer were fulfilled, but that in fact the conditions are not

being fulfilled. And these are propositions which we do frequently have goodreason to believe. For instance, the fact that I am now experiencing a series of

sense-contents which belong to a table, a chair, and other material things, and

that in similar circumstances I always have perceived these material things,

and also remarked that other human beings perceived them, gives me a good

inductive  basis  for  the  generalization  that  in  such  circumstances  these

material  things  always  are  perceptible—a  hypothesis  whose  validity  is

independent of the fact that at a given moment no one may actually be in a

position to perceive them. Having now left my room, I have good reason to

believe that these things are not in fact being perceived by anyone. For I

observed that no one was there when I left, and I have observed that no one

has since entered by the door or the window; and my past observations of the

ways in which human beings make their entry into rooms gives me the right

to assert that no one has entered the room in any other way. In addition, my

past observations of the way in which material things come to be destroyed

support my belief that if I were now in my room I should not be perceiving

any  such  process  of  destruction.  And  thus,  having  shown  that  I  may

simultaneously have good reason to believe that no one is perceiving certain

material things in my room, and also that if anyone were in my room he

would be perceiving them, I have shown that it is possible to have good

inductive grounds for believing that a material thing exists unperceived.

We have mentioned, also, that there may be good inductive grounds for

believing  in  the  existence  of  things  which  have  never  at  any  time  been

perceived. And this, too, can easily be shown with the help of an example.

Suppose that flowers have been observed to grow at a certain altitude on all

the mountains of a given range which have ever been climbed; and suppose

that there is one mountain in the range which appears to be exactly like the

others but happens never to have been climbed; in such a case we may infer

by analogy that if anyone were to climb this mountain he would perceive

flowers growing there also. And this is to say that we are entitled to regard it

as  probable  that  flowers  do  exist  there,  although  they  are  never  in  fact

perceived.


MONISM AND PLURALISM




  Having dealt with the various aspects of the realist-idealist controversy, we

come finally to treat of the dispute between monists and pluralists. We have,indeed, already remarked that the assertion that Reality is One, which it is

characteristic of a monist to make and a pluralist to controvert, is nonsensical,

since no empirical situation could have any bearing on its truth. But this

metaphysical assertion is apt to be the outcome of certain logical errors which

it is desirable to examine. And this we shall now proceed to do.

The line of argument which most monists pursue is this: everything in the

world,  they  say,  is  related  to  everything  else  in  some  way  or  other;  a

proposition  which  for  them  is  a  tautology  since  they  regard  otherness  as

being a relation. And, further, they hold that every relation is internal to its

terms. A thing is what it is, they declare, because it has the properties which

it has. That is, all its properties, including all its relational properties, are

constitutive  of  its  essential  nature.  If  it  is  deprived  of  any  one  of  its

properties, then, they say, it ceases to be the same thing. And from these

premises it is deduced that to state any fact about a thing involves stating

every fact about it, and that this involves stating every fact about everything.

And this is tantamount to saying that any true proposition can be deduced

from any other, from which it follows that any two sentences which express

true propositions are equivalent. And this leads monists, who are given to

using  the  words  “truth”  and  “reality”  interchangeably,  to  make  the

metaphysical assertion that Reality is One.

It should be added that it is admitted even by monists that the sentences

which people actually use to express propositions that they believe to be true

are  not  all  equivalent  to  one  another.  But  they  regard  this  fact,  not  as

throwing any doubt on their conclusion that every true proposition can be

deduced from every other, but as showing that none of the propositions which

anyone  ever  believes  are  in  fact  true.  They  say,  indeed,  that,  while  it  is

impossible for human beings ever to express wholly true propositions, they

can, and do, express propositions which have a varying degree of truth. But

what  precisely  they  mean  by  this,  and  how  they  reconcile  it  with  their

premises, I have never yet been able to understand.

  Clearly, the crucial step in the monist’s argument, which leads him to such

paradoxical conclusions, is the assumption that all the properties of a thing,

including all its relational properties, are constitutive of its nature. And this

assumption has only to be stated clearly and unambiguously for its falsity to

become apparent. In the form in which we have stated it so far, which is the

form in which it is commonly stated, it is not, indeed, unambiguous. For tospeak  of  the  nature  of  a  thing  may  simply  be  a  way  of  referring  to  the

behaviour which is characteristic of it— as in the sentence “It is in the nature

of  a  cat  to  catch  mice.”  But  it  may  also,  as  we  have  seen,  be  a  way  of

referring to the definition of a thing—as in the sentence “It is in the nature of

an a priori proposition to be independent of experience.” So that the words

“all the properties of a thing are constitutive of its nature” may legitimately

be used to express either the proposition that all the properties of a thing are

relevant to its behaviour, or else the proposition that all the properties of a

thing are defining properties of it. And it is not easy to tell from the writings

of monists which of these propositions they wish to maintain. Sometimes,

indeed, they seem to uphold both, without drawing a very clear distinction

between them. But it is plain that it must be the second that they employ in

the argument which we are now considering, whether they are aware of it or

not. For even if it were true, which it is not, that it was necessary to take all

the properties of a thing into account in order to predict its behaviour, it

would not follow that every fact about the thing was logically deducible from

every other. Whereas this conclusion does follow from the proposition that

all the properties of a thing belong to it by definition. For, in that case, to

assert that the thing exists at all is implicitly to assert every fact about it. But

we know that to ascribe to a thing a property which belongs to it by definition

is to express an analytic proposition, a tautology. And thus the assumption

that all the properties of a thing are constitutive of its nature leads, in this

usage, to the absurd consequence that it is impossible, even in principle, to

express a synthetic fact about anything. And I regard this as being sufficient

to show that the assumption is false.

  What makes this false assumption superficially plausible is the ambiguity

of such sentences as “If this thing had not got the properties which it has, it

would not be what it is.” To assert this may be to assert merely that if a thing

has a property, it cannot also lack it—that if, for example, my newspaper is

on the table in front of me, it is not the case that it is not on the table. And

this is an analytic proposition whose validity no one would dispute. But to

allow this is not to allow that all the properties which a thing has are defining

properties. To say that if my newspaper were not on the table in front of me it

would not be what it is, is false if it is equivalent to saying that it is necessary

for my newspaper to be on the table in the sense in which it is necessary for it

to contain news. For whereas the proposition that my newspaper contains

news  is  analytic,  the  proposition  that  it  is  on  the  table  in  front  of  me  issynthetic. It is self-contradictory to assert that my newspaper does not contain

news, but it is not self-contradictory to assert that my newspaper is not on the

table in front of me, although it happens to be false. And it is only when “A

has  not p”  is  a  self-contradictory  proposition  that p  can  be  said  to  be  a

defining, or internal, property of A.

In discussing this question, we have employed the factual terminology in

which  it  is  commonly  presented,  but  this  has  not  prevented  us  from

recognising that it is linguistic in character. For we have seen that to say that

a property p is a defining property of a thing A is equivalent to saying that the

sentence which is formed out of the symbol “A” as subject and the symbol
                                                            109
“p” as predicate expresses an analytic proposition. And it must be added

that the use of factual terminology is particularly inadvisable in this instance,

because a predicate which serves to express an analytic proposition when

combined  with  one  descriptive  phrase  may  serve  to  express  a  synthetic

proposition  when  combined  with  another  descriptive  phrase  which

nevertheless refers to the same object. Thus to have written Hamlet is an

internal property of the author of Hamlet, but not of the author of Macbeth,

nor yet of Shakespeare. For it is self-contradictory to say that the author of

Hamlet did not write Hamlet, but it is not self-contradictory, although it is

false,  to  say  that  the  author  of Macbeth  did  not  write Hamlet,  or  that

Shakespeare did not write Hamlet. If we use the current factual terminology

and  say  that  it  was  logically  necessary  for  the  author  of Hamlet  to  have

written Hamlet, but not for Shakespeare or the author of Macbeth, or that

Shakespeare  and  the  author  of Macbeth  could  conceivably  have  existed

without  writing Hamlet  but  the  author  of Hamlet  could  not,  or  that

Shakespeare and the author of Macbeth would still have been themselves if

they had not written Hamlet but the author of Hamlet would not, we should

appear in each case to be contradicting ourselves; for we allow that the author

of Hamlet is the same person as Shakespeare and as the author of Macbeth.

But when it is recognised that these are simply ways of saying that “the

author  of Hamlet  wrote Hamlet”  is  an  analytic  proposition,  whereas

“Shakespeare wrote Hamlet” and “the author of Macbeth wrote Hamlet” are

synthetic, the appearance of self-contradiction is completely removed.

  With this we conclude our examination of the logical errors which give

rise to the metaphysical doctrine of monism. But we must still mention that it

is characteristic of a monist to affirm, and of a pluralist to deny, not only thatevery fact is logically contained in every other, but also that every event is

causally connected with every other. There are some, indeed, who would say

that the latter proposition could be derived from the former, on the ground

that causality was itself a logical relation. But this would be a mistake. For if

causality  were  a  logical  relation,  then  the  contradictory  of  every  true

proposition which asserted a causal connection would be self-contradictory.

But  it  is  allowed  even  by  those  who  maintain  that  causality  is  a  logical

relation that propositions which assert the existence either of general or of

particular causal connections are synthetic. In Hume’s phraseology, they are

propositions concerning matters of fact. And we have shown that the validity

of such propositions cannot be established a priori, as Hume himself made

clear. “It implies no contradiction,” he says, “that the course of nature may

change, and that an object, seemingly like those which we have experienced,

may be attended with different or contrary effects. May I not clearly and

distinctly conceive, that a body, falling from the clouds, and which in all

other respects resembles snow, has yet the taste of salt or feeling of fire? Is

there any more intelligible proposition than to affirm, that all the trees will

flourish  in  December  and  January,  and  decay  in  May  and  June?  Now

whatever  is  intelligible,  and  can  be  distinctly  conceived,  implies  no

contradiction, and can never be proved false by any demonstrative argument
                                    110
or abstract reasoning a priori.” Here Hume is supporting our contention

that it is only by experience that the validity of synthetic propositions can be

determined. Propositions which cannot be denied without self-contradiction

are analytic. And it is to the class of synthetic propositions that those which

assert causal connection belong.

We may conclude from this that the monistic doctrine that every event is

causally  connected  with  every  other  is  logically  independent  of  the  other

monistic  doctrine  which  we  have  examined—that  every  fact  is  logically

contained in every other. We have, indeed, no a priori  ground  either  for

accepting or for rejecting the doctrine that every event is causally connected

with  every  other,  but  there  are  good  empirical  grounds  for  rejecting  it,

inasmuch as it denies the possibility of natural science. For it is plain that in

making any given prediction we are able to consider only a limited set of

data; what we do not take into account, we assume that we are entitled to

ignore as irrelevant. I assume, for example, that in order to determine whether

it will rain tomorrow I need not take into account the present state of mind of

the  Emperor  of  Manchukuo.  If  we  were  not  entitled  to  make  suchassumptions,  there  would  be  no  likelihood  of  our  predictions  ever  being

successful, for we should always be ignoring the greater part of the relevant

data. The fact that our predictions are very often successful gives us reason to

believe that some at least of our judgements of irrelevance are correct, and so

to reject the monistic doctrine which denies their legitimacy.

It is important for us to expose the errors which are commonly associated

with monism, because there is a sense in which we ourselves desire to uphold

the unity of science. For we maintain that it is a mistake to conceive of the

various “special sciences” as portraying different “aspects of reality.” We

have  shown  that  all  empirical  hypotheses  refer  ultimately  to  our  sense-

contents.  They  all  function  alike  as  “rules  for  the  anticipation  of  future

experience”;  and  it  is  very  seldom  the  case  that,  in  making  a  particular

prediction,  we  are  guided  by  the  hypotheses  of  only  one  science.  What

chiefly  prevents  this  unity  from  being  recognized  at  present  is  the
                                                                      111
unnecessary multiplicity of current scientific terminologies.

For  our  part  we  are  concerned  to  emphasize  not  so  much  the  unity  of

science  as  the  unity  of  philosophy  with  science.  With  regard  to  the

relationship of philosophy and the empirical sciences, we have remarked that

philosophy does not in any way compete with the sciences. It does not make

any  speculative  assertions  which  could  conflict  with  the  speculative

assertions  of  science,  nor  does  it  profess  to  venture  into  fields  which  lie

beyond the scope of scientific investigation. Only the metaphysician does

that, and produces nonsense as a result. And we have also pointed out that it

is  impossible  merely  by  philosophizing  to  determine  the  validity  of  a

coherent system of scientific propositions. For the question whether such a

system is valid is always a question of empirical fact; and, therefore, the

propositions of philosophy, since they are purely linguistic propositions, can

have no bearing upon it. Thus the philosopher is not, qua philosopher, in a

position to assess the value of any scientific theory; his function is simply to

elucidate the theory by defining the symbols which occur in it.

It might be thought that the philosophical elucidation of scientific theories

was required only for the popularization of science, and could not be of much

benefit to the scientists themselves. But this would be a mistake. One has

only  to  consider  the  importance  to  contemporary  physics  of  Einstein’s

definition  of  simultaneity,  in  order  to  realise  how  necessary  it  is  for  the

experimental physicist to be furnished with clear and definitive analyses ofthe  concepts  which  he  employs.  And  the  need  for  such  analyses  is  even

greater  in  the  less  advanced  sciences.  For  example,  the  failure  of

psychologists  at  the  present  time  to  emancipate  themselves  from

metaphysics, and to co-ordinate their enquiries, is principally due to the use

of  symbols  such  as  “intelligence”  or  “empathy”  or  “subconscious  self,”

which  are  not  precisely  defined.  The  theories  of  psycho-analysts  are

particularly full of metaphysical elements which a philosophical elucidation

of their symbols would remove. It would be the philosopher’s business to

make clear what was the real empirical content of the propositions of psycho-

analysts,  and  what  was  their  logical  relationship  to  the  propositions  of

behaviourists or Gestalt psychologists, a relationship at present obscured by

unanalysed differences of terminology. And it can hardly be disputed that

such  a  work  of  clarification  would  be  favourable,  if  not  essential,  to  the

progress of the science as a whole.

But if science may be said to be blind without philosophy, it is true also

that philosophy is virtually empty without science. For while the analysis of

our everyday language is useful as a means of preventing, or exposing, a

certain amount of metaphysics, the problems which it presents are not of such

difficulty or complexity as to make it probable that they will remain long

unsolved. Indeed we have dealt with most of them in the course of this book,

including  the  problem  of  perception,  which  is  perhaps  the  most  difficult

problem of those which are not essentially connected with the language of

science; a fact which explains why it has played so large a part in the history

of modern philosophy. What confronts the philosopher who finds that our

everyday language has been sufficiently analysed is the task of clarifying the

concepts of contemporary science. But for him to be able to achieve this, it is

essential  that  he  should  understand  science.  If  he  is  incapable  of

understanding the propositions of any science, then he is unable to fulfil the

philosopher’s  function  in  the  advancement  of  our  knowledge.  For  he  is

unable to define the symbols which, most of all, require to be made clear.

It is indeed misleading to draw a sharp distinction, as we have been doing,

between philosophy and science. What we should rather do is to distinguish

between the speculative and the logical aspects of science, and assert that

philosophy  must  develop  into  the  logic  of  science.  That  is  to  say,  we

distinguish between the activity of formulating hypotheses, and the activity of

displaying  the  logical  relationship  of  these  hypotheses  and  defining  thesymbols which occur in them. It is of no importance whether we call one who

is engaged in the latter activity a philosopher or a scientist. What we must

recognise is that it is necessary for a philosopher to become a scientist, in this

sense, if he is to make any substantial contribution towards the growth of

human knowledge.INDEX








            ABSOLUTE, THE
          Absolutism in ethics
          Æsthetic criticism, function of
          Æsthetic judgements, not objectively valid
            Agnosticism
          Altruism
            Ambiguous symbols, defined
          Analogy, argument from, as applied to other minds
          Analysis, as the function of philosophy

                involves no metaphysical principles
                is concerned with linguistic usages
                its logical character
                its utility
                nor empirical presuppositions
                provides definitions in use
          Analytic propositions

                defined
                how they increase our knowledge
                Kant’s definition of
                liable to be mistaken for synthetic propositions
                their lack of factual independence of experience
                their power to surprise us
          Ants
          A priori propositions

                as tautologies
                cannot serve as “first principles,”
          Aristotelian logicians
          Aristotle, primarily an analyst
          Atoms

          “BASIC” PROPOSITIONS          Being, as a metaphysical term
          Bentham, J.
          Berkeley, George, his empiricism carried further by Hume

                his analysis of the notion of a material thing
                his idealism
                his mentalism
                his theism
          Berlin, I..
          Black, M..
          Bradley, F..
          Braithwaite, R. B..
          Broad, C. D..

          CAPITALISM
          Carnap, R.. .....

                uses a language in the analysis of itself
          Casuistry
          Categorical imperatives
            Causation, defined

                not a logical relation
            Characteristica Universalis, Leibnitz’s desire for.
          Cogito ergo sum, a Cartesian fallacy
          Colour blindness
            Communication, possibility of
            Consciousness
            Conservatism in science
            Continuity, direct and indirect, defined
          Contradiction, principle of

            DEFINITION, explicit AND in use
          Depth, as a property of visual and tactual sense-fields
          Descartes, R., his method

                his mentalism
          Descriptions, definite, Bertrand Russell’s theory of
          Diagrams, their use in geometry
          Domitian
            Duncan-Jones, Austin...

          ECONOMY, PRINCIPLE OF, in scientific

                method
          Egotism
          Einstein, A.
          Electrons
          Elements of logical constructions defined
          Emotive utterances
          Empirical propositions. See Synthetic propositions.
            Empiricism and necessary truths                and rationalism
                and the self
                logical doctrines of
                  psychological doctrines of
            Entailment defined
          Equivalence defined
          Ethical judgements, if normative, neither true nor false

                their validity not a subject for argument
          Ethical science
          Ethical symbols, distinction between the normative and descriptive
          Ethics, the different questions involved in
          Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries
          Ewing, A. C.,..
          Excluded middle, law of
          Existence, analysed

                not an attribute
          Experience. See Sense-experience.
            Experiential propositions

          FACTUAL PROPOSITIONS DEFINED
          Faith
          Feeling, expression and assertion of
          Fictitiousness not an attribute

          GENERAL PROPOSITIONS NOT CONCLUSIVELY VERIFIABLE
            Geometry, formal: its propositions analytic

                and physical space
                does not necessarily require intuition
          Gestalt psychologists
          “Given,” the, in sense experience
          God, his existence cannot be demonstrated

                his place in Berkeley’s philosophy
                nor shown to be probable not a mathematician.
                Goya

          HAHN, H...
          Hamlet
          Heidegger, M..
          Hempel, C..
          Hobbes, T
          Hume, D., his analysis of causation

                his analysis of the self
                his empiricism
                his psychological views
                his rejection of metaphysics
                his view of scientific method
                shows that no empirical proposition can be logically certain
                shows that no event intrinsically points to any other          Hypotheses and empirical propositions

                not conclusively verifiable
                nor conclusively confutable
                their relation to experience

          IDEA, LOCKE AND BERKELEY’S USAGE OF
          Idealism and realism

                empirical doctrine of
                logical doctrines of
                metaphysical doctrine of
          Identity of different people’s experiences
          Illusion, argument from
          Incorrigible propositions
          Induction, futility of attempting to justify
          Internality of all properties, fallaciously assumed by monists
          Intuition as a method of arriving at beliefs

                not a criterion of knowledge
                not essential in geometry
                not the basis of Descartes’ method
          JEHOVAH
          Juhos, B. von.

          KANT and arithmetic

                his account of necessary truths
                his belief in God
                his condemnation of transcendent metaphysics
                his definitions of analytic and synthetic judgements
                his transcendental aesthetic
                his theory of morals
                his view of geometry
                his view of scientific method
                on empiricism
                primarily an analyst
                sees that existence is not an attribute
          Keynes, J. M..

            LANGFORD, C. H.
          Language, its connection with logic

                misleads metaphysicians
                scientific and emotive use of
                the subject of philosophical analysis
          Laws of Nature, definitions or hypotheses
          Laws of thought, Aristotelian, as tautologies
          Lazerowitz, M...
          Leibnitz
          Lewis, C. I....
          Limited independent variety, Keynes’ principle of, does not justify induction
          Linguistic propositions disguised in factual terminology                rules
          Locke, J., as an analyst

                his misconception of matter
          Logic comprehends philosophy

                and possibly mathematics

                              concerned  with  definitions  and  their  consequences,  and  not  with
                            empirical matters of fact
                            its ability to surprise us
                            its truths are analytic
                Logical constructions defined

                            not fictitious objects
                Logistic

          MACE, C. A..
          Mach, E.
          Malcolm, Norman..
          Marxists
          Material things as logical constructions out of sense-contents
          may exist unperceived
          Mathematics consists, like logic, of analytic propositions

                its ability to surprise us
                reducible to logic?
          Matter and mind
          May Queens
          Meaning, an ambiguous term

                and principle of verification
                the word used in a variety of senses
          Memory
          Menger, K..
            Metaphysicians not necessarily mystics

                their statements not verifiable
            Metaphysics defined

                  distinguished from philosophy.
                examples of
                how it arises
                its aesthetic value
                not literally significant
          Mill, J. S., a follower of Hume

                his conception of a material thing
                on logic and mathematics
          Mind, activity of

                and matter
          Monism and causation                and pluralism
                metaphysical doctrine of
                the outcome of logical errors
          Moore, G. E....

                his argument against subjectivism in ethics
                his defence of common sense
                on reality
          Moral judgements. See Ethical judgements.
          Mysticism

          NAGEL, E..
          Nature of a thing, the, an ambiguous expression
          Necessary connection not exemplified by synthetic propositions
          Necessary propositions. See A priori propositions.
          Neurath, O...
          Nothing not the name of a thing
          Numbers, natural, reducible to classes?

              OBSERVATION-STATEMENTS
          Ostensive propositions
          Other minds, our knowledge of

          PAIN, AN AMBIGUOUS TERM
          Particulars
          Past, our knowledge of the
            Perception, problem of

                its solution
          Personal identity
            Phenomenalism

                applied to material things
                applied to oneself
                applied to other minds
          Philosophy, a department of logic

                  distinguished from metaphysics
                its analytic character
                its future
                its history
                its relation to science
                not a search for first principles
                not speculative
                provides definitions

          Plato primarily an analyst
          Pleasure

          Pluralism and monism

                metaphysical doctrine of
          Poincaré, H.                his objection to the view that mathematics is tautologous
          Popper, K..
          Positivism
          Price, H. H...
          Probability

                defined
            Propositions cannot negate themselves

                defined
                not to be regarded as real entities
                use of the word
          Putative propositions

          QUESTIONS, GENUINE AND FICTITIOUS

          RAMSEY, F. P...
          Rationalism, logical doctrines of

                metaphysical doctrine of
                and empiricism
                and scientific method
                and sensation
                and the self
          Rationality defined
          Realism, logical doctrine of

                metaphysical doctrine of
                and idealism
                empirical doctrine of
          Reality analysed
          Real qualities of things

          Reason, truths of, do not refer to matters of fact
          Relations

                symmetrical and transitive, defined
          Relative product

                defined.
          Religion and scienceSee also Theism.
          Religious experience
          Resemblance, direct and indirect, defined
          Robots
          Ross, Sir W. David.
          Russell, B. A. W..

                his propositional calculus
                his system of logic
                his theory of definite descriptions
                on mathematics
                on the structure of language
          Ryle, G., ...            SCHLICK, M....
          Schools of philosophy, unwarranted
          Science and philosophy

                and religion
                as a method of prediction
                covers whole field of knowledge
                its unity
          Scientific procedure cannot be justified a priori
          Self, the, analysis of
            Self-consciousness and self-identity
          Self-consistency
          Sensation not analysable into subject act, and object
            Sense-contents, actual and possible

                defined
                existence of
                neither mental nor physical
                subjectivity of
                their relationship with material things
          Sense-experience

                and sense-contents
                and the self
                determines the validity of synthetic propositions
            Sense-fields
          Sense-histories
          Sentence an ambiguous word

                definition of
                expression of a statement
                literal meaninget seq.
          Shakespeare
          Simultaneity
          Solipsism
          Soul, the
          Stace, W....

                State, the English
                Statement a new technical term et seq.
                definition of
                normative and factual
                verifiable statement defmed
          Stebbing, L. S...
          Stevenson, C. L.n.
          Structure and content
            Subjectivism in ethics

                objections to
          Substance, a metaphysical term
          Substantival ego, metaphysical character of the
          Survival          Syllogism, principle of the
          Symbols and signs
          Synonymity defined
          Synthetic propositions defmed

                Kant’s definition of
                their validity

            TAUTOLOGIES. See Analytic propositions.
          Theism as a form of metaphysics
            Transcendent reality, denial of possibility of
          Truth, nature of

                theories of
          Type, identity of, as applied to sentences

                and to symbols

            UNDERSTANDING, possibility of mutual

                and analysis
          Unicorns
          Uniformity of Nature, principle of the, cannot justify induction,

                49–50
          Universals
          Utilitarianism

                objections to

          VALUE, JUDGEMENTS OF. See Ethical and Æsthetic judgements.
          Values, emotive theory of
          Verifiability as a criterion of significance

                practical and in principle
                strong and weak
            Verification never conclusive

                the principle of
          Viennese circle, the

            WAISMANN, F..
          Waverley, the author of
          Whitehead, A. N.
          Whole, organic, defined
          Willis, J. R. M.
          Wittgenstein, L..

                on logical necessity
                on the impossibility of drawing a limit to thinking
          Wisdom, John..A CATALOG OF SELECTED


DOVER BOOKS IN ALL FIELDS OF


INTEREST














A CATALOG OF SELECTED DOVER BOOKS IN ALL FIELDS OF

                                      INTEREST

100  BEST-LOVED  POEMS,  Edited  by  Philip  Smith.  “The  Passionate

Shepherd to His Love,” “Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?” “Death,

be not proud,” “The Raven,” “The Road Not Taken,” plus works by Blake,

Wordsworth, Byron, Shelley, Keats, many others. 96pp.  x 8¼

                                                                            0-486-28553-7

100  SMALL  HOUSES  OF  THE  THIRTIES,  Brown-Blodgett  Company.

Exterior  photographs  and  floor  plans  for  100  charming  structures.

Illustrations  of  models  accompanied  by  descriptions  of  interiors,  color

schemes, closet space, and other amenities. 200 illustrations. 112pp. 8⅜ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-44131-8

1000  TURN-OF-THE-CENTURY  HOUSES:  With  Illustrations  and  Floor

Plans, Herbert C. Chivers. Reproduced from a rare edition, this showcase ofhomes  ranges  from  cottages  and  bungalows  to  sprawling  mansions.  Each

house is meticulously illustrated and accompanied by complete floor plans.

256pp. 9% x 12¼.

                                                                            0-486-45596-3




101  GREAT  AMERICAN  POEMS,  Edited  by  The  American  Poetry  &

Literacy Project. Rich treasury of verse from the 19th and 20th centuries

includes works by Edgar Allan Poe, Robert Frost, Walt Whitman, Langston

Hughes, Emily Dickinson, T. S. Eliot, other notables. 96pp.  x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-40158-8

101  GREAT  SAMURAI  PRINTS,  Utagawa  Kuniyoshi.  Kuniyoshi  was  a

master of the warrior woodblock print—and these 18th-century illustrations

represent the pinnacle of his craft. Full-color portraits of renowned Japanese

samurais pulse with movement, passion, and remarkably fine detail. 112pp.

8⅜ x 11. 0-486-46523-3

ABC  OF  BALLET,  Janet  Grosser.  Clearly  worded,  abundantly  illustrated

little guide defines basic ballet-related terms: arabesque, battement, pas de

chat, relevé, sissonne, many others. Pronunciation guide included. Excellent

primer. 48pp.  x 5¾

4%
                                                                          0-486-40871-X




ACCESSORIES OF DRESS: An Illustrated Encyclopedia, Katherine Lester

and  Bess  Viola  Oerke.  Illustrations  of  hats,  veils,  wigs,  cravats,  shawls,

shoes, gloves, and other accessories enhance an engaging commentary that

reveals the humor and charm of the many-sided story of accessorized apparel.

644 figures and 59 plates. 608pp. 6 ⅛ x 9¼.

                                                                            0-486-43378-1




ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, Mark Twain. Join Huck and

Jim as their boyhood adventures along the Mississippi River lead them into a

world of excitement, danger, and self-discovery. Humorous narrative, lyricaldescriptions of the Mississippi valley, and memorable characters. 224pp. 

x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-28061-6

ALICE STARMORE’S BOOK OF FAIR ISLE KNITTING, Alice Starmore.

A noted designer from the region of Scotland’s Fair Isle explores the history

and techniques of this distinctive, stranded-color knitting style and provides

copious illustrated instructions for 14 original knitwear designs. 208pp. 8⅜ x

10⅞.

                                                                            0-486-47218-3

ALICE’S  ADVENTURES  IN  WONDERLAND,  Lewis  Carroll.  Beloved

classic about a little girl lost in a topsy-turvy land and her encounters with the

White Rabbit, March Hare, Mad Hatter, Cheshire Cat, and other delightfully

improbable characters. 42 illustrations by Sir John Tenniel. 96pp.  x 8¼

5%
                                                                            0-486-27543-4

AMERICA’S  LIGHTHOUSES:  An  Illustrated  History,  Francis  Ross

Holland.  Profusely  illustrated  fact-filled  survey  of  American  lighthouses

since 1716. Over 200 stations—East, Gulf, and West coasts, Great Lakes,

Hawaii, Alaska, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and the Mississippi and St.

Lawrence Rivers. 240pp. 8 x 10¾.

                                                                          0-486-25576-X




AN ENCYCLOPEDIA OF THE VIOLIN, Alberto Bachmann. Translated by

Frederick  H.  Martens.  Introduction  by  Eugene  Ysaye.  First  published  in

1925, this renowned reference remains unsurpassed as a source of essential

information,  from  construction  and  evolution  to  repertoire  and  technique.

Includes a glossary and 73 illustrations. 496pp. 6⅛ x 9¼

                                                                            0-486-46618-3

ANIMALS:  1,419  Copyright-Free  Illustrations  of  Mammals,  Birds,  Fish,

Insects, etc., Selected by Jim Harter. Selected for its visual impact and ease of

use,  this  outstanding  collection  of  wood  engravings  presents  over  1,000

species  of  animals  in  extremely  lifelike  poses.  Includes  mammals,  birds,

reptiles, amphibians, fish, insects, and other invertebrates. 284pp. 9 x 12.                                                                            0-486-23766-4

THE  ANNALS,  Tacitus.  Translated  by  Alfred  John  Church  and  William

Jackson Brodribb. This vital chronicle of Imperial Rome, written by the era’s

great historian, spans A.D. 14-68 and paints incisive psychological portraits

of major figures, from Tiberius to Nero. 416pp.  x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-45236-0

ANTIGONE,  Sophocles.  Filled  with  passionate  speeches  and  sensitive

probing of moral and philosophical issues, this powerful and often-performed

Greek  drama  reveals  the  grim  fate  that  befalls  the  children  of  Oedipus.

Footnotes. 64pp.  x 8 ¼.

5¥e
                                                                            0-486-27804-2




ART DECO DECORATIVE PATTERNS IN FULL COLOR, Christian Stoll.

Reprinted from a rare 1910 portfolio, 160 sensuous and exotic images depict

a breathtaking array of florals, geometrics, and abstracts—all elegant in their

stark simplicity. 64pp. 8⅜ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-44862-2

THE  ARTHUR  RACKHAM  TREASURY:  86  Full-Color  Illustrations,

Arthur Rackham. Selected and Edited by Jeff A. Menges. A stunning treasury

of 86 full-page plates span the famed English artist’s career, from Rip Van

Winkle (1905) to masterworks such as Undine, A Midsummer Night’s Dream,

and Wind in the Willows (1939). 96pp. 8% x 11.

                                                                            0-486-44685-9




THE AUTHENTIC GILBERT & SULLIVAN SONGBOOK, W. S. Gilbert

and  A.  S.  Sullivan.  The  most  comprehensive  collection  available,  this

songbook includes selections from every one of Gilbert and Sullivan’s light

operas. Ninety-two numbers are presented uncut and unedited, and in their

original keys. 410pp. 9 x 12.

                                                                            0-486-23482-7THE AWAKENING, Kate Chopin. First published in 1899, this controversial

novel of a New Orleans wife’s search for love outside a stifling marriage

shocked  readers.  Today,  it  remains  a  first-rate  narrative  with  superb

characterization. New introductory Note. 128pp.  x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-27786-0

BASIC  DRAWING,  Louis  Priscilla.  Beginning  with  perspective,  this

commonsense manual progresses to the figure in movement, light and shade,

anatomy, drapery, composition, trees and landscape, and outdoor sketching.

Black-and-white illustrations throughout. 128pp. 8% x 11.

                                                                            0-486-45815-6

THE  BATTLES  THAT  CHANGED  HISTORY,  Fletcher  Pratt.  Historian

profiles 16 crucial conflicts, ancient to modern, that changed the course of

Western civilization. Gripping accounts of battles led by Alexander the Great,

Joan of Arc, Ulysses S. Grant, other commanders. 27 maps. 352pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                          0-486-41129-X

BEETHOVEN’S LETTERS, Ludwig van Beethoven. Edited by Dr. A. C.

Kalischer. Features 457 letters to fellow musicians, friends, greats, patrons,

and literary men. Reveals musical thoughts, quirks of personality, insights,

and daily events. Includes 15 plates. 410pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-22769-3

BERNICE BOBS HER HAIR AND OTHER STORIES, F. Scott Fitzgerald.

This brilliant anthology includes 6 of Fitzgerald’s most popular stories: “The

Diamond as Big as the Ritz,” the title tale, “The Offshore Pirate,” “The Ice

Palace,” “The Jelly Bean,” and “May Day.” 176pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-47049-0

BESLER’S  BOOK  OF  FLOWERS  AND  PLANTS:  73  Full-Color  Plates

from  Hortus  Eystettensis,  1613,  Basilius  Besler.  Here  is  a  selection  of

magnificent plates from the Hortus Eystettensis, which vividly illustrated and

identified the plants, flowers, and trees that thrived in the legendary German

garden at Eichstätt. 80pp. 8⅜ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-46005-3THE  BOOK  OF  KELLS,  Edited  by  Blanche  Cirker.  Painstakingly

reproduced  from  a  rare  facsimile  edition,  this  volume  contains  full-page

decorations,  portraits,  illustrations,  plus  a  sampling  of  textual  leaves  with

exquisite calligraphy and ornamentation. 32 full-color illustrations. 32pp. 9⅜

x 12¼.

                                                                            0-486-24345-1

THE  BOOK  OF  THE  CROSSBOW:  With  an  Additional  Section  on

Catapults and Other Siege Engines, Ralph Payne-Gallwey. Fascinating study

traces history and use of crossbow as military and sporting weapon, from

Middle  Ages  to  modern  times.  Also  covers  related  weapons:  balistas,

catapults, Turkish bows, more. Over 240 illustrations. 400pp. 7¼ x 10⅛.

                                                                            0-486-28720-3

THE BUNGALOW BOOK: Floor Plans and Photos of 112 Houses, 1910,

Henry L. Wilson. Here are 112 of the most popular and economic blueprints

of  the  early  20th  century—plus  an  illustration  or  photograph  of  each

completed  house.  A  wonderful  time  capsule  that  still  offers  a  wealth  of

valuable insights. 160pp. 8⅜ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-45104-6




THE CALL OF THE WILD, Jack London. A classic novel of adventure,

drawn from London’s own experiences as a Klondike adventurer, relating the

story of a heroic dog caught in the brutal life of the Alaska Gold Rush. Note.

64pp.  x 8¼.

5¥%s
                                                                            0-486-26472-6




CANDIDE, Voltaire. Edited by Francois-Marie Arouet. One of the world’s

great satires since its first publication in 1759. Witty, caustic skewering of

romance, science, philosophy, religion, government—nearly all human ideals

and institutions. 112pp.  x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-26689-3

CELEBRATED IN THEIR TIME: Photographic Portraits from the George

Grantham Bain Collection, Edited by Amy Pastan. With an Introduction byMichael Carlebach. Remarkable portrait gallery features 112 rare images of

Albert Einstein, Charlie Chaplin, the Wright Brothers, Henry Ford, and other

luminaries  from  the  worlds  of  politics,  art,  entertainment,  and  industry.

128pp. 8⅜ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-46754-6

CHARIOTS  FOR  APOLLO:  The  NASA  History  of  Manned  Lunar

Spacecraft to 1969, Courtney G. Brooks, James M. Grimwood, and Loyd S.

Swenson,  Jr.  This  illustrated  history  by  a  trio  of  experts  is  the  definitive

reference on the Apollo spacecraft and lunar modules. It traces the vehicles’

design, development, and operation in space. More than 100 photographs and

illustrations. 576pp. 6¾ x 9¼.

                                                                            0-486-46756-2

A  CHRISTMAS  CAROL,  Charles  Dickens.  This  engrossing  tale  relates

Ebenezer Scrooge’s ghostly journeys through Christmases past, present, and

future and his ultimate transformation from a harsh and grasping old miser to

a charitable and compassionate human being. 80pp.  x 8¼.

5%
                                                                            0-486-26865-9

COMMON SENSE, Thomas Paine. First published in January of 1776, this

highly  influential  landmark  document  clearly  and  persuasively  argued  for

American  separation  from  Great  Britain  and  paved  the  way  for  the

Declaration of Independence. 64pp.  x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-29602-4

THE COMPLETE SHORT STORIES OF OSCAR WILDE, Oscar Wilde.

Complete  texts  of  “The  Happy  Prince  and  Other  Tales,”  “A  House  of

Pomegranates,” “Lord Arthur Savile’s Crime and Other Stories,” “Poems in

Prose,” and “The Portrait of Mr. W. H.” 208pp.  x 8¼.

    0-486-45216-6 COMPLETE SONNETS, William Shakespeare. Over 150

      exquisite poems deal with love, friendship, the tyranny of time, beauty’s

      evanescence, death, and other themes in language of remarkable power,

              precision, and beauty. Glossary of archaic terms. 80pp.  x 8¼.

5%
                                                                            0-486-26686-9

THE COUNT OF MONTE CRISTO: Abridged Edition, Alexandre Dumas.

Falsely  accused  of  treason,  Edmond  Dantès  is  imprisoned  in  the  bleakChateau d’If. After a hair-raising escape, he launches an elaborate plot to

extract a bitter revenge against those who betrayed him. 448pp.  x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-45643-9

CRAFTSMAN BUNGALOWS: Designs from the Pacific Northwest, Yoho

& Merritt. This reprint of a rare catalog, showcasing the charming simplicity

and cozy style of Craftsman bungalows, is filled with photos of completed

homes, plus floor plans and estimated costs. An indispensable resource for

architects, historians, and illustrators. 112pp. 10 x 7.

                                                                            0-486-46875-5

CRAFTSMAN BUNGALOWS: 59 Homes from “The Craftsman,” Edited by

Gustav  Stickley.  Best  and  most  attractive  designs  from  Arts  and  Crafts

Movement  publication—1903—1916—includes  sketches,  photographs  of

homes, floor plans, descriptive text. 128pp. 8¼ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-25829-7

CRIME  AND  PUNISHMENT,  Fyodor  Dostoyevsky.  Translated  by

Constance Garnett. Supreme masterpiece tells the story of Raskolnikov, a

student  tormented  by  his  own  thoughts  after  he  murders  an  old  woman.

Overwhelmed by guilt and terror, he confesses and goes to prison. 480pp. 

5%e
x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-41587-2

THE  DECLARATION  OF  INDEPENDENCE  AND  OTHER  GREAT

DOCUMENTS  OF  AMERICAN  HISTORY:  1775-1865,  Edited  by  John

Grafton. Thirteen compelling and influential documents: Henry’s “Give Me

Liberty or Give Me Death,” Declaration of Independence, The Constitution,

Washington’s  First  Inaugural  Address,  The  Monroe  Doctrine,  The

Emancipation Proclamation, Gettysburg Address, more. 64pp.  x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-41124-9

THE DESERT AND THE SOWN: Travels in Palestine and Syria, Gertrude

Bell.  “The  female  Lawrence  of  Arabia,”  Gertrude  Bell  wrote  captivating,

perceptive  accounts  of  her  travels  in  the  Middle  East.  This  intriguing

narrative, accompanied by 160 photos, traces her 1905 sojourn in Lebanon,

Syria, and Palestine. 368pp. 5⅜ x 8½. 0-486-46876-3A  DOLL’S  HOUSE,  Henrik  Ibsen.  Ibsen’s  best-known  play  displays  his

genius for realistic prose drama. An expression of women’s rights, the play

climaxes when the central character, Nora, rejects a smothering marriage and

life in “a doll’s house.” 80pp.  x 8¼.

5%e
                                                                            0-486-27062-9

DOOMED  SHIPS:  Great  Ocean  Liner  Disasters,  William  H.  Miller,  Jr.

Nearly 200 photographs, many from private collections, highlight tales of

some of the vessels whose pleasure cruises ended in catastrophe: the Morro

Castle, Normandie, Andrea Doria, Europa, and many others. 128pp. 8⅞ x

11¾.

                                                                            0-486-45366-9

THE DORÉ BIBLE ILLUSTRATIONS, Gustave Doré. Detailed plates from

the  Bible:  the  Creation  scenes,  Adam  and  Eve,  horrifying  visions  of  the

Flood, the battle sequences with their monumental crowds, depictions of the

life of Jesus, 241 plates in all. 241pp. 9 x 12.

                                                                          0-486-23004-X

DRAWING  DRAPERY  FROM  HEAD  TO  TOE,  Cliff  Young.  Expert

guidance on how to draw shirts, pants, skirts, gloves, hats, and coats on the

human figure, including folds in relation to the body, pull and crush, action

folds, creases, more. Over 200 drawings. 48pp. 8¼ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-45591-2

DUBLINERS, James Joyce. A fine and accessible introduction to the work of

one of the 20th century’s most influential writers, this collection features 15

tales, including a masterpiece of the short-story genre, “The Dead.” 160pp. 

  x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-26870-5




EASY-TO-MAKE  POP-UPS,  Joan  Irvine.  Illustrated  by  Barbara  Reid.

Dozens of wonderful ideas for three-dimensional paper fun—from holiday

greeting  cards  with  moving  parts  to  a  pop-up  menagerie.  Easy-to-follow,

illustrated  instructions  for  more  than  30  projects.  299  black-and-white

illustrations. 96pp. 8⅜ x 11.                                                                            0-486-44622-0




EASY-TO-MAKE STORYBOOK DOLLS: A “Novel” Approach to Cloth

Dollmaking, Sherralyn St. Clair. Favorite fictional characters come alive in

this  unique  beginner’s  dollmaking  guide.  Includes  patterns  for  Pollyanna,

Dorothy from The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, Mary of The Secret Garden, plus

easy-to-follow instructions, 263 black-and-white illustrations, and an 8-page

color insert. 112pp. 8¼ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-47360-0

EINSTEIN’S ESSAYS IN SCIENCE, Albert Einstein. Speeches and essays

in accessible, everyday language profile influential physicists such as Niels

Bohr and Isaac Newton. They also explore areas of physics to which the

author made major contributions. 128pp. 5 x 8.

                                                                            0-486-47011-3

EL DORADO: Further Adventures of the Scarlet Pimpernel, Baroness Orczy.

A popular sequel to The Scarlet Pimpernel, this suspenseful story recounts

the Pimpernel’s attempts to rescue the Dauphin from imprisonment during

the French Revolution. An irresistible blend of intrigue, period detail, and

vibrant characterizations. 352pp. 

5%e x 8Y%.
                                                                            0-486-44026-5




ELEGANT  SMALL  HOMES  OF  THE  TWENTIES:  99  Designs  from  a

Competition, Chicago Tribune. Nearly 100 designs for five- and six-room

houses  feature  New  England  and  Southern  colonials,  Normandy  cottages,

stately  Italianate  dwellings,  and  other  fascinating  snapshots  of  American

domestic architecture of the 1920s. 112pp. 9 x 12.

                                                                            0-486-46910-7

THE  ELEMENTS  OF  STYLE:  The  Original  Edition,  William  Strunk,  Jr.

This is the book that generations of writers have relied upon for timeless

advice on grammar, diction, syntax, and other essentials. In concise terms, it

identifies  the  principal  requirements  of  proper  style  and  common  errors.

64pp. 5⅜ x 8½. 0-486-44798-7THE  ELUSIVE  PIMPERNEL,  Baroness  Orczy.  Robespierre’s

revolutionaries find their wicked schemes thwarted by the heroic Pimpernel

—Sir Percival Blakeney. In this thrilling sequel, Chauvelin devises a plot to

eliminate the Pimpernel and his wife. 272pp. 

5%e x 8%.
                                                                            0-486-45464-9

AN ENCYCLOPEDIA OF BATTLES: Accounts of Over 1,560 Battles from

1479 B.C. to the Present, David Eggenberger. Essential details of every major

battle in recorded history from the first battle of Megiddo in 1479 B.C. to

Grenada in 1984. List of battle maps. 99 illustrations. 544pp. 6½ x 9¼.

                                                                            0-486-24913-1

ENCYCLOPEDIA  OF  EMBROIDERY  STITCHES,  INCLUDING

CREWEL,  Marion  Nichols.  Precise  explanations  and  instructions,  clearly

illustrated, on how to work chain, back, cross, knotted, woven stitches, and

many more—178 in all, including Cable Outline, Whipped Satin, and Eyelet

Buttonhole. Over 1400 illustrations. 219pp. 8⅜ x 11¼.

                                                                            0-486-22929-7

ENTER JEEVES: 15 Early Stories, P. G. Wodehouse. Splendid collection

contains first 8 stories featuring Bertie Wooster, the deliciously dim aristocrat

and Jeeves, his brainy, imperturbable manservant. Also, the complete Reggie

Pepper (Bertie’s prototype) series. 288pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-29717-9

ERIC  SLOANE’S  AMERICA:  Paintings  in  Oil,  Michael  Wigley.  With  a

Foreword  by  Mimi  Sloane.  Eric  Sloane’s  evocative  oils  of  America’s

landscape  and  material  culture  shimmer  with  immense  historical  and

nostalgic appeal. This original hardcover collection gathers nearly a hundred

of  his  finest  paintings,  with  subjects  ranging  from  New  England  to  the

American Southwest. 128pp. 10⅝ x 9.

                                                                          0-486-46525-X




ETHAN FROME, Edith Wharton. Classic story of wasted lives, set against a

bleak  New  England  background.  Superbly  delineated  characters  in  a

hauntingly grim tale of thwarted love. Considered by many to be Wharton’s

masterpiece. 96pp. 5% x 8 YA.
                                                                            0-486-26690-7




THE  EVERLASTING  MAN,  G.  K.  Chesterton.  Chesterton’s  view  of

Christianity—as a blend of philosophy and mythology, satisfying intellect

and spirit—applies to his brilliant book, which appeals to readers’ heads as

well as their hearts. 288pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-46036-3




THE FIELD AND FOREST HANDY BOOK, Daniel Beard. Written by a co-

founder of the Boy Scouts, this appealing guide offers illustrated instructions

for  building  kites,  birdhouses,  boats,  igloos,  and  other  fun  projects,  plus

numerous helpful tips for campers. 448pp. x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-46191-2

FINDING YOUR WAY WITHOUT MAP OR COMPASS, Harold Gatty.

Useful, instructive manual shows would-be explorers, hikers, bikers, scouts,

sailors, and survivalists how to find their way outdoors by observing animals,

weather patterns, shifting sands, and other elements of nature. 288pp. 5⅜ x

8½.

                                                                          0-486-40613-X

FIRST FRENCH READER: A Beginner’s Dual-Language Book, Edited and

Translated by Stanley Appelbaum. This anthology introduces 50 legendary

writers—Voltaire, Balzac, Baudelaire, Proust, more—through passages from

The Red and the Black, Les Misérables, Madame Bovary, and other classics.

Original French text plus English translation on facing pages. 240pp. 5⅜ x

8½.

                                                                            0-486-46178-5

FIRST GERMAN READER: A Beginner’s Dual-Language Book, Edited by

Harry Steinhauer. Specially chosen for their power to evoke German life and

culture,  these  short,  simple  readings  include  poems,  stories,  essays,  and

anecdotes by Goethe, Hesse, Heine, Schiller, and others. 224pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-46179-3FIRST  SPANISH  READER:  A  Beginner’s  Dual-Language  Book,  Angel

Flores.  Delightful  stories,  other  material  based  on  works  of  Don  Juan

Manuel, Luis Taboada, Ricardo Palma, other noted writers. Complete faithful

English translations on facing pages. Exercises. 176pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-25810-6

FIVE ACRES AND INDEPENDENCE, Maurice G. Kains. Great back-to-

the-land classic explains basics of self-sufficient farming. The one book to

get. 95 illustrations. 397pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-20974-1

FLAGG’S  SMALL  HOUSES:  Their  Economic  Design  and  Construction,

1922, Ernest Flagg. Although most famous for his skyscrapers, Flagg was

also  a  proponent  of  the  well-designed  single-family  dwelling.  His  classic

treatise  features  innovations  that  save  space,  materials,  and  cost.  526

illustrations. 160pp. 9⅜ x 12¼.

                                                                            0-486-45197-6




FLATLAND: A Romance of Many Dimensions, Edwin A. Abbott. Classic of

science (and mathematical) fiction—charmingly illustrated by the author—

describes the adventures of A. Square, a resident of Flatland, in Spaceland

(three  dimensions),  Lineland  (one  dimension),  and  Pointland  (no

dimensions). 96pp.  x 8¼.

                                                                          0-486-27263-X




FRANKENSTEIN,  Mary  Shelley.  The  story  of  Victor  Frankenstein’s

monstrous  creation  and  the  havoc  it  caused  has  enthralled  generations  of

readers  and  inspired  countless  writers  of  horror  and  suspense.  With  the

author’s own 1831 introduction. 176pp.  x 8¼.

5¥e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-28211-2

THE GARGOYLE BOOK: 572 Examples from Gothic Architecture, Lester

Burbank Bridaham. Dispelling the conventional wisdom that French Gothic

architectural flourishes were born of despair or gloom, Bridaham reveals the

whimsical  nature  of  these  creations  and  the  ingenious  artisans  who  madethem. 572 illustrations. 224pp. 8⅜ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-44754-5




THE GIFT OF THE MAGI AND OTHER SHORT STORIES, O. Henry.

Sixteen captivating stories by one of America’s most popular storytellers.

Included are such classics as “The Gift of the Magi,” “The Last Leaf,” and

“The Ransom of Red Chief.” Publisher’s Note. 96pp. x 8¼.

5%
                                                                            0-486-27061-0

THE GOETHE TREASURY: Selected Prose and Poetry, Johann Wolfgang

von Goethe. Edited, Selected, and with an Introduction by Thomas Mann. In

addition to his lyric poetry, Goethe wrote travel sketches, autobiographical

studies,  essays,  letters,  and  proverbs  in  rhyme  and  prose.  This  collection

presents outstanding examples from each genre. 368pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-44780-4

GREAT EXPECTATIONS, Charles Dickens. Orphaned Pip is apprenticed to

the dirty work of the forge but dreams of becoming a gentleman—and one

day  finds  himself  in  possession  of  “great  expectations.”  Dickens’  finest

novel. 400pp. 

 
                                                                            0-486-41586-4




GREAT  WRITERS  ON  THE  ART  OF  FICTION:  From  Mark  Twain  to

Joyce Carol Oates, Edited by James Daley. An indispensable source of advice

and inspiration, this anthology features essays by Henry James, Kate Chopin,

Willa Cather, Sinclair Lewis, Jack London, Raymond Chandler, Raymond

Carver, Eudora Welty, and Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. 192pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-45128-3

HAMLET, William Shakespeare. The quintessential Shakespearean tragedy,

whose highly charged confrontations and anguished soliloquies probe depths

of human feeling rarely sounded in any art. Reprinted from an authoritative

British edition complete with illuminating footnotes. 128pp.  x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-27278-8THE HAUNTED HOUSE, Charles Dickens. A Yuletide gathering in an eerie

country retreat provides the backdrop for Dickens and his friends—including

Elizabeth Gaskell and Wilkie Collins—who take turns spinning supernatural

yarns. 144pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-46309-5

HEART OF DARKNESS, Joseph Conrad. Dark allegory of a journey up the

Congo River and the narrator’s encounter with the mysterious Mr. Kurtz.

Masterly blend of adventure, character study, psychological penetration. For

many, Conrad’s finest, most enigmatic story. 80pp. 

 
                                                                            0-486-26464-5

HENSON  AT  THE  NORTH  POLE,  Matthew  A.  Henson.  This  thrilling

memoir  by  the  heroic  African-American  who  was  Peary’s  companion

through two decades of Arctic exploration recounts a tale of danger, courage,

and determination. “Fascinating and exciting.”—Commonweal. 128pp. 5% x

8½.

                                                                          0-486-45472-X

HISTORIC COSTUMES AND HOW TO MAKE THEM, Mary Fernald and

E. Shenton. Practical, informative guidebook shows how to create everything

from short tunics worn by Saxon men in the fifth century to a lady’s bustle

dress of the late 1800s. 81 illustrations. 176pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-44906-8

THE HOUND OF THE BASKERVILLES, Arthur Conan Doyle. A deadly

curse in the form of a legendary ferocious beast continues to claim its victims

from the Baskerville family until Holmes and Watson intervene. Often called

the best detective story ever written. 128pp. x 8¼.

5%
                                                                            0-486-28214-7

THE  HOUSE  BEHIND  THE  CEDARS,  Charles  W.  Chesnutt.  Originally

published  in  1900,  this  groundbreaking  novel  by  a  distinguished  African-

American author recounts the drama of a brother and sister who “pass for

white” during the dangerous days of Reconstruction. 208pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-46144-0

THE  HUMAN  FIGURE  IN  MOTION,  Eadweard  Muybridge.  The  4,789

photographs  in  this  definitive  selection  show  the  human  figure—modelsalmost all undraped—engaged in over 160 different types of action: running,

climbing stairs, etc. 390pp. 7⅞ x 10⅝. 0-486-20204-6




THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING EARNEST, Oscar Wilde. Wilde’s witty

and buoyant comedy of manners, filled with some of literature’s most famous

epigrams, reprinted from an authoritative British edition. Considered Wilde’s

most perfect work. 64pp. 

5%e x 8.
                                                                            0-486-26478-5

THE  INFERNO,  Dante  Alighieri.  Translated  and  with  notes  by  Henry

Wadsworth Longfellow. The first stop on Dante’s famous journey from Hell

to Purgatory to Paradise, this 14th-century allegorical poem blends vivid and

shocking imagery with graceful lyricism. Translated by the beloved 19th-

century poet, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. 256pp. 

5¥%s x 8%
                                                                            0-486-44288-8

JANE EYRE, Charlotte Brontë. Written in 1847, Jane Eyre tells the tale of an

orphan girl’s progress from the custody of cruel relatives to an oppressive

boarding  school  and  its  culmination  in  a  troubled  career  as  a  governess.

448pp. 

5%6 x 8%
                                                                            0-486-42449-9




JAPANESE  WOODBLOCK  FLOWER  PRINTS,  Tanigami  Kônan.

Extraordinary collection of Japanese woodblock prints by a well-known artist

features 120 plates in brilliant color. Realistic images from a rare edition

include daffodils, tulips, and other familiar and unusual flowers. 128pp. I x

8¼. 0-486-46442-3

JEWELRY MAKING AND DESIGN, Augustus F. Rose and Antonio Cirino.

Professional secrets of jewelry making are revealed in a thorough, practical

guide. Over 200 illustrations. 306pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-21750-7

JULIUS CAESAR, William Shakespeare. Great tragedy based on Plutarch’s

account of the lives of Brutus, Julius Caesar and Mark Antony. Evil plotting,

ringing  oratory,  high  tragedy  with  Shakespeare’s  incomparable  insight,dramatic power. Explanatory footnotes. 96pp. 

h¥e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-26876-4

THE JUNGLE, Upton Sinclair. 1906 bestseller shockingly reveals intolerable

labor practices and working conditions in the Chicago stockyards as it tells

the grim story of a Slavic family that emigrates to America full of optimism

but soon faces despair. 320pp. 

5%e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-41923-1

THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  IS  WITHIN  YOU,  Leo  Tolstoy.  The  soul-

searching  book  that  inspired  Gandhi  to  embrace  the  concept  of  passive

resistance, Tolstoy’s 1894 polemic clearly outlines a radical, well-reasoned

revision of traditional Christian thinking. 352pp. 

5% x 8%
                                                                            0-486-45138-0

THE  LADY  OR  THE  TIGER?:  and  Other  Logic  Puzzles,  Raymond  M.

Smullyan. Created by a renowned puzzle master, these whimsically themed

challenges  involve  paradoxes  about  probability,  time,  and  change;

metapuzzles; and self-referentiality. Nineteen chapters advance in difficulty

from relatively simple to highly complex. 1982 edition. 240pp. 5% x 8½.

                                                                          0-486-47027-X

LEAVES  OF  GRASS:  The  Original  1855  Edition,  Walt  Whitman.

Whitman’s  immortal  collection  includes  some  of  the  greatest  poems  of

modern  times,  including  his  masterpiece,  “Song  of  Myself.”  Shattering

standard  conventions,  it  stands  as  an  unabashed  celebration  of  body  and

nature. 128pp. 

576 X 8B/
                                                                            0-486-45676-5

LES  MISÉRABLES,  Victor  Hugo.  Translated  by  Charles  E.  Wilbour.

Abridged by James K. Robinson. A convict’s heroic struggle for justice and

redemption plays out against a fiery backdrop of the Napoleonic wars. This

edition features the excellent original translation and a sensitive abridgment.

304pp. 6⅛ x 9¼.

                                                                            0-486-45789-3




LILITH:  A  Romance,  George  MacDonald.  In  this  novel  by  the  father  offantasy literature, a man travels through time to meet Adam and Eve and to

explore humanity’s fall from grace and ultimate redemption. 240pp. 5⅜ x

8½.

                                                                            0-486-46818-6




THE  LOST  LANGUAGE  OF  SYMBOLISM,  Harold  Bayley.  This

remarkable  book  reveals  the  hidden  meaning  behind  familiar  images  and

words,  from  the  origins  of  Santa  Claus  to  the  fleur-de-lys,  drawing  from

mythology,  folklore,  religious  texts,  and  fairy  tales.  1,418  illustrations.

784pp.  5⅜  x  8½.  0-486-44787-1  MACBETH,  William  Shakespeare.  A

Scottish  nobleman  murders  the  king  in  order  to  succeed  to  the  throne.

Tortured by his conscience and fearful of discovery, he becomes tangled in a

web of treachery and deceit that ultimately spells his doom. 96pp.  x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-27802-6

MAKING  AUTHENTIC  CRAFTSMAN  FURNITURE:  Instructions  and

Plans  for  62  Projects,  Gustav  Stickley.  Make  authentic  reproductions  of

handsome, functional, durable furniture: tables, chairs, wall cabinets, desks, a

hall  tree,  and  more.  Construction  plans  with  drawings,  schematics,

dimensions,  and  lumber  specs  reprinted  from  1900s The  Craftsman

magazine. 128pp. 8⅛ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-25000-8

MATHEMATICS  FOR  THE  NONMATHEMATICIAN,  Morris  Kline.

Erudite and entertaining overview follows development of mathematics from

ancient  Greeks  to  present.  Topics  include  logic  and  mathematics,  the

fundamental concept, differential calculus, probability theory, much more.

Exercises and problems. 641pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-24823-2




MEMOIRS  OF  AN  ARABIAN  PRINCESS  FROM  ZANZIBAR,  Emily

Ruete.  This  19th-century  autobiography  offers  a  rare  inside  look  at  the

society surrounding a sultan’s palace. A real-life princess in exile recalls her

vanished world of harems, slave trading, and court intrigues. 288pp. 5⅜ x8½.

                                                                            0-486-47121-7

THE METAMORPHOSIS AND OTHER STORIES, Franz Kafka. Excellent

new English translations of title story (considered by many critics Kafka’s

most perfect work), plus “The Judgment,” “In the Penal Colony,” “A Country

Doctor,” and “A Report to an Academy” Note. 96pp. 

5¥e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-29030-1

MICROSCOPIC  ART  FORMS  FROM  THE  PLANT  WORLD,  R.

Anheisser.  From  undulating  curves  to  complex  geometrics,  a  world  of

fascinating images abound in this classic, illustrated survey of microscopic

plants. Features 400 detailed illustrations of nature’s minute but magnificent

handiwork. The accompanying CD-ROM includes all of the images in the

book. 128pp. 9 x 9.

                                                                            0-486-46013-4

A  MIDSUMMER  NIGHT’S  DREAM,  William  Shakespeare.  Among  the

most popular of Shakespeare’s comedies, this enchanting play humorously

celebrates the vagaries of love as it focuses upon the intertwined romances of

several pairs of lovers. Explanatory footnotes. 80pp. x 8¼.

                                                                          0-486-27067-X

THE MONEY CHANGERS, Upton Sinclair. Originally published in 1908,

this  cautionary  novel  from  the  author  of The  Jungle  explores  corruption

within the American system as a group of power brokers joins forces for

personal gain, triggering a crash on Wall Street. 192pp. 5% x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-46917-4

THE  MOST  POPULAR  HOMES  OF  THE  TWENTIES,  William  A.

Radford. With a New Introduction by Daniel D. Reiff. Based on a rare 1925

catalog, this architectural showcase features floor plans, construction details,

and photos of 26 homes, plus articles on entrances, porches, garages, and

more. 250 illustrations, 21 color plates. 176pp. 8⅜ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-47028-8

MY  66  YEARS  IN  THE  BIG  LEAGUES,  Connie  Mack.  With  a  New

Introduction by Rich Westcott. A Founding Father of modern baseball, Mack

holds the record for most wins—and losses—by a major league manager.Enhanced by 70 photographs, his warmhearted autobiography is populated by

many legends of the game. 288pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-47184-5

NARRATIVE  OF  THE  LIFE  OF  FREDERICK  DOUGLASS,  Frederick

Douglass.  Douglass’s  graphic  depictions  of  slavery,  harrowing  escape  to

freedom, and life as a newspaper editor, eloquent orator, and impassioned

abolitionist. 96pp. 

 
                                                                            0-486-28499-9




THE NIGHTLESS CITY: Geisha and Courtesan Life in Old Tokyo, J. E. de

Becker. This unsurpassed study from 100 years ago ventured into Tokyo’s

red-light  district  to  survey  geisha  and  courtesan  life  and  offer  meticulous

descriptions of training, dress, social hierarchy, and erotic practices. 49 black-

and-white illustrations; 2 maps. 496pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-45563-7

THE ODYSSEY, Homer. Excellent prose translation of ancient epic recounts

adventures of the homeward-bound Odysseus. Fantastic cast of gods, giants,

cannibals,  sirens,  other  supernatural  creatures—true  classic  of  Western

literature. 256pp. x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-40654-7




OEDIPUS  REX,  Sophocles.  Landmark  of  Western  drama  concerns  the

catastrophe that ensues when King Oedipus discovers he has inadvertently

killed  his  father  and  married  his  mother.  Masterly  construction,  dramatic

irony. Explanatory footnotes. 64pp. 

5%e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-26877-2

ONCE UPON A TIME: The Way America Was, Eric Sloane. Nostalgic text

and drawings brim with gentle philosophies and descriptions of how we used

to live—self-sufficiently —on the land, in homes, and among the things built

by hand. 44 line illustrations. 64pp. 8% x 11.

                                                                            0-486-44411-2ONE OF OURS, Willa Cather. The Pulitzer Prize—winning novel about a

young Nebraskan looking for something to believe in. Alienated from his

parents, rejected by his wife, he finds his destiny on the bloody battlefields of

World War I. 352pp. 

5%s x 8%
                                                                            0-486-45599-8




ORIGAMI  YOU  CAN  USE:  27  Practical  Projects,  Rick  Beech.  Origami

models can be more than decorative, and this unique volume shows how! The

27 practical projects include a CD case, frame, napkin ring, and dish. Easy

instructions feature 400 two-color illustrations. 96pp. 8¼ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-47057-1

OTHELLO,  William  Shakespeare.  Towering  tragedy  tells  the  story  of  a

Moorish general who earns the enmity of his ensign lago when he passes him

over  for  a  promotion.  Masterly  portrait  of  an  archvillain.  Explanatory

footnotes. 112pp. 

h%e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-29097-2




PARADISE LOST, John Milton. Notes by John A. Himes. First published in

1667, Paradise Lost ranks among the greatest of English literature’s epic

poems.  It’s  a  sublime  retelling  of  Adam  and  Eve’s  fall  from  grace  and

expulsion from Eden. Notes by John A. Himes. 480pp. x 8¼.

                                                                          0-486-44287-X

PASSING, Nella Larsen. Married to a successful physician and prominently

ensconced  in  society,  Irene  Redfield  leads  a  charmed  existence—until  a

chance encounter with a childhood friend who has been “passing for white.”

112pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-43713-2

PERSPECTIVE  DRAWING  FOR  BEGINNERS,  Len  A.  Doust.  Doust

carefully  explains  the  roles  of  lines,  boxes,  and  circles,  and  shows  how

visualizing  shapes  and  forms  can  be  used  in  accurate  depictions  of

perspective. One of the most concise introductions available. 33 illustrations.

64pp. 5⅜ x 8½                                                                            0-486-45149-6

PERSPECTIVE MADE EASY, Ernest R. Norling. Perspective is easy; yet,

surprisingly few artists know the simple rules that make it so. Remedy that

situation with this simple, step-by-step book, the first devoted entirely to the

topic. 256 illustrations. 224pp. 5% x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-40473-0

THE  PICTURE  OF  DORIAN  GRAY,  Oscar  Wilde.  Celebrated  novel

involves a handsome young Londoner who sinks into a life of depravity. His

body retains perfect youth and vigor while his recent portrait reflects the

ravages of his crime and sensuality. 176pp. 

 
                                                                            0-486-27807-7

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE, Jane Austen. One of the most universally loved

and  admired  English  novels,  an  effervescent  tale  of  rural  romance

transformed by Jane Austen’s art into a witty, shrewdly observed satire of

English country life. 272pp. 

                                                                            0-486-28473-5




THE  PRINCE,  Niccolò  Machiavelli.  Classic,  Renaissance-era  guide  to

acquiring and maintaining political power. Today, nearly 500 years after it

was written, this calculating prescription for autocratic rule continues to be

much read and studied. 80pp. x 8¼.

5¥%e
                                                                            0-486-27274-5




QUICK SKETCHING, Carl Cheek. A perfect introduction to the technique

of  “quick  sketching.”  Drawing  upon  an  artist’s  immediate  emotional

responses, this is an extremely effective means of capturing the essential form

and  features  of  a  subject.  More  than  100  black-and-white  illustrations

throughout. 48pp. 11 x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-46608-6RANCH  LIFE  AND  THE  HUNTING  TRAIL,  Theodore  Roosevelt.

Illustrated  by  Frederic  Remington.  Beautifully  illustrated  by  Remington,

Roosevelt’s  celebration  of  the  Old  West  recounts  his  adventures  in  the

Dakota  Badlands  of  the  1880s,  from  roundups  to  Indian  encounters  to

hunting bighorn sheep. 208pp. 6¼ x 9¼.

                                                                            0-486-47340-6

THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE, Stephen Crane. Amid the nightmarish

chaos of a Civil War battle, a young soldier discovers courage, humility, and,

perhaps, wisdom. Uncanny re-creation of actual combat. Enduring landmark

of American fiction. 112pp. x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-26465-3

RELATIVITY SIMPLY EXPLAINED, Martin Gardner. One of the subject’s

clearest, most entertaining introductions offers lucid explanations of special

and  general  theories  of  relativity,  gravity,  and  spacetime,  models  of  the

universe, and more. 100 illustrations. 224pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-29315-7

REMBRANDT  DRAWINGS:  116  Masterpieces  in  Original  Color,

Rembrandt van Rijn. This deluxe hardcover edition features drawings from

throughout  the  Dutch  master’s  prolific  career.  Informative  captions

accompany these beautifully reproduced landscapes, biblical vignettes, figure

studies, animal sketches, and portraits. 128pp. 8⅜ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-46149-1

THE ROAD NOT TAKEN AND OTHER POEMS, Robert Frost. A treasury

of  Frost’s  most  expressive  verse.  In  addition  to  the  title  poem:  “An  Old

Man’s  Winter  Night,”  “In  the  Home  Stretch,”  “Meeting  and  Passing,”

“Putting in the Seed,” many more. All complete and unabridged. 64pp. x

8¼.

                                                                            0-486-27550-7

ROMEO  AND  JULIET,  William  Shakespeare.  Tragic  tale  of  star-crossed

lovers, feuding families and timeless passion contains some of Shakespeare’s

most  beautiful  and  lyrical  love  poetry.  Complete,  unabridged  text  with

explanatory footnotes. 96pp. 

5%e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-27557-4SANDITON  AND  THE  WATSONS:  Austen’s  Unfinished  Novels,  Jane

Austen. Two tantalizing incomplete stories revisit Austen’s customary milieu

of courtship and venture into new territory, amid guests at a seaside resort.

Both are worth reading for pleasure and study. 112pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-45793-1

THE  SCARLET  LETTER,  Nathaniel  Hawthorne.  With  stark  power  and

emotional  depth,  Hawthorne’s  masterpiece  explores  sin,  guilt,  and

redemption  in  a  story  of  adultery  in  the  early  days  of  the  Massachusetts

Colony. 192pp. 

H5%e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-28048-9




THE  SEASONS  OF  AMERICA  PAST,  Eric  Sloane.  Seventy-five

illustrations  depict  cider  mills  and  presses,  sleds,  pumps,  stump-pulling

equipment, plows, and other elements of America’s rural heritage. A section

of old recipes and household hints adds additional color. 160pp. 8⅜ x 11.

                                                                            0-486-44220-9

SELECTED  CANTERBURY  TALES,  Geoffrey  Chaucer.  Delightful

collection includes the General Prologue plus three of the most popular tales:

“The Knight’s Tale,” “The Miller’s Prologue and Tale,” and “The Wife of

Bath’s Prologue and Tale.” In modern English. 144pp. 

 
                                                                            0-486-28241-4

SELECTED  POEMS,  Emily  Dickinson.  Over  100  best-known,  best-loved

poems by one of America’s foremost poets, reprinted from authoritative early

editions. No comparable edition at this price. Index of first lines. 64pp. x

8¼. 0-486-26466-1

SIDDHARTHA, Hermann Hesse. Classic novel that has inspired generations

of seekers. Blending Eastern mysticism and psychoanalysis, Hesse presents a

strikingly original view of man and culture and the arduous process of self-

discovery, reconciliation, harmony, and peace. 112pp. 

HMe x 8.
                                                                            0-486-40653-9SKETCHING OUTDOORS, Leonard Richmond. This guide offers beginners

step-by-step demonstrations of how to depict clouds, trees, buildings, and

other outdoor sights. Explanations of a variety of techniques include shading

and constructional drawing. 48pp. 11 x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-46922-0

SMALL HOUSES OF THE FORTIES: With Illustrations and Floor Plans,

Harold E. Group. 56 floor plans and elevations of houses that originally cost

less than $15,000 to build. Recommended by financial institutions of the era,

they range from Colonials to Cape Cods. 144pp. 8⅜ x 11.

                                                                          0-486-45598-X

SOME  CHINESE  GHOSTS,  Lafcadio  Hearn.  Rooted  in  ancient  Chinese

legends,  these  richly  atmospheric  supernatural  tales  are  recounted  by  an

expert  in  Oriental  lore.  Their  originality,  power,  and  literary  charm  will

captivate readers of all ages. 96pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-46306-0

SONGS FOR THE OPEN ROAD: Poems of Travel and Adventure, Edited

by The American Poetry & Literacy Project. More than 80 poems by 50

American  and  British  masters  celebrate  real  and  metaphorical  journeys.

Poems  by  Whitman,  Byron,  Millay,  Sandburg,  Langston  Hughes,  Emily

Dickinson, Robert Frost, Shelley, Tennyson, Yeats, many others. Note. 80pp.


5%e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-40646-6

SPOON RIVER ANTHOLOGY, Edgar Lee Masters. An American poetry

classic,  in  which  former  citizens  of  a  mythical  midwestern  town  speak

touchingly from the grave of the thwarted hopes and dreams of their lives.

144pp. 

                                                                            0-486-27275-3




STAR LORE: Myths, Legends, and Facts, William Tyler Olcott. Captivating

retellings of the origins and histories of ancient star groups include Pegasus,

Ursa  Major,  Pleiades,  signs  of  the  zodiac,  and  other  constellations.

“Classic.”—Sky & Telescope. 58 illustrations. 544pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                            0-486-43581-4THE STRANGE CASE OF DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE, Robert Louis

Stevenson. This intriguing novel, both fantasy thriller and moral allegory,

depicts the struggle of two opposing personalities—one essentially good, the

other evil—for the soul of one man. 64pp. 

5%e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-26688-5

SURVIVAL HANDBOOK: The Official U.S. Army Guide, Department of

the Army. This special edition of the Army field manual is geared toward

civilians. An essential companion for campers and all lovers of the outdoors,

it constitutes the most authoritative wilderness guide. 288pp. 

5%e X 8%.
                                                                          0-486-46184-X

A TALE OF TWO CITIES, Charles Dickens. Against the backdrop of the

French Revolution, Dickens unfolds his masterpiece of drama, adventure, and

romance about a man falsely accused of treason. Excitement and derring-do

in the shadow of the guillotine. 304pp. 

5% x 8%
                                                                            0-486-40651-2

TEN  PLAYS,  Anton  Chekhov. The  Sea  Gull,  Uncle  Vanya,  The  Three

Sisters,  The  Cherry  Orchard,  and  Ivanov,  plus  5  one-act  comedies: The

Anniversary,  An  Unwilling  Martyr,  The  Wedding,  The  Bear,  and The

Proposal. 336pp. 0-486-46560-8

5%e x 8%
THE FLYING INN, G. K. Chesterton. Hilarious romp in which pub owner

Humphrey Hump and friend take to the road in a donkey cart filled with rum

and cheese, inveighing against Prohibition and other “oppressive forms of

modernity.” 320pp. 5⅜ x 8½.

                                                                          0-486-41910-X




THIRTY YEARS THAT SHOOK PHYSICS: The Story of Quantum Theory,

George Gamow. Lucid, accessible introduction to the influential theory of

energy  and  matter  features  careful  explanations  of  Dirac’s  anti-particles,

Bohr’s  model  of  the  atom,  and  much  more.  Numerous  drawings.  1966

edition. 240pp. 5⅜ x 8½

                                                                          0-486-24895-X

TREASURE ISLAND, Robert Louis Stevenson. Classic adventure story of aperilous sea journey, a mutiny led by the infamous Long John Silver, and a

lethal scramble for buried treasure—seen through the eyes of cabin boy Jim

Hawkins. 160pp. 

e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-27559-0

THE TRIAL, Franz Kafka. Translated by David Wyllie. From its gripping

first  sentence  onward,  this  novel  exemplifies  the  term  “Kafkaesque.”  Its

darkly  humorous  narrative  recounts  a  bank  clerk’s  entrapment  in  a

bureaucratic maze, based on an undisclosed charge. 176pp.  x 8¼.

5%s
                                                                          0-486-47061-X

THE TURN OF THE SCREW, Henry James. Gripping ghost story by great

novelist  depicts  the  sinister  transformation  of  2  innocent  children  into

flagrant liars and hypocrites. An elegantly told tale of unspoken horror and

psychological terror. 96pp. 

                                                                            0-486-26684-2

UP  FROM  SLAVERY,  Booker  T.  Washington.  Washington  (1856-1915)

rose to become the most influential spokesman for African-Americans of his

day. In this eloquently written book, he describes events in a remarkable life

that  began  in  bondage  and  culminated  in  worldwide  recognition.  160pp. 


5%e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-28738-6

VICTORIAN  HOUSE  DESIGNS  IN  AUTHENTIC  FULL  COLOR:  75

Plates  from  the  “Scientific  American  -  Architects  and  Builders  Edition,”

1885-1894,  Edited  by  Blanche  Cirker.  Exquisitely  detailed,  exceptionally

handsome  designs  for  an  enormous  variety  of  attractive  city  dwellings,

spacious  suburban  and  country  homes,  charming  “cottages”  and  other

structures—all accompanied by perspective views and floor plans. 80pp. 9¼

x 12¼.

                                                                            0-486-29438-2

VILLETTE, Charlotte Brontë. Acclaimed by Virginia Woolf as “Brontë’s

finest novel,” this moving psychological study features a remarkably modern

heroine who abandons her native England for a new life as a schoolteacher in

Belgium. 480pp. x 8¼.

                                                                            0-486-45557-2THE VOYAGE OUT, Virginia Woolf. A moving depiction of the thrills and

confusion of youth, Woolf’s acclaimed first novel traces a shipboard journey

to South America for a captivating exploration of a woman’s growing self-

awareness. 288pp. 

                                                                            0-486-45005-8




WALDEN; OR, LIFE IN THE WOODS, Henry David Thoreau. Accounts of

Thoreau’s  daily  life  on  the  shores  of  Walden  Pond  outside  Concord,

Massachusetts, are interwoven with musings on the virtues of self-reliance

and individual freedom, on society, government, and other topics. 224pp. 


5%e x 8%
                                                                            0-486-28495-6

WILD PILGRIMAGE: A Novel in Woodcuts, Lynd Ward. Through startling

engravings shaded in black and red, Ward wordlessly tells the story of a man

trapped in an industrial world, struggling between the grim reality around

him and the fantasies his imagination creates. 112pp. 6⅛ x 9¼.

                                                                            0-486-46583-7

WILLY POGÁNY REDISCOVERED, Willy Pogány. Selected and Edited

by Jeff A. Menges. More than 100 color and black-and-white Art Nouveau—

style illustrations from fairy tales and adventure stories include scenes from

Wagner’s “Ring” cycle, The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, Gulliver’s Travels,

and Faust. 144pp. 8% x 11.

                                                                            0-486-47046-6




WOOLLY  THOUGHTS:  Unlock  Your  Creative  Genius  with  Modular

Knitting, Pat Ashforth and Steve Plummer. Here’s the revolutionary way to

knit—easy, fun, and foolproof! Beginners and experienced knitters need only

master a single stitch to create their own designs with patchwork squares.

More than 100 illustrations. 128pp. 6½ x 9¼.

                                                                            0-486-46084-3

WUTHERING HEIGHTS, Emily Brontë. Somber tale of consuming passionsand  vengeance—played  out  amid  the  lonely  English  moors—recounts  the

turbulent and tempestuous love story of Cathy and Heathcliff. Poignant and

compelling. 256pp. 

                                                                            0-486-29256-8THE TABLE TALK OF MARTIN LUTHER, Martin Luther. Edited with an

Introduction by Thomas S. Kepler. (0-486-44359-0)

THE GUIDE FOR THE PERPLEXED, Moses Maimonides. (0-486-20351-4)

HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY, Julian Marias. (0-486-21739-6)

THE KABBALAH UNVEILED, S. L. MacGregor Mathers. (0-486-45137-2)

PISTIS SOPHIA: THE GNOSTIC TRADITION OF MARY MAGDALENE,

JESUS, AND His DISCIPLES, G. R. S. Mead. (0-486-44064-8)

THE  ESSENTIAL  NIETZSCHE,  Friedrich  Nietzsche.  Edited  by  Heinrich

Mann. (0-486-45117-8)

REVELATIONS OF DIVINE LOVE, Julian of Norwich. (0-486-45244-1)

THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST, Nicolas Notovitch. Translated

by Virchand R. Gandhi. (0-486-46853-4)

AN INTRODUCTION TO EXISTENTIALISM, Robert G. Olson. (0-486-

20055-8)

THE MYSTICS OF SPAIN, E. Allison Peers. (0-486-42501-0)

ON  THE  AESTHETIC  EDUCATION  OF  MAN,  Friedrich  Schiller.

Translated with an Introduction by Reginald Snell. (0-486-43739-6)

THE  WORLD  AS  WILL  AND  REPRESENTATION,  VOL.  1,  Arthur

  Schopenhauer. (0-486-21761-2)

THE  WORLD  AS  WILL  AND  REPRESENTATION,  VOL.  2,  Arthur

  Schopenhauer. (0-486-21762-0)

MUHAMMAD’S  PEOPLE:  AN  ANTHOLOGY  OF  MUSLIM

  CIVILIZATION, Eric Schroeder. (0-486-42502-9)

THE QUEST OF THE HISTORICAL JESUS, Albert Schweitzer. Translated

by W. Montgomery. (0-486-44027-3)

ON CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE, St. Augustine. Translated by Rev. Professor

J. F. Shaw. (0-486-46918-2)

THE  RULE  OF  ST.  BENEDICT,  St.  Benedict.  Translated  with  an

Introduction by Cardinal Gasquet. (0-486-45796-6)

INTRODUCTION TO THE DEVOUT LIFE, St. Francis de Sales. Edited and

Translated by Allan Ross. (0-486-47168-3)ASCENT OF MOUNT CARMEL, St. John of the Cross. Translated by E.

Allison Peers. (0-486-46837-2)

THE GOSPEL IN BRIEF, Leo Tolstoy. Translated by Isabel Hapgood. (0-

  486-46811-9)

A CONFESSION, Leo Tolstoy. Translated by Aylmer Maude. (0-486-43851-

1)

THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN You, Leo Tolstoy (0-486-45138-0)

THE WAY OF A PILGRIM, Translated by Nina A. Toumanova. (0-486-

45597-1)

MYSTICISM: A STUDY IN THE NATURE AND DEVELOPMENT OF

  SPIRITUAL CONSCIOUSNESS, Evelyn Underhill. (0-486-42238-0)





See every Dover book in print at www.doverpublications.com1   Vide M. Lazerowitz, “The Principle of Verifiability,” Mind, 1937, PP.

372–8-


2    In The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, pp. 92—104.


3   Vide M. Lazerowitz, “Strong and Weak Verification,” Mind, 1939, pp.

202—13.


4   “Verification and Experience,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,

Vol. XXXVII; cf. also The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, pp. 80—4.


5   Vide I. Berlin, “Verifiability in Principle,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian

Society, Vol. XXXIX.


6   The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, pp. 240—1.


7      cf.  Bertrand  Russell, The  Problems  of  Philosophy,  p.  91:  “Every

proposition  which  we  can  understand  must  be  composed  wholly  of

constituents  with  which  we  are  acquainted.”  And,  if  I  understand  him

correctly, this is what Professor W. T. Stace has in mind when he speaks of a

“Principle of Observable Kinds.” Vide his “Positivism,” Mind, 1944. Stace

argues  that  the  principle  of  verification  “rests  upon”  the  principle  of

observable kinds, but this is a mistake. It is true that every statement that is

allowed to be meaningful by the principle of observable kinds is also allowed

to be meaningful by the principle of verification: but the converse does not

hold.


8   Both Dr. A. C. Ewing, “Meaninglessness,” Mind, 1937, pp. 347—64, and

Stace, op. cit., take it to be an empirical hypothesis.


9   e.g. by Professor C. D. Broad, “Are these Synthetic a priori Truths,”

Supplementary Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. XV.


10      This  contradicts  what  I  said  in  my  contribution  to  a  symposium  on

“Truth by Convention,” Analysis,  Vol.  4,  Nos.  2  and  3;  cf.  also  Norman

Malcolm, “Are Necessary Propositions really Verbal,” Mind, 1940, pp. 189

—203.11   Vide A. C. Ewing, “The Linguistic Theory of a priori Propositions,”

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1940; cf. also Professor G. E. Moore,

“A Reply to My Critics,” The Philosophy of G. E. Moore, pp. 575—6, and

Professor E. Nagel’s review of The Philosophy of G. E. Moore, Mind, 1944,

p. 64.


12   cf. Norman Malcolm, “The Nature of Entailment,” Mind, 1940, pp. 333

—47.


13   The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, p. 167; cf. also Professor G.

Ryle, “Unverifiability by Me,” Analysis, Vol. 4, No. 1.


14    The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, pp. 168—70.


15   My confidence in it has been somewhat increased by John Wisdom’s

interesting series of articles on “Other Minds,” Mind, 1940—3. But I am not

sure that this is the effect that he intended them to produce.


16   cf. Sir W. David Ross, The Foundations of Ethics, pp. 30—41.


17   I understand that this deficiency has been made good by C. L. Stevenson

in his book, Ethics and Language, but the book was published in America

and I have not yet been able to obtain it. There is a review of it by Austin

Duncan-Jones in Mind, October, 1945, and a good indication of Stevenson’s

line of argument is to be found in his articles on “The Emotive Meaning of

Ethical Terms,” Mind, 1937, “Ethical Judgements and Avoidability,” Mind,

1938, and “Persuasive Definitions,” Mind, 1938.


18   Mind, 1936, p. 358.


19   e.g. in his Introductory to Mathematical Philosophy, pp. 172—80.


20   In an article on “Russell’s Theory of Descriptions,” The Philosophy of

Bertrand Russell, vide especially pp. 179—89.


21   “Reply to Criticisms,” The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell, p. 690.


22   G. Ryle, Philosophical Arguments, Inaugural Lecture delivered before

the University of Oxford, 1945.23   Vide The Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, pp. 243—63; and R. B.

Braithwaite,  “Propositions  about  Material  Objects,” Proceedings  of  the

Aristotelian Society, Vol. XXXVIII.


24   G. E. Moore, “Is Existence a Predicate?” Supplementary Proceedings of

the Aristotelian Society, 1936. I have made use of the same illustration in my

paper on “Does Philosophy analyse Common Sense?” symposium with A. E.

Duncan-Jones, Supplementary Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1937.


25   I do not wish to imply that Moore himself was solely, or even primarily,

concerned  with  refuting  the  ontological  argument.  But  I  think  that  his

reasoning  does  achieve  this,  though  not  this  alone.  Similarly  Russell’s

“theory of descriptions” has other uses besides relieving us of “subsistent

entities,”


26   Vide “Does Philosophy analyse Common Sense?” and Duncan-Jones’

paper on the same subject, Supplementary Proceedings of the Aristotelian

Society, 1937; cf. also John Wisdom, “Metaphysics and Verification,” Mind,

1938, and “Philosophy, Anxiety and Novelty,” Mind, 1944.


27   I have put in the qualifying word “usually” because I think that some

empirical propositions, such as those that occur in histories of philosophy,

may  be  counted  as  philosophical.  And  philosophers  use  empirical

propositions as examples, to serve philosophical ends. But, in so far as they

are not merely historical, I think that the truths discoverable by philosophical

methods are analytic. At the same time I should add that the philosopher’s

business, as Professor Ryle has pointed out to me, is rather to “solve puzzles”

than to discover truths.


28   Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Preface.


29   Bradley, Appearance and Reality, 2nd ed., p. I.


30   This example has been used by Professor Schlick to illustrate the same

point.


31      A  remark  taken  at  random  from Appearance  and  Reality,  by  F.  H.Bradley.


32   e.g. M. Schlick, “Positivismus und Realismus,” Erkenntnis, Vol. I, 1930.

F.  Waismann,  “Logische  Analyse  des  Warscheinlichkeitsbegriffs,”

Erkenntnis, Vol. I, 1930.


33   e.g. M. Schlick, “Die Kausalität in der gegenwärtigen Physik,” Natur-

wissenschaft, Vol. 19, 1931.


34   This has been proposed by Karl Popper in his Logik der Forschung.


35   This is an over-simplified statement, which is not literally correct. I give

what I believe to be the correct formulation in the Introduction, p. 13.


36   In Chapter VIII.


37   Vide “Demonstration of the Impossibility of Metaphysics,” Mind, 1934,

P. 339.


38   Vide Chapter VIII.


                        2
39   Vide Chapter V.  Chapter IV.


40   Vide The Critique of Pure Reason, “Transcendental Dialectic,” Book II,

Chapter iii, section 4.


41      This  argument  is  well  stated  by  John  Wisdom, Interpretation  and

Analysis, pp. 62, 63.


42   Vide Was ist Metaphysik, by Heidegger: criticised by Rudolf Carnap in

his  “Uberwindung  der  Metaphysik  durch  logische  Analyse  der  Sprache,”

Erkenntnis, Vol. II, 1932.


43   For a discussion of this point, see also C. A. Mace, “Representation and

Expression,” Analysis,  Vol.  I,  Nor.  3;  and  “Metaphysics  and  Emotive

Language,” Analysis, Vol. II, Nos. 1 and 2.


44   Vide Chapter III and Chapter VIII.45   cf. J. M. Keynes, A Treatise on Probability, Part III.


46      Vide  G.  E.  Moore,  “A  Defence  of  Common  Sense,” Contemporary

Brutish Philosophy, Vol. II.


47   Vide A Treatise of Human Nature, Book I, Part III, section 15.


48   An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, section 7.


49      Carnap  has  stressed  this  point.  Where  we  speak  of  “linguistic”

propositions expressed in “factual” or “pseudo-factual” language he speaks of

“Pseudo-Objektsätze” or “quasi-syntaktische Sätze” as being expressed in the

“Inhalt-liche,” as opposed to the “Formale Redeweise.” Vide Logische Syntax

der Sprache , Part V.


50      cf.  my  article  “On  Particulars  and  Universals,” Proceedings  of  the

Aristotelian Society, 1933—4, pp. 54, 55.


51   cf. Rudolf Carnap, Logische Syntax der Sprache, Part V, 79B, and 84.


52   That this statement needs to be qualified is shown in the Introduction, pp.

24 ff.


53   Vide Principia Mathematica, Introduction, Chapter iii, and Introduction

to Mathematical Philisophy, Chapter xvi.


54   This is not quite accurate, vide Introduction, pp. 22-4.


55   This must not be taken to imply that all English-speaking people actually

employ a single, precise system of symbols. Vide pp. 70-1.


56   Chapter VII.


57   “The relative product of two relations R and S is the relation which

holds between x and z when there is an intermediate term y such that x has

the relation R to y and y has the relation S to z” Principia Mathematica,

Introduction, Chapter I.


58   See H. H. Price, Perception, p. 218.59   There is a ground for saying that the philosopher is always concerned

with an artificial language. For the conventions which we follow in our actual

usage of words are not altogether systematic and precise.


60   Thus if I wish to refute a philosophical opponent I do not argue about

people’s  linguistic  habits.  I  try  to  prove  that  his  definitions  involve  a

contradiction. Suppose, for example, that he is maintaining that “A is a free

agent” is equivalent to “A’s actions are uncaused.” Then I refute him by

getting him to admit that “A is a free agent” is entailed by “A is morally

responsible for his actions” whereas “A’s actions are uncaused” entails “A is

not morally responsible for his actions.”


61   Introduction to L. Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, p. 23.


62   Concerning logical paradoxes, see Russell and Whitehead, Principia

Mathematica,  Introduction,  Chapter  ii;  F.  P.  Ramsey, Foundations  of

Mathematics, pp. 1-63; and Lewis and Langford, Symbolic Logic, Chapter

xiii.


63   Vide Logische Syntax der Sprache, Parts I and II.


64   Critique of Pure Reason, 2nd ed., Introduction, section i.


65   Critique of Pure Reason, 2nd ed., Introduction, sections iv and v.


66   Vide Karl Menger, “Die Neue Logik,” Krise und Neuaufbau in den

Exakten  Wissenschaften,  pp.  94—6;  and  Lewis  and  Langford, Symbolic

Logic, Chapter v.


67      Vide  Lewis  and  Langford, Symbolic  Logic,  Chapter  vii,  for  an

elaboration of this point.


68   Vide Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, Chapter ii.


69   cf. H. Poincaré, La Science et l’Hypothèse, Part II, Chapter iii.


70   cf. M. Black, The Nature of Mathematics, p. 154.


71   This hypothesis is not mentioned in theCritique of Pure Reason, but wasmaintained by Kant at an earlier date.


72   Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, 3-031.


73   La Science et l’Hypothèse, Part I, Chapter i.


74   This was wrongly stated in previous editions as “true for n when it is true

for n + 1.”


75   cf. B. Russell’s Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, Chapter iii, p.

27.


76      cf.  Hans  Hahn,  “Logik,  Mathematik  und  Naturerkennen,”

Einheitswissenschaft, Heft II, p. 18. “Ein allwissendes Wesen braucht keine

Logik und keine Mathematik.”


77   For a criticism of this doctrine, see G. Ryle, “Are there propositions?”

Aristotelian Society Proceedings, 192—30.


78      cf.  F.  P.  Ramsey  on  “Facts  and  Propositions,” The  Foundations  of

Mathematics, pp. 142—3.


79   e.g. M. Schlick, “Über das Fundament der Erkenntnis,” Erkenntnis, Band

IV, Heft II; and “Facts and Propositions,” Analysis, Vol. II, No. 5; and B. von

Juhos, “Empiricism and Physicalism,” Analysis, Vol. II, No. 6.


80   See also Rudolf Carnap, “Über Protokolsätze,” Erkenntnis, Band III;

Otto  Neurath,  “Protokolsätze,” Erkenntnis,  Band  III;  and  “Radikaler

Physikalismus und ‘Wirkliche Welt,’ ” Erkenntnis, Band IV, Heft V; and

Carl Hempel, “On the Logical Positivists’ Theory of Truth,” Analysis, Vol.

II, No. 4.


81   This question is reviewed in the Introduction, pp. 10-11.


82   Of course those who believe in “ostensive” propositions do not maintain

that such a proposition as “This is white” is valid in virtue of its form alone.

What they assert is that I am entitled to regard the proposition “This is white”

as objectively certain when I am actually experiencing a white sense-content.

But can it really be the case that they mean to assert no more than the trivialtautology that when I am seeing something white, then I am seeing something

white? See following footnote.


83      It  has  subsequently  occurred  to  me  that  the  doctrine  of  ostensive

propositions may be due to the confusion of the proposition “It is certain that

p implies p”—e.g. “It is certain that if I am in pain, then I am in pain”—

which is a tautology, with the proposition “p implies that (p is certain)”—e.g.

“If I am in pain, then the proposition ‘I am in pain’ is certain,” which is, in

general, false. Vide my article on “The Criterion of Truth,” Analysis, Vol. III,

Nos. 1 and 2.


84      For  an  elaboration  of  this  view,  see  H.  Poincaré, La  Science  et

l’Hypothèse.


85   It will be seen that even “descriptions of past experience” are in a sense

predictive  since  they  function  as  “rules  for  the  anticipation  of  future

experience.” See the end of this chapter for an elaboration of this point.


86   La Science et l’Hypothèse, Part IV, Chapter ix, p. 170.


87   This definition is not, of course, intended to apply to the mathematical

usage of the term “probability.”


88   The implications of this statement may be misleading, vide Introduction,

p. 19.


89   The case for a pragmatic treatment of history, in our sense, is well put by

C. L. Lewis in Mind and the World Order, pp. 150—3.


90      The  argument  that  follows  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the

Introduction, pp. 20-2.


91   cf. Philosophical Studies, “The Nature of Moral Philosophy.”


92   This point was suggested to me by Professor H. H. Price.


93      This  is  not  the  only  criterion.  Vide The  Foundations  of  Empirical

Knowledge, pp. 142-4.94   For a definition of a symmetrical transitive relation, see Chapter III, p.

66.


95   cf. Bertrand Russell, Analysis of Mind, Lecture IX.


96   Treatise of Human Nature, Book I, Part IV, section vi.


97   Treatise of Human Nature, Appendix.


98      This  is  not  true  if  one  adopts  a  psychological  criterion  of  personal

identity.


99   cf. L. S. Stebbing, Logical Positivism and Analysis.


100   cf. Rudolf Carnap, “Scheinprobleme in der Philosophie: das Fremd-

psychische  und  der  Realismusstreit,”  and  “Psychologie  in  physikalische

Sprache,” Erkenntnis, Vol. III, 1932.


101   This question is referred to in the Introduction, pp. 19-20.


102   This argument is used by Professor L. S. Stebbing in her article on

“Communication  and  Verification,” Supplementary  Proceedings  of  the

Aristotelian Society, 1934.


103      See  Hans  Hahn,  “Logik,  Mathematik  und  Naturerkennen,”

Einheitswissenschaft, Heft II, for a discussion of this question.


104   Vide G. E. Moore, Philosophical Studies, “The Refutation of Idealism.”


105   This point is made also by Rudolf Carnap in Der logische Aufbau der

Welt, section 65.


106   Vide The First Dialogue between Hylas and Philonous.


107   Philosophical Studies, “The Conception of Reality.”


108   cf. W. Stace, “The Refutation of Realism,” Mind, 1934.


109   The passage which follows, down to the end of the paragraph, wasincorporated also in a paper on “Internal Relations” which was read at the

1935  joint  session  of  Mind  Association  and  Aristotelian  Society.  See  the

Supplementary Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1935.


110   An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, section iv.


111   What is required to put an end to this is the fulfilment of Leibnitz’s

hope  for  a  “Characteristica  Universalis.”  Cf.  Otto  Neurath,

“Einheitswissenschaft  und  Psychologie,” Einheitswissenschaft,  Heft  I,  and

“Einheit der Wissenschaft als Aufgabe,” Erkenntnis, Band V, Heft I. Also

Rudolf  Carnap,  “Die  physikalische  Sprache  als  Universalsprache  der

Wissenschaft,” Erkenntnis, Vol. II, 1932, and English translation, The Unity

of  Science,  and  “Die  Aufgabe  der  Wissenschafts-logik,”

Einheitswissenschaft, Heft III.