
ORISON SWETT MARDEN 
THE SECRET OF ACHIEVEMENT 
® ORISON SWETT MARDEN, 1898 Copyright to the TIMELESS WISDOM COLLECTION: ® 2013 Business and Leadership Publishing, 
All rights Reserved No part of this book could be condensed or reproduced without the permit of the author. Published by Business and Leadership Publishing, Los Angeles, California, United States of 
America. 
BANDLPUBLISHERS@GMAIL.COM 
Orison Swett Marden is considered a forward thinker and was way ahead of its time. However, please remember that this book is a product of its time and do not reflect the same views on race, gender, sexuality, ethnicity, and interpersonal relations as it would ifitwaswrittentoday. 
Most references to “Man” must be read understanding “Man” as human being, both male and female, as the author intended from the beginning (as a writer of the new thought movement, he fought fortheequalityofwomen). 
Although the wisdom they impart is ageless, parents might wish to discuss with their children how some things have changed since thisbookwaswritten. 
The author uses examples with amounts in US$of the time. 
For the books written between 1895 and 1917, one US dollar is equivalent to around US$25 of 2013. 

With World War I came huge inflation, and by 1920, a dollar wasworth $11.63 of today (less than half than before theWar). 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR ORISON SWETT MARDEN 
BorninNewEnglandin1850,Mardenhadadifficultinfancy,as both his parents died when he was a child. Shuttled from one guardiantoanother,heworkedasa “hiredboy” toearnhiskeep. 
Inspired by an early self-help book by the Scottish author Samuel Smiles, he set out to improve himself and his life circumstances. 
He attended Boston University, where he graduated in 1871, and AndoverTheologicalSeminary. 
He later earned an M.D. in 1881 and an LL.B. degree in 1882, bothinHarvard. 
Then,hestudiedattheBostonSchoolofOratory. 
During his college days he worked at catering and hotel management and was so successful that he had $20,000 (around $500.000 in today’s dollars) in capital when he finished his formal training. 
He bought a property in Rhode Island and developed a resort area. 
During the 1890’s Financial Depression, he lost his hotel. He moved to Chicago, where he worked as hotel manager during the World'sFairof1893. 
ThenhewentbacktoBostonandstartedoveragain. 
He never accepted defeat. On the contrary, the hard times 
inspired him to put together his ideas -particularly concerning optimism-, in a first book, Pushing to the Front, published in 1894, onlytwoyearsafterhehadlosteverything. 
Itbecameanimmediatesuccess,a true best seller ofit time,with phenomenalcirculation. 
He followed this with over 60 books and booklets mostly on the subjects of success, the cultivation of will-power, and positive thinking; but he also wrote on health, fitness and aging well, sexual education,andwomenequality. 
Besides Samuel Smiles, Marden cites as influences on his thinkingtheworksofOliverWendellHolmes,Jr. andRalphWaldo Emerson, forerunners of what, by the 1890s, was called the New Thought Movement. In 1897 he founded Success Magazine, and later became a regular contributor to Elizabeth Towne's New Thoughtmagazine Nautilus during the first two decades of the 20th century. 
Marden, as other contemporary writers of New Thought (like William Walker Atkinson, Wallace Wattles, and Elizabeth and William Towne) believed that our thoughts influence our lives and our life circumstances. They believed that “thoughts are things”, and because of the Law of Attraction (like attracts like), we must beverycarefulwithwhatandhowwethink. 
He said, “We make the world we live in and shape our own environmentwithourthoughts.” 

Yet although he is best known for his books on financial success, he always emphasized that this would come as a result of cultivating one's personal development: “The golden opportunity you are seeking is in yourself. It is not in your environment; it is notinluckorchance,orthehelpofothers;itisinyourselfalone.” 
His book titles express eloquently this outlook of cheerful optimismandconfidence. 
He averaged two books a year, from Pushing to the Front in 1894,tohislastin1924,whenhediedattheageof74. 
He had some two million words in as yet unpublished manuscripts. 

Over 50 of his books have been published as part of our Timeless Wisdom collection. You can find references on him and otherauthorsattheendofthebook. 



PREFACE TO THE TIMELESS WISDOM COLLECTION 
King Solomon says in Proverbs that there is nothing new under thesun. 
For thousands of years, life has been teaching us the same lessons over and over. Through war and peace; through rags and riches; through stories of hope and of despair; through tragedies andfailurethatendintriumphandsuccess… 
The lessons are simple, as simple are the values that originate them: Courage, Perseverance, Faith, Love, Truthfulness, Decision, GoodStewardship,Happiness… 
Also, be extremely careful with what you think and how you think it. “As a man thinks, so is his life”, says the Bible. Like attracts like. Fear, Worry and Hate attract more fear, more worry and more hate, in all its manifestations. Positive thinking attracts positivethings. 
Countless sages of the ages have tried to convey these messages andlessonsindifferentwaysandformulas. 
From Pythagoras to Plato; from Dante, to Da Vinci and Goethe; from Bacon to Shakespeare; from Emerson to Prentice Mulford; from Joan D’Arc to Helen Keller; from Ben Franklin to Abraham Lincoln… But we just keep ignoring them, and making the same mistakes… 
In this series, we present you the men and women of New Thought, whose lives were committed to enlighten the world with thewisdomoftheages. 
William Walker Atkinson, Orison Swett Marden, Napoleon Hill, Dale Carnegie, Charles A. Haanel, Dale Carnegie, Wallace Wattles, Bruce Maclelland, Christian D Larson, Ernest Holmes, 
Ralph Waldo Trine, Elizabeth Towne, Henry Wood, Neville Goddard, Charles Fillmore, Emile Coué and a few others that we feature in our collection, are considered the masters of self-development and positive thinking, and the promoters of New Thought, a movement that came very much to life again with the Millennium. 
We also round our collection with theosophists as Annie Besant, William Judge and Charles Leadbeater; economists as John Maynard Keynes; philosophers as Bertrand Russell or J.W.Dunne; Industrialists as Henry Ford, Andrew Carnegie and Charles Schwab, Psychologists as Isador Coriat and Carl Jung, and of course, classics of literature as Ernest Hemingway, William Faulkner, H. G. Wells, George Orwell, Aldous Huxley or C.S. Lewis. 

In over 300 books these writers brilliantly captured the essence of life, success, and the traditions of the East and the West, becoming one of the best collections in personal and mind-development in existence. These books are books for enlightenment... They will provide the seeker –the one who is readyandispayingattention-,someofthedeepestanswersoflife. 
Mauricio 
Chaves-Mesén 

BestSellingauthorof ‘‘12 
Laws 
of 
Great 
Entrepreneurs’ 
and 
the 
fiction 
series 
“The 
Knights 
of 
Nostradamus” 


ABOUT THIS BOOK 
The Secret of Achievement is one of the earliest works of Marden, written onlyfouryearsaftertheincrediblesuccessof Pushing to the Front. 
Courage, Self Control, Good Habits, Decision and Tenacity, are some of the traits of a person that Marden analyzes in this book, which are what he calls the “secrets” togetahead inlife. 


CONTENTS 
PREFACE 
MORALSUNSHINE 
BLESSEDBEDRUDGERY. 
HONESTY 
AS 
PRINCIPLEANDASPOLICY 
HABIT 
—THESERVANT, 
—THEMASTER 
TRIFLES 
COURAGE 
SELF-CONTROL 
THE 
SCHOOLOFLIFE 
BEINGANDSEEMING 

DECIDE 
TENACITY 
OF 
PURPOSE 
THEARTOFKEEPING 
WELL 
PURITYIS 
POWER 
AHOME 
OF 
MYOWN 

TITLES 
AND 
AUTHORSTIMELESSWISDOM 
COLLECTION 

PREFACE 
The ancient Romans placed the busts and statues of heroes in their Houses, in order that their children might constantly have illustrious Examples before them, and thus learn to imitate the virtues that make men heroic. 
The object of this volume is to hold up to youth and those of all ages ideals of noble character, to illustrate the qualities essential to lofty achievement; to stimulate, encourage, and inspire them to be and to do something in the world; to teach them how to acquire practical power, and howtosucceed inlife. 
"The young," says Timothy Titcomb, "have been preached to, lectured to, taught,exhorted, advised. They haveseldombeentalkedto." 
The author has endeavored to talk to his readers; has tried by means of stirring examples to fill them with fresh incentives to earnest, useful living, 
— to spur the sluggish to greater activity. He not only gives stories of men and women who have done something of worth or note, but aims to point out the secret of their achievement; to show the cause and give an analysis of their successes and failures; to explain why such and such a man was great, 
—whatspecialtraitsledtohissuccess, —whatidealsinspiredhim. The book is intended to show that the secret of every great success has been indomitable resolution and earnest application; to point out how small and mean and common most lives are, in comparison with what they might be. It teaches youth how to meet life, to dare to live in accordance with a noble creed, assuring them that all things serve a brave soul; and that the worldalwayslistenstothemanthathas awill. It points out to them how to make stepping stones of obstacles, and encouragesthemtobelievethattheycando whatothershave done. It aims to give advice in the choice of an occupation or profession; to 
encourage anyone who feels that he is now the square peg in the round hole and a comparative failure to find his place in life, and to show him how he may utilize his talents; to help everyone to find a purpose and to make his life meet that purpose; to show him that, if he is out of his sphere, he is doomed to perpetual inferiority and disappointment, and must get his living by his weaknessinsteadof byhisstrength. 
The book aims to furnish encouragement and cheer for those who, even late in life, are anxious to make up, by self-instruction, for the deficiency of a neglected education, and to become larger, broader, truer, and nobler men and women. 
With Governor Russell, the book urges the youth to make a living; but to remember that there is one thing better than making a living, — making a life. 
AmericaandtheTwentieth Century! 
These words, only other names for Opportunity, are enough to stir every ambitious youth to noble endeavor, and to arouse the sleeping aspirations of thedullestminds. 

1 MORAL SUNSHINE 

Thereis noreallifebutcheerfullife.—Addison 

bones.—Solomon 

AgnesStrickland 

Commandments.—H. W. Shaw 

Asunnydisposition istheverysoulofsuccess.—Mathews. 

Thetwo noblestthings aresweetnessandlight.—Swift. 

And 'tis thatcrownsawelcome.—Massinger 

Amerry heart isacontinualfeasttoothersbesidesitself.—C. Buxton 

Seneca 

‘Whatisanoptimist,father?’ asked afarmer's boy 
"Well, John," replied his father, "you know I can't give ye the dictionary meanin' of that word any more'n I can of a great many others. But I've got a kind of an idee what it means. Probably you don't remember your Uncle 
Henry; but I guess if there ever was an optimist, he was one. Things was always comin' out right with Henry, and especially anything hard that he had todo;itwa'n'tgoin'tobehard, —'twasjestkindofsolid-pleasant. 
"Takehoein' corn, now. Ifanything kind of took the tucker outof me 'twas hoein' corn in the hot sun. But in the field, 'long about the time I begun to lag back a little, Henry, he'd look up an' say:— "Good, Jim! When we get these two rows hoed, an' eighteen more, the piece'll be half done!' An' he'd say it in such a kind of a cheerful way that I couldn't 'a' ben any more tickled if the piecehad been alldone,— an'therestwouldgolight enough. 
"But the worst thing we had to do — hoein' corn was a picnic to it — was pickin' stones. No end to that on our old farm, if we wanted to raise anything. When we wa'n't hurried and pressed at somethin' else, there was always pickin' stones to do; and there wa'n't a plowin' but what brought a fresh crop ofstonestothetop,an'seemsasif the pickin' all hadto bedoneoveragain. 
"Well, sir, you'd 'a' thought, to hear Henry, that there wa'n't any fun in the world like pickin' stone. He looked at it in a different way from anybody I ever see. Once, when the corn was all hoed, and the grass wa'n't fit to cut yet, an' I'd got all laid out to go fishin', and father he up and set us to picking stones up on the west piece, an' I was about ready to cry, Henry, he says: — "Come on, Jim. I know where there's lots of nuggets!' "An' what do you s'pose, now?” That boy had a kind of a game that that there field was what he calledaplassermining field; andhegotmeintoit, andIcould 'a'swornIwas inCalifornyall day —Ihadsuchagoodtime. 
Only, says Henry, after we'd got through the day's work, 'the way you get rich with these nuggets is to get rid of 'em, instead of to get 'em.' "That somehow didn't strike my fancy, but we'd had play instead of work, anyway, and a great lot of stones had been rooted out of that field. "An', as I said before, I can't give ye any dictionary definition of 'optimism'; but if your Uncle Henrywa'n'tanoptimist,Idon'tknowwhatoneis." 
"Howoldareyou,Sambo?" saidagentleman toa black man. 
"Howold,massa?" replied him. 
"If you reckon by the years, sah, I'se twenty-five; but if you goes by the funI'se 'ad,IguessI'seahunderd." 
The late Charles A. Dana fairly bubbled over with the enjoyment of his work, and was, up to his last illness, at his office every day. A cabinet officer once said to him: — "Well, Mr. Dana, I don't see how you stand this infernal grind." 
"Grind!" said Mr. Dana. "You never were more mistaken. I have nothing but fun." As with Roosevelt, "bully " was the favorite word with him, a word used only to express uncommon pleasure, such as had been afforded by a trip abroad or a run to Cuba or Mexico, or by a perusal of something especially pleasing inthe "Sun's"columns. 
"You'relettingyourself growold," he said oncetoa decidedly decrepit old man. "Do you read novels, and play billiards, and walk a great deal?" "No, no, no," said the old man, sadly. "I do," said Mr. Dana, with the exuberance ofachild. "Ihavefunfrommorningtillnight." 
"Look on the bright side," said a young man to a friend who was discontented and melancholy. "But there is no bright side," was the doleful reply. "Verywell —thenpolish upthedarkone." 
"The world would be better and brighter," says Sir John Lubbock, " if people were taught the duty of being happy, as well as the happiness of doing our duty. To be happy ourselves is a most effectual contribution to the happinessofothers." 
"I don't know what to do," cries the transformed Scrooge, laughing and crying in the same breath; "I am as light as a feather, I am as happy as an angel,Iamasmerryasaschoolboy,Iamasgiddyasadrunkenman. 
A merry Christmas to everybody! A happy New Year to all the world! Halloa, there! Whoop! Halloa!" David Coombe, in his old English cobbler's shop, said dolefully, "It is the darkest hole that ever I saw; never a bit of sun comes in this place, summer or winter." A vision came to the dozing cobbler, inangelform, saying: 
"I will tell you how to set a trap for a sunbeam. It must be bright and pure, baited with Energy, Perseverance, Industry, Charity, Faith, Hope and Content. Do this, David Coombe, and you will never say again that no sunbeam gilds your dwelling, or gladdens your declining days." The first step David took was to clean the dust and dirt of years from the window-panes of his cobbler's shop, Then the sunbeams came in, a whole family of them; and theycameto stay. 
Have you ever read the story of Billy Bray? He was a most remarkable and original character. The dominating characteristic of his religion was its joyousness. Some people did not like his exuberance of spirit; and they told him that, if he did not cease to praise God so much in the meetings, they would shut him up in a barrel. "Then," said Billy, "I'll praisethe Lordthrough thebunghole." 
Of Lord Holland's sunshiny face Rogers said, "He always comes to breakfastlike amanuponwhomsomesuddengoodfortunehasfallen." 
"Many years ago," says Oliver Wendell Holmes, "in walking among the gravesatMountAuburn, I cameupon aplain, uprightmarbleslabwhichbore an epitaph of only four words, but to my mind they meant more than any of the labored inscriptions on the surrounding monuments, —' She was so pleasant,' 
That was all, and it was enough. That one note revealed the music of a life of which I knew and asked nothing more." She was — "A happy soul that all thewayToheaven hadmadeasummer day." 
Miss Cheerful cannot be called pretty. Seeing her for the first time, one cannot help thinking, even if he does not say it, "What a plain face!" Yet her friendsneverthinkofit. 
The Juniors at Sunday-school, who love her as their superintendent, never think of it. Farthest of all is the thought from those in the home that is wonderfullybrightened byher presence. 
In a group picture of a family, Miss Cheerful's face is seen among the rest. Did I say she is plain? In this picture she fairly outshines them all. Why? Just becauseshe isherself. SheisMissCheerful. 
The little girl bade " Good-morning" to the sun for waking her up, and her birdie; then she asked her mother's permission, and softly, reverently, gladly, bade "Good-morning to God," — and why should she not? There is ever sunshine somewhere; and the brave man will go on his way rejoicing, content to look forward if tinder a cloud, not bating one jot of heart or hope if for a moment cast down; honoring his occupation, whatever it may be; rendering even rags respectable by the way he wears them; and not only being happy himself,butcausingthehappinessofothers. 
"Give us, therefore, oh! give us " — let us cry with Carlyle, —•" the man who sings at his work! He will do more in the same time, —he will do it better, —hewillperseverelonger. 
One is scarcely sensible of fatigue whilst he marches to music. The very stars are said to make harmony as they revolve in their spheres. Wondrous is the strength of cheerfulness, altogether past calculation its powers of endurance. 
Efforts, to be permanently useful, must be uniformly joyous, — a spirit all sunshine,gracefulfrom verygladness, beautifulbecausebright." 
"I live in a constant endeavor to fence against the infirmities of ill-health and other evils by mirth," said Sterne; " I am persuaded that every time a man smiles, — but much more so when he laughs, — it adds something to his fragment of life." Curran's ruling passion was his joke. In his last illness, his physician observing in the morning that he seemed to cough with more difficulty, he answered, "That is rather surprising, as I have been practising allnight." Cheerfulpeoplelive longinourmemory. 
We remember joy more readily than sorrow, and always look back with tenderness onthebrave andcheerful. 
"I resolved that, like the sun, so long as my day lasted, I would look on the brightsideof everything," saidHood. 
In a mission congregation in Jamaica, a collection was to be taken for missionary purposes. One of the brethren was appointed to preside; and resolutions were adoptedasfollows: 
"(1)Resolved,That we willallgive. 
(2)Resolved,That we willgiveasthe Lordhas prospered us. 
(3)Resolved,That we willgivecheerfully." Then the contribution began, each person, according to custom, walking up to deposit his gift under the eye of the presiding officer. One of the most well-to-do members hung back until he was painfully noticeable; and when he at length deposited his gift, the brother at the table remarked, "Dat is 'cordin'todefustresolushun, but not 'cordin'tode second." 
The member retired angrily to his seat, taking back his money; but conscience or pride kept working, till he came back and doubled his contribution,with acrabbed, "Takedat,den." 
The brother at the table again spoke, " Dat may be 'cordin' to de fust and second resolushuns, but it isn't 'cordin' to de third." The giver, after a little, accepted the rebuke, and came up a third time with a still larger gift and a good-natured face. Then the faithful president expressed his gratification thus, "Dat's'cordin'toallde resolushuns." 
"There was a little potted rose-bush in a sick-room which I visited," said Rev. J. R. Miller. "It stood in the window. One day I noticed that the one rose on the bush was looking toward the light. I referred to it; and the sick woman said that her daughter had turned the rose round several times toward the darkness of the room, but that each time the little flower had twisted itself back, until again its face was toward the light. It would not look into the darkness. The rose taught me a lesson — never to allow myself to look toward any gloom, but instantly to turn from it. We should train ourselves to turn from all shadows and discouragements. There is always a bright side, and we should find it. Discouragement is full of danger. It weakens and hurts thelife." 
When asked what the weather would be on the morrow, the Shepherd of Salisbury Plain replied that it would be just what he preferred; and, on further inquiry as to how that could be, answered, " Because it will be such weather asshall pleaseGod, andwhatever pleases Himalwayspleasesme." 
Enjoyment of life is independent of the thermometer, if we determine it shallbe. Sunshinewithin more thancompensates for itsabsence without. 
"I noticed," said Franklin, "a mechanic, among a number of others, at work on a house a little way from my office, who always appeared to be in a merry humor; he had a kind word and smile for everyone he met. Let the day be ever so cold, gloomy, or sunless, a happy smile danced on his cheerful countenance. Meeting him one morning, I asked him to tell me the secret of hisconstantflowofspirits." 
'Itisno secret,doctor,' hereplied. 'I havegot one of the best ofwives;and, when I go to work, she always has a kind word of encouragement for me; and, when I go home, she meets me with a smile and a kiss; and then tea is sure to be ready, and she has done so many little things through the day to please me, that I cannot find it in my heart to speak an unkind word to anybody.'" 
"I see our brother, who has just sat down, lives on Grumbling Street," said a keen-witted Yorkshireman. "I lived there myself for some time, and never enjoyed good health. The air was bad, the house bad, the water bad; the birds never came and sang in the street; and I was gloomy and sad enough. But I ' flitted.' I got into Thanksgiving Avenue; and ever since then I have had good health, and so have my family. The air is pure, the house good; the sun shines onitallday;thebirdsarealwayssinging;andIamhappyas I canlive. 
Now, I recommend our brother to 'flit.' There are plenty of houses to let on Thanksgiving Avenue; and I am sure he will find himself a new man if he willonlycome;andIshallberight gladtohave himforaneighbor." 
"There is a chap out in Ohio," said President Lincoln, "who has been writing a series of letters for the newspapers over the signature of Petroleum 
V. Nasby. Some one sent me a pamphlet collection of them the other day. I am going to write 'Petroleum' to come down here, and I intend to tell him, if hewillcommunicatehistalenttome,Iwill swap placeswith him." 
In a corner of his desk, Lincoln kept a copy of the latest humorous work; and it was frequently his habit, when fatigued, annoyed, or depressed, to take this up, and read a chapter with great relief. Cheerful people, who look on the bright side of the picture, and who are ever ready to snatch victory from defeat, are always popular; they are not only happy in themselves, but the cause of happiness to others. In London there was no sunshine at all in December, 1884, in January, 1885, or in December, 1890. Two consecutive months London was without any sunshine. How many lives have been years without sunshine! The fogs of discontent, of anxiety and care, of fretting and stewing, of ceaseless anxiety, of unhappy disposition, of irritating surroundings, shut out the sunlight of happiness from many a life. There is inestimable blessing in a cheerful spirit. When the soul throws its windows wide open, letting in the sunshine, and presenting to all who see it the evidence of its gladness, it is not only happy, but it has an unspeakable power ofdoinggood. Toalltheother beatitudes maybeadded, "Blessedarethe joy-makers." 
"A merry heart doeth good like a medicine." If we hug misery to ourselves, by unerring law the tides of weakening, unhappy thought set toward us, flow into our being, rising higher and higher until we are submerged. For many years a poor blind peddler of needles and threads, buttons and sewing-room supplies, went about the streets of Boston from house to house. Dr. Savage used to pity this man very much, and once ventured to talk with him about his condition. He was utterly amazed to find that the man was perfectly happy. He said that he had a faithful wife, and a business by which he earned sufficient for his wants; and, if he were to complainof his lot,heshould feelmeanand contemptible. 
Jay Cooke, many times a millionaire at the age of fifty-one, at fifty-two practically penniless, went to work again and built another fortune. The last of his three thousand creditors was paid, and the promise of the great financier was fulfilled. To a visitor who once asked him how he regained his fortune, Mr.Cooke replied: "That is simple enough; by never changing the temperament I derived from my father and mother. From my earliest experience in life I have always been of a hopeful temperament, never living in a cloud; I have always had a reasonable philosophy to think that men and times are better than harsh criticism would suppose. I believed that this American world of ours is full of wealth, and that it is only necessary to go to work and find it. That is the secret of my success in life. Always look on the sunnyside." 
If you dislike your position, complain to no one, least of all to your employer. Fill the place as it was never filled before. Crowd it to overflowing. Make yourself too competent for it. Show that you are abundantly worthy of better things. Express yourself in this manner as freely asyouplease,foritistheonlyway thatwillcount. 
Form the habit early in life of leaving your business at the store, or wherever you may be employed. Never carry it home to mar the peace of your family; if you do, you will soon drive out the sunshine. It is men like Philip Armour, who shed care like water from a duck's back, who turn the key on business when they leave the store, that are happy. Everlastingly hugging the burden of our business everywhere disappoints and disgusts our friends. 
Constant contemplation of trouble stamps itself upon the face. You are smaller, meaner, stingier, and more disagreeable for all the misery you have carriedhome. 
And it never advanced your business one inch; it has retarded it by undermining your health, and losing friends and customers for you. Ruskin says, "God gives us always strength enough, and sense enough, for everything hewants ustodo." 
Walter Scott, who wrote "Give me an honest laugher," was one of the happiest men in the world. He had a kind word and a pleasant smile for everyone, andeverybodylovedhim. 
"You doubtless remember, Brother Henry," said a college classmate of Henry Ward Beecher, "how you used to vex the righteous soul of Brother Casswell, the sober member of our class, by the indulgence of your mirthfulness." 
"Yes, yes," he replied; "and Casswell is dead and I am alive, and that is just the difference between our theories." True Christianity is cheerful. Christ taught no long-faced, gloomy theology; he taught the gospel of gladness and good cheer. His doc trines were touched with the sunlight, and drew lessons from the flowers of the field. The birds of the air, the beasts of the fields, and happy,romping childrenareinthem. Truepietyisascheerfulas the day. 
"Ifindnonsensesingularlyrefreshing," said Talleyrand. "Take life too seriously, and what is it worth?" asks Goethe. "If the morning wake us to no new joys, if the evening bring us not the hope of new pleasures, is it worthwhile to dress and undress? Does the sun shine on me today that I may reflect on yesterday? — that I may endeavor to foresee and to control what can neither be foreseen nor controlled — the destiny of tomorrow?" The faculty of laughter was given us to serve a wise purpose. It is nature's device for exercising the internal organs, and giving us pleasure at the same time. Laughing begins in the lungs and diaphragm, setting the liver, stomach, and other internal organs into quick vibration. The heart beats faster, sends the blood bounding through the body, increases the respiration, and gives warmth and glow to the whole system. Laughter brightens the eye, expands the chest, and tends to restore that exquisite poise or balance which we call health, and which results from the harmonious action of all the functions of thebody. A jolly physician is often better than all his pills. "The most completely lost of all days," said Chamfort, "is the one in which we have not laughed." Hume found in an old manuscript of King Edward II. of England, an item: " 
Acrown, for making the king laugh." Humor was Lincoln's life-preserver, as it has been to thousands of others. "If it were not for this occasional vent," he usedtosay, "I should die." 
Emerson's smile wasaperpetualbenediction uponallwhoknewhim. 
Alwayslaughwhenyou can;it isacheap medicine. 
You there, you on the verge of despair, sit down, take a pen, and write off a list of your sorrows and misfortunes; and follow it with a faithful inventory of what you have left on the side of possible happiness, your faculties, your possessions, your friends and relatives, your acquirements, your tastes, your healthfulactivities, yourprobability oflife,yourreason ableexpectations,not forgetting your duties to others and the gratification their fulfillment will give. Then we arereadyto adjustthe account. 
"Courage, ami, le diable est mort; Courage, friend, the Devil is dead!" was Denys' constant countersign, which he would give to everybody. "They don't understand it," he would say, "but it wakes them up. I carry the good news from city to city, to uplift men's hearts." Once he came across a child whohad broken a pitcher. "Courage, ami, le diable est mort!" said he, which was such cheering news that she ceased crying, and ran home to tell it to her grandma. 
The San Francisco " Argonaut " says that a woman in Milpitas, a victim of almost crushing sorrows, despondency, indigestion, insomnia, and kindred ills, determined to throw off the gloom which was making life a burden in and about her, and establish a rule that she would laugh at least three times a day whetheroccasionpresentedornot;soshetrainedherself to laugh heartily at the least provocation, and would retire to her room and make merry by herself. She is now in excellent health and buoyant spirits, her home has become a sunny, cheerful abode, and her husband and children have become greatly affected by her mirthfulness, and now they all are healthy and happy. In western New York there resided a physician who was known as the "Laughing Doctor." Dr. Burdick was always full of smiles, presenting the happiest kind of a face; and it is said that his good humor was contagious, and that his presence and his cheerful, hopeful advice were all that were necessary with his patients; he dealt sparingly in drugs, and still was very successful. 
A man in a neighboring city was given up to die; his family was sent for and hadgathered at the bedside; when one called to see him who assured him smilinglythathewas all right, would soonbe well, and talked in such a strain that the sick man was forced to laugh; and the effort so roused his energies and hissystem that herallied,andwas,indeed, soonwell again. 
Emerson says, "Do not hang a dismal picture on your wall, and do not dealwith sables and glooms in your conversation." "Away with these fellows who go howling through life," wrote Beecher, "and all the while passing for birds of paradise. He that cannot laugh and be gay should look to himself. He should fastandprayuntilhis facebreaksforth intolight." 
"Somepeoplehavean ideathat they comfort the afflicted when they groan over them," says Talmage. "Don't drive a hearse through a man's soul. When you bind up a broken bone of the soul, and want splints, do not make them of cast iron." It was said of Cromwell that hope shone like a fiery pillar in him whenit hadgoneoutin allothers. 
"AHwhojoywouldwin Mustshareit,—Happinesswasbornatwin." 
A little boy said to his mother: "I couldn'tmake little sister happy, no how I could fix it. But I made myself happy trying to make her happy." "I make Jim happy, and he laughs," said another boy, speaking of his invalid brother; 
"and thatmakes me happy, andI laugh." 
"Happinessis amosaic,composed ofmany smallerstones." 
Don't worry, don't fret; we shall ultimately come to the light if we look upward, live upward, work upward. The seed in the earth does not doubt that it willsometimedevelop into stem,bud,leaf, flower,andfruit. Itdoes notask how it is ever to get up through this mass of earth above it. It does not complain becausethereare stonesandturf initsway; but it gently pushes and pushes its tender head up between the stones and against the clod, and by the very persistence of growing, breaks out into the light, buds, flowers, and fruits. The agencies which draw us out of obscurity into prominence, out of ignorance into culture, are as much outside of ourselves as the sunlight, the dew, the shower, and the chemic forces, which call the plant-germ out of the clod, unfolditspetals,andcall outits fragrance,are outsideoftheseed. 
"If I knew the box wherethe smiles are kept, No matter how large the key, Or strong the bolt, I would try so hard it would open, I know, for me. Then over the land and the sea, broadcast, I'd scatter the smiles to play, That the children's faces mightholdthemfast Formanyandmany aday. 
"If I knew a box that was large enough To hold all the frowns I meet, I would like to gather them, everyone, From nursery, school, and street. Then, folding and holding, I'd pack them in, And,turningthemonsterkey, I'd hire a gianttodropthe box To the depths of the deep, deep sea." "It was only a glad 'good-morning,' As she passed along the way, But it spread the morning's glory Over the livelong day." "Only a thought in passing,—a smile, or encouraging word,— Has lifted many a burden no other gift could have stirred." 

2 BLESSEDBE DRUDGERY. 

WHY don't you want to go to school?" asked Mr. Gray, in surprise, when hissonof fifteen wishedtobeexcused fromfurther attendance. "Well, sir," replied Charles, "I am tired of studying, and I don't see any useinit." "Doyou thinkthatyouknowenough?" inquiredthefather. 
"I know as much as George Lyman does, and he left school three months ago. He says that he is not going away to school, as his father has plenty of money." "You need not go, then," said Mr. Gray; "but wait a minute," he continued, as Charles thanked him and started for the door, "you have nothing to be grateful for. You need not go to school if you are not willing to study; but understand one thing — if you do not go to school, you will have 
togo towork. Icannot affordto haveyou idle." The next morning, Mr. Gray took Charles with him to visit a prison, and asked for an interview with a former schoolmate. "I am glad to see you, Mr. Harmon," said he, as the prisoner approached, "but sorry, very sorry, to find you here." "You can't be more sorry than I am," said the convict, adding, as he looked at Charles, "I suppose that this is your boy." "Yes, this is my eldest son, Charles. He is just about the age we were when we used to go to school together. Haveyou forgotten allaboutthosedays,John?" "I wish I could forget, William!" exclaimed the prisoner, after a short pause. "I sometimes think that it is all a dream, and that I shall yet wake to find itso." "How did it happen?" inquired Mr. Gray; "when I saw you last, your prospectswere bright,muchbrighterthanmine." "It can be told in a few words," replied the prisoner; "my ruin was caused byidlenessand bad company. I would not study. I thought there was no need fora richman's son todo that. My father's death left me with great wealth, of which I never earned a dollar, and of whose use and worth I knew nothing. How it went I hardly know; butI awoke one morning to find myself poorer than the lowest clerk in the house. I did not know how to get a dollar by honest labor, but money I musthave; soItriedtogetitwithoutwork. Therest needs notelling." Harmon was called back to his prison work, and Mr. Gray asked the jailer, "How many of your prisoners have ever been trained to any useful trade or 
business?" 
"Not oneinten," wasthereply. 
"Youseemedsurprised,Charles,whenI told you you must work like other boys," said Mr. Gray, as they drove homeward; "and this visit to the prison is myanswer. The world calls me a rich man, and so I am. I amable to give you every chance to grow wise and good; but I am not, and never shall be, rich enough to have you live without work. Many a father has learned to his sorrowwhatitis tohavea boy idle." 
Charles thought deeply for a moment, and said, " I think I will go to school onMonday, father." 
John Adams was another boy who became tired of his lessons, and asked 
his father to excuse him from Latin grammar. "Certainly, John," was the reply; "instead, youmaydigsomeditches inthebog. It needsdraining." 
Now, little as John liked to decline Latin pronouns, he liked still less to decline such a request from his father, with whom he was pretty well acquainted; so he took the proffered spade, and passed a busy day in the bog. But ditching proved so conducive to reflection that he begged that night for permission to resume his Latin on the morrow. Consent was given; and he applied himself so earnestly to his studies and to whatever else he undertook, that he became one of the pillars of the American Revolution, and Washington's successor as President of the United States. Why should I toil and slave," many a young man has asked, "when I have only myself to live for?" God help the man who has neither mother, sister, nor wife for whom to struggle,andwhodoes not feelthat toiland thebuilding upofcharacterbring theirown reward. 
A rich man who had neglected his own education and culture, and sacrificed every personal comfort and pleasure to leave a fortune to his children, made this confession: " I spared no expense in their training, and they never knew what it was to want money. No one ever had a fairer prospect of becoming honored and respected than my sons; but look at the results. 
One is a physician, but he has no patients; the second is a lawyer without a single client; the third is a merchant, but he is above visiting his counting-house. In vain I urge them to be more industrious, more frugal, more energetic. Whatis the reply? 'There is no usein it, father, we shall never want formoney. Youhaveenoughforus all.'" 
The "Youth's Companion" says that at sixteen years of age Cyrus W. Field, the promoter of the Atlantic cable, left his home at Stockbridge, Mass., to seek his fortune in New York. It was only by strict economy that the eight dollars given him by his father at parting could be spared from the family purse. 
On reaching the city, he went to the house of his brother, David Dudley Field, subsequently the leader of the New York bar, where his unhappiness was so apparent as to draw from Dr. Mark Hopkins, then a guest, the remark, "Iwouldnotgivemuch for aboy if hewerenothomesickonleavinghome." 
Cyrus entered the store of A. T. Stewart, then the leading dry-goods house of the city, as errand-boy, at a salary of fifty dollars for the first year. He was obliged to be at his work between six and seven in the morning, and after he was promoted to clerk, the hours for attendance at the store were from a quarter past eight in the morning until evening. "I always made it a point," Mr. Field wrote in his autobiography, "to be there before the partners came, and never to leave before they went. My ambition was to make myself a thoroughly good merchant. I tried to learn in every department all I possibly could,knowingI hadtodependentirelyuponmyself." 
The boy went to the Mercantile Library, and read in the evenings, and joined a debating society that met every Saturday night. Mr. Stewart's rules were strict. One of them required each clerk to enter in a book the time he came in the morning, when he left for dinner, when he returned from dinner, when he went to supper, and when he came back. If he was late in the morning, or was over an hour at dinner, or took more than three-quarters of an hour for supper, he had to pay a fine of twenty-five cents for every offense. 
Cyrus was so prompt, so careful in every detail, and so faithful, that he soonwon his employer's confidence. Promotion was sure for such a boy, and hedidnothaveto waitlongforit. 
Stewart himself had been just such a boy; and as a man he put his whole heart into his business, and worked early and late. His system was so comprehensive that his great establishments seemed almost to run themselves; but none the less the proprietor kept careful watch of details, and tothedayofhis deathwaseager for improvementinevery department. 
But witness the attempt of his successors to continue the business. They had not only the benefit of Stewart's experience, but the reserve of his great wealth. Hehad won success without either;they failedwith both. He gavehis first and best attention to his stores, and thought of outside enterprises only in moments of leisure; they reversed this order. With him prosperity never obscured the fact that a successful merchant must not be content with having one price for all, but must treat all alike; with them the pride of mere wealth and station led to discrimination, which was followed by loss of trade, and evenactive opposition fromthose whohad beengoodcustomers. 
They maintained the unequal struggle for years, for the estate was large in both money and credit. But time brought the inevitable result; and, when money and credit were both gone, the Stewart store passed into the hands of John Wanamaker, the boy with no chance, who walked four miles to Philadelphia every day, worked in a bookstore for a dollar and a quarter a week, and tried to earn ten times his wages for his employer. Only plain men of drudgery and detail can build up such enterprises as those of Stewart and Wanamaker; and only such men can long conduct them successfully, even after they are well established. Work faithfully, and you will put yourself in possessionofagloriousand enlarging happiness. 
A French writer says, "I can say that I have seen Michael Angelo, when he was about sixty years of age, and not then very robust, make the fragments of marble fly about at such a rate that he cut off more in a quarter of an hour than three strong young men could have done in an hour —a thing almost in credible to anyone who has not seen it; and he used to work with such fury, with such an impetus, that it was feared he would dash the whole marble to pieces, makingateach stroke chips of three or four fingers' thickness fly off;" with a material in which, if he had gone only a hair's breadth too far, he would have totally destroyed the work, which could not be restored like plasteror clay. 
It was Michael Angelo who said of Raphael: "One of the sweetest souls that ever breathed, he owed more to his industry than to his genius." When asked how he had accomplished such wonders, Raphael said, "From my earliest childhood I have made it a principle never to neglect anything." This artist, for whose death all Rome mourned, and Pope Leo X wept, was only thirty-seven years of age, and yet he left two hundred and eighty-seven pictures, and over five hundred drawings. Some of his single pictures have broughtafortune. 
What a lesson in this brief life for indolent and lazy youth! Leonardo da Vinci, cheerful, eager, enthusiastic, would often go to his work at daybreak, and not come down from the scaffolding to eat or drink till the light had left him. After Rubens had become famous and rich, an alchemist urged him to assist in transmuting metals into gold, a secret which the scientist felt sure he had discovered. 
"Youhave come twenty years too late," replied Rubens; "I discovered the secret long ago." Pointing to his palette and brushes, he added, "Everything I touch turns to gold." Millais had no thought for anything but his art while painting. "I work harder than any plowman," he would sometimes say. "My adviceto allboysis, 'Work!'Theycan'tallbegeniuses,butthey canallwork; and without work even the most brilliant genius will be of very little good. I never recommend any one to be an artist. If a boy has a real calling to be an artist, he will be one without being recommended. Scores of people bring their children to me and ask me if I should advise them to bring them up as painters; and I always say, 'Certainly not' But whatever a boy intends to be he must grind at it; study all the minutest details, not scamp any of the uninteresting elementary part, but be thoroughly well up in all the groundworkonthesubject." 
As Luther, when translating the Bible, took for his motto, Nulla dies sine linea, so Turner seems to have taken for his, "No day without some work accomplished!" He often quoted the advice of his teacher, Joshua Reynolds, who said, "Those who are resolved to excel must go to their work, willing or unwilling, morning, noon, and night. They will find it no play, but very hard labor." Hard labor it was; but in Turner's case it was a labor of love, and broughtwithita richreward. 
Show me a man who has benefited the world by his wisdom, or his country by his patriotism, or his neighborhood by his philanthropy, and you show me a man who has made the best of every minute. Peter the Great, although heir to an empire, won his real crown and throne by sturdy toil. More than any other monarch, he laid aside royal robes, and wore a workman'sclothes. Seeingthat theartsofcivilization were but little knownin Russia, he determinedto educatehimselfandelevatehispeople. 
At twenty-six, an age when most princes love enjoyment, he started on a tour, not of pleasure, but of hard work. In Holland he served a voluntary apprenticeship to a shipbuilder. In England he worked in papermills, sawmills, rope-yards, watchmakers' shops, and other manufactories, not only observing closely, but also doing the work and receiving the treatment of a common laborer. At Istia he passed a month learning to work iron at Muller's forges; the last day he forged eighteen poods of iron, and put his mark thereon. 
Several boyars, or nobles of Russia, who accompanied him, probably did notfancy the drudgery, but they had to carry coals and blow the bellows. He asked Muller how much a blacksmith usually received per pood. "Three copecks, or an altina," was the reply; but the great foundryman brought his royal assistant eighteen ducats. "Keep your ducats," said Peter, "I have not wrought any better than any other man; give me what you would give anybody else. I want to buy a pair of shoes, of which I am in great need." In fact, the shoes hehad onhadbeen oncemended, and were fullofholes. 
He took pride in the new ones, saying, "These I earned by the sweat of my brow." One of the bars of iron forged by Peter is still shown at Istia in Muller's forge, with his mark upon it; another is kept in St. Petersburg, in the Cabinet of Curiosities, as a memorial of the workman emperor— an inspiration toeveryRussian,frompeasantto czar,whilethe empireshalllast. 
Should you be so unfortunate as to suppose you are a genius, and that "things will come to you," it would be well to undeceive yourself as soon as possible. Makeupyourmind thatindustrymustbethepriceof all youobtain, and atoncebeginto paydown. 
Genius inoperative is no more genius than a bushel of acorns is a forest of oaks. "I do not remember a book in all the departments of learning," said Beecher, "nor a scrap of literature, nor a work in all the schools of art, from which its author has derived a permanent renown, that is not known to have beenlong andpatiently elaborated. 
Genius needs industry as much as industry needs genius." Labor is the parent of all the lasting monuments of this world, whether in verse or in stone, in poetry or in pyramids. Goldsmith thought four lines a good day's work. Hewasseven years evolving 
"The Deserted Village." "By a long habit of writing," said he, "one acquires a greatness of thinking, and a mastery of manner, which holiday writers, with ten times the genius, may vainly attempt to equal." Longfellow declared that the secret studies of the poet are the sunken piers on which his poetic work rests; out of sight, but essential. It is interesting to study facsimiles of the "first drafts" of great productions, from the "Declaration of Independence" to Longfellow's "Psalm of Life," and note what elaboration was requiredbefore theybecame finished works. 
Bryant is said to have written "Thanatopsis" a hundred times, and then to have been dissatisfied with it. Demosthenes made no secret of the pains he expended in forging his thunderbolts against Philip. So fastidious was Plato that he wrote the first sentence in the "Republic" nine different ways before he could satisfy himself. Pope would spend whole days over a couplet; Charlotte Bronte, an hour over a word; and Gray, a month over a short composition. 
Gibbon wrote the first chapter of the "Decline and Fall" three times before he was satisfied with it, and nearly a quarter of a century elapsed before the entire work wasfinished. 
Anthony Trollope declared it all stuff and nonsense for one to wait for moods. "It is wonderful how many great successes have come of accident," said a friend to Rufus Choate. "Nonsense!" replied the great lawyer, " you might as well let drop the Greek alphabet, and expect to pick up the 'Iliad.'" "Waiting for something to turn up" is waiting for moonbeams to turn into silver, formagic andchancetotaketheplaceof natural law in the universe. It is the philosophy of the shiftless, the refuge of the lazy, the excuse of the improvident. 
"People sometimes attribute my success to my genius," said Alexander Hamilton; "all the geniusIknowanything about ishard work." 
On his seventieth birthday, Daniel Webster told the secret of his success: "Work has made me what I am. I never ate a bit of idle bread in my life." Drudgery has been called "the gray angel of success." "I have found my greatest happiness in labor," said Mr. Gladstone, when nearing fourscore and ten. "Iearlyformedthehabitofindustry,andithas been itsownreward. 
The young are apt to think that rest means a cessation from all effort, but I havefound themostperfectrestinchanging effort. If brain-wearyoverbooks and study, go out into the blessed sunlight and the pure air, and give heartfelt exercise tothebody. The brain will soon become calm and rested. The efforts of nature are ceaseless. Even in our sleep the heart throbs on. If these great forces ceased for an instant, death would follow. I try to live close to Nature, and to imitate her in my labors. The compensation is sound sleep, a wholesomedigestion,and powers that are keptattheir best; and this, I take it, is thechiefreward ofindustry." 
"I've known Edison since he was a boy of fourteen," said a friend; "and of my own knowledge I can say he never spent an idle day in his life. Often, when he should have been asleep, I have known him to sit up half the night reading. He did not take to novels or wild Western adventures, but read works onmechanics,chemistry,and electricity;and hemasteredthem,too. 
But in addition to his reading, which he could only indulge in at odd hours, he carefully cultivated his wonderful powers of observation, till at length,whenhewas notactuallyasleep,itmaybesaid he waslearningallthe time." 
"After I have completed an invention," says Edison, "I seem to lose interest in it. One might think that the money value of an invention constitutes its reward to the man who loves his work. But, speaking for myself, I can honestly say this is not so. Life was never more full of joy to me, than when, a poor boy, I began to think out improvements in telegraphy, and to experiment with the cheapest and crudest appliances. But now that I have all the appliances I need, and am my own master, I continue to find my greatest pleasure, and so my reward, in the work thatprecedeswhat theworld callssuccess." 
"Then let us sing a hallelujah, and make a fresh beatitude: Blessed be Drudgery. It is the one thing we cannot spare." Well has it been said that it is because we have to go, and go morning after morning, through rain and shine, through toothache, headache, heartache, to the appointed spot, and do the appointed work; and only because we have to stick to that work eight or ten hours, long after rest would be sweet; because the schoolboy's lesson must be learned at nine o'clock, and learned without a slip; because the accounts on the ledger must square to a cent; because the goods must tally exactlywiththeinvoice;because goodtemper mustbekeptwiththechildren, customers, neighbors, not seven, but seventy times seven times; because the besetting sin must be watched today, tomorrow, and the next day; in short, withoutmuchmatterwhatour workbe, whetherthisorthat,itisbecause, and onlybecause,ofthe rut,plod, humdrum, grind,in the work,that weatlast get these foundations laid, — attention, promptness, accuracy, firmness, patience, self-denial,andthe rest. 
There is no surer token of a little mind than to imagine that anything in the wayof physical labor is dishonoring. I confess to an unbounded contempt for the smart young gentleman who would not, on any consideration, be seen carrying a parcel down the street. When Roman emperors were taken from the plow, the empire was mistress of the world. But in later Rome, both the tillers of the soil and the mechanics were principally slaves; and there even theenlightenedCicero wrote: 
"All artisans are engaged in a degrading profession. There can be nothing ingenuous in a workshop." Aristotle said: "The best regulated states will not permit a mechanic to be a citizen; for it is impossible for one who lives the life of a mechanic, or hired servant, to practice a life of virtue. Some were born to be slaves." When Cyrus learned that the Lacedaemonians kept a market, he despised them. But, like a dry rot, this contempt for labor robbed thesenationsof their realstrength,andtheyperishedfromtheearth. 
Shortly after President Tyler's term of office expired, his political opponents elected him a surveyor of highways in the little Virginian village where he lived. This had not the desired effect of annoying and exposing him to ridicule; for he accepted the position, performing its duties faithfully and with dignity. This noble and silent rebuke to those who held labor in contemptbroughtarequestforhisresignation. 
"Gentlemen," hereplied, "Ineverrefusean office,andneverresign." 
What a lesson is Napoleon's life for sickly, wishy-washy prospectuses that never become published works and effeminate dudes! For eighteen hours before the battle of Waterloo he had neither eaten nor slept. His clothes were coveredwithmudandsoaked withrain. 
But, regardless of exposure and fatigue, he did not seek to warm himself by the fire. The Duke of Wellington was noted for his great industry. He was everlastingly atit. Henever dawdled;hewas aspromptasthe sun. 
Lord Ellenborough had a hard time in getting a start at the bar, but he was determined never to relax his industry until success came to him. When almost exhausted with work, he kept this motto constantly before his eyes, lesthemight betempted torelaxhisefforts, “Readorstarve." 
A man converted at a Salvation Army meeting declares that he begged his way from five years of age, and never earned a cent in his life by honest labor; in fact, that he did not know how to do anything. About the only thing he could do after he was converted was to tend a baby, for which he received one dollar a week. Think of an able-bodied man, in this land of opportunity, growingupwithoutlearning howto doanything! 
TheOldGermaninscriptionon akey, "IfI rest, Irust," isastrue ofmenas of iron. 
InEngland,idlenesswas oncepunishedas follows:forthefirstoffense the idlerwas taken before a justice, and his fault recorded; for the second, he was burned on the hand; for the third, he suffered death. In 1556, it was whipping for the first offense, whipping and the upper part of the ear cut off for the second, and for the third, imprisonment, and for the fourth, death. Among the Greeks, idlenesswaspunishedby law. 
Outside of man there is not an idle atom in the universe; everything is workingout its mission. "Work is the one great law of the world," said Zola, “which leads organized matter slowly but steadily to its own goal." Life has no other meaning. It is a law of nature that, the moment activity ceases anywhere, there a retrograde process sets in. The moment we cease to use our faculties, that moment they begin to deteriorate. Nature will let us have only whatweuse,and while we useit. 
Labor is the fabled magician's wand, the philosopher's stone, the cap of Fortunatus. Its insignia, the plow, the anvil, and the loom, are decorations of honor; while its successful votaries, eminent members of the Order of Industry, should take rank among the benefactors of mankind. Nothing is more demoralizing to success than the habit of dawdling over work; it dissipates energy, demoralizes ambition, weakens energy, and makes us things insteadofmen. 
The sluggard is of very ancient pedigree; Solomon gave us a picture of him: "Yeta little sleep,a little slumber, alittlefolding ofthehands tosleep." 
"The Tattler" proposed to consider every worthless man a dead man, or living only when he is of some advantage to others. According to this system, some men are born at twenty years of age, some at thirty, some at threescore, and somenot abovean hourbeforethey die. 
In one of his novels, Emile Zola describes a conversation between the workwomen of a laundry in Paris, about what each would do if she had ten thousand francs a year. They were all of one mind; they would do just nothing at all! Carlyle asserts the "unspeakable holiness of work." "Blessed is he who has found his work: let him ask no other blessedness. He has a work, a lifepurpose;hehasfoundit,andwillfollowit! 
How, as a free flowing channel, dug and torn by noble force through the sour mud-swamp of one's existence, like an ever-deepening river there, it runs and flows; draining off the sour, festering water gradually from the root of the remotest grass blade; making, instead of pestilential swamp, a green fruitfulmeadow,withits clear-flowing stream. 
How blessed for the meadow itself, let the stream and its value be great or small! Labor is life. Properly thou hast no other knowledge but what thou hast gotby working;therest isyet allahypothesis ofknowledge." 
"God bless that habit of getting up at seven," wrote Walter Scott; "I could do nothing without it. It keeps me up to the scratch." Guests at Abbotsford used to wonder when Scott found time to do his work, for he was always disengaged to entertain them. He had broken the back of his work while they were in their beds. Work! It makes the eye bright and the complexion rosy. It makes the muscles strong, and the brain clear, and sends the blood through artery and vein at a healthy pace. It is nature's panacea for half the ills that afflict the body. There would be less dyspepsia, and consequently less of the "religion that makes people miserable," if there were more exercise of the bodyin the sortof work thatGod sentAdamtodowhenhe leftParadise. 
"Blessed be Drudgery!" For thrice it blesses us: it gives us the fundamental qualities of manhood and womanhood; it gives us success in the thing we have to do; and it makes us, if we choose, artists—artists within, whatever our outward work may be. Blessed be Drudgery, the secret of all achievement,of allculture! 
"When I heara youngman spokenofas givingpromiseofhighgenius, the first question I ask about him is, always, 'Does he work ?'" said Ruskin. "Produce, produce! were it but the pitifulest, infinitesimal fraction of a product, produce it in God's name. 'Tis the utmost thou hast in thee? Out with it then! Up, up!" says Carlyle, "' Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it withthywholemight.'" 
3 

HONESTY AS PRINCIPLEAND AS POLICY 

Anhonestman'sthenoblest work ofGoA—Pope. 

Thehonest man,though ne'erso poor, Iskingofmenfora'that.—Burns. 

Iwouldrather berightthanbe president.— Henry Clay. 

A straight line is the shortest in morals as well as in geometry.—Isaac Barrow. 

PUT that back!" exclaimed President John Quincy Adams, when his son took a sheet of paper from a pigeonhole to write a letter. "That belongs to the Government. Here is my own stationery, at the other end of the desk. I alwaysusethat for lettersonprivatebusiness." 
Mr. Adams was as particular in other ways, and is celebrated for his accuracy, truthfulness, and punctuality. When a member of the House of Representatives, his entrance was a sure indication that the time to call to orderhad arrived. He always kept his appointments,and would no more think of takingothers'timebytardinessthantheir moneybytheft. 
"Go, my son, I consign thee to God," said the mother of Abd-el-Kader, aftergiving himfortypiecesofsilver,andmakinghim promise never to tell a lie; "we may not meet again until the day of judgment." The boy left home to seek his fortune, but in a few days the party with which he traveled was attackedby robbers. "Whatmoneyhaveyouwithyou?" asked one. 
"Forty dinars are sewed up in my garment," replied Abd-el-Kader; but the robber onlylaughed. 
"What money have you really with you?" inquired another sternly, and the youth repeated his former answer; but no attention was paid to his statement, which wasnot believed on account of its frankness. "Come here, boy," called the chief, who had noticed the men talking with the young traveler; "what moneyhave youin yourpossession?" 
"I have told two of your men already that I have forty dinars sewed up in my clothes, but they do not seem to believe me." "Rip his garments open," 
commandedthe chiefoftherobbers,andsoonthesilverwas found. 
"Andhowcameyou totell this?" hewas asked. 
"Because I would not be false to my mother to whom I promised never to 
tella lie." 
"Boy," said the leader, "are you so mindful of your duty to your mother, although so young, and am I insensible, at my mature age, of the duty I owe 
toGod?Giveme yourhand,thatI mayswear repentanceupon it." 
Hedidso, andhisfollowersweregreatly impressed. 
"You have been our leader in guilt," said his lieutenant; "be mine, at least, in the path of virtue," and he took the boy's hand as his chief had done. One byonealltherest ofthe banddidthesame. 
Honesty and truth, even in children, cannot fail to exert an influence for good upon those around them. It may not produce such remarkable results as in the Arab's story, but none the less it is felt by all. "If honesty did not exist, weoughttoinventitasthe bestmeans ofgettingrich," said Mirabeau. 
In a country school, the teacher put a very hard word to the pupil at the head of a class in spelling, and he missed it. She passed it to the next, and the next, and. so on, till it came to the last scholar,—the smallest of the class, who spelled it and went to the head, above seventeen boys and girls, all older thanhimself. 
The teacher then wrote the word on the blackboard, that they all might see howit is spelled, and learn it better. But no sooner had she written it than the little boy at the head cried out, "Oh! Miss W, I didn't spell it that way; I said 'e' instead of 'i';and he went back to the foot, of his own accord, quicker than hehadgoneto thehead. 
He was too honest to take credit that did not belong to him. "I have been guilty of every kind of sin," said a cardinal at confession, thinking by self-accusation to get the reputation of a saint. "It is a solemn fact," said the confessor. "I have indulged in pride, ambition, malice, and revenge," groaned the cardinal. "It is too true," said the monk. "Why, you fool," exclaimed the cardinal in anger, "you don't imagine that I mean all this to the letter!" "Ho! ho!" said the confessor, "so you have been a lair, too, have you?" The humbled cardinalwithdrewfromtheconfessional. 
"Mr. Jones," said Ethan Allen, as he entered a lawyer's office, "I owe a gentleman in Boston sixty pounds on a note, which he has sent to Vermont for collection. I cannot pay it just now, and want you to postpone settlement until I can raise the money." "All right," replied Mr. Jones, and, when the court assembled next, he rose and said, "May it please your honor, we deny that this signature is genuine." He knew that this course would require the summoning of witnesses from Boston, which would give Allen all the time hewanted. 
"Mr. Jones," shouted Allen, in a voice of thunder, "I did not hire you to come here to lie! This is a true note! I signed it,— I'll swear to it,—and I'll pay it! I want no shuffling. I want time. What I employed you for was to get this matter put over to the next court, not to come here and lie and juggle aboutit." Thelawyer quailed, but the case was put over as Allen wished. "If I hireyou," saida Detroitgrocerto a boywho hadappliedforwork, "Isuppose 
you willdoasI tellyou?" 
"Yes,sir." 
"IfItoldyou tosaythesugar washigh grade whenitwas low, what would you say?" 
The boy did not hesitate a moment. "I'd say it," he responded, promptly. "If I told you to say the coffee was pure, when you knew that it had beans in it, what would you say?" "I'd say it." "If I told you to say that the butter was fresh, when you knew it had been in the store for a month, what would you say?" "I'd say it." The merchant was nonplused. "How much will you work for?" he inquired, very seriously. "One hundred dollars a week," answered the boy, in a business-like tone. The grocer came near falling from his stool. "One hundred dollars a week?" he repeated, in astonishment. "With a percentageafterthefirsttwo weeks," said the boy, coolly. "Yousee," hewent on, "first-class liars come high; and, if you need them in your business, you've got to pay them the price. Otherwise I'll work for three dollars per week;" and the boy caught the grocer at his own game, and got the job at threedollarsperweek. 
The Indians flocked about the store of a new trader, and examined his goods,but offered to buy nothing. Finally the chief visited him. "How do you do, John? Show me goods. Aha! I take a blanket for me, and calico for squaw,—three otter-skins for blanket and one for calico. Ugh! pay you by'm­by tomorrow." He received his goods, and left. On the next day he returned with a large part of his band, his blanket full of skins. "Now, John, I pay you." He drew from his blanket four otter-skins, one after the other, laying them on the counter. After a moment's hesitation, he drew out a fifth, a rich and rare one, and laid it on the counter. "That's right, John." Pushing it back, the traderreplied, "Youoweme but four,I wantonly my justdues." 
Theypassedit backandforthbetween them severaltimes, till at length the chief appeared satisfied. He put the skin back in his blanket, scrutinized the trader, and then, stepping to the door, cried to his followers, "Come, — come trade with the pale-face, John. He no cheat Indian, his heart big." Then, turningto the trader, he said, "Suppose you take last skin, I tell my people no trade with you. We drive off others; but now you be Indians' friend, and we be yours." Before dark the trader was waist-deep in furs, and had his till well filledwithcash. 
When one of his ships was long overdue, Jacob Barker, the merchant prince of New Orleans, called at an insurance office to take out a new policy on the vessel. A high rate of premium was demanded, as fears were entertained for the safety of the ship; but Mr. Barker offered a lower figure, and leftwithoutcomingtoanagreement. 
That night a swift messenger brought the news of the total loss of the vessel, at which he only said, "Very well." Next morning, on the way to his counting-house, he stopped his carriage at the insurance office, and, without leaving his seat, said quietly to the secretary, "Friend, thee need not make out that policy;I'veheardoftheship." 
"Oh, sir! — but, sir, — Mr. Barker," said the secretary, running into the office; and, returning a moment later, "we've made out the policy, and you can'tbackout ofit." 
"Howso,my friend?" asked themerchant. 
"When you left last evening, we agreed to your proposal, and the policy was made out at once. The office became liable, and you must take it. See, here it is," he added, as a clerk brought out the paper with the signature hardlydry. 
"Well, friend," said Mr. Barker, "if thee will have it, I suppose I must take it," putting the paper in his pocket. During the day the news of the wreck was madeknown, andof the waytheinsurance companyhadcheateditself. 
C. F. Adams tells a good story of a Dutchman's method of doing business. "Igeeps me von leedle schtore, und does a pooty goot peeznis, but I don't got moochgapital,soI findsithardvorktogetme allder gredits votI vould like. Last veek I hear about some goots a barty vas going to sell pooty sheap, und so I writes dot man if he vould gief me der refusal of dose goots for a gouble of days. He gafe me der refusal, — dot is, he sait I gouldn't haf dem, — but he sait he vould gall on me und see mine schtore, und den if mine schtanding vasgoot, berhapsve mightdo somedingstogedder. 
"Veil, yesterday, a shentleman comes in and says, 'Mr. Schmidt, I pelieve.' Isays, 'Yaw,' und den I dinks, dis vas der man vot has doze goots to sell, und I must dry to make some goot imbressions mit him. "' Dis vas goot schtore,' he says, 'bud you don't got a pooty big shtock already.' I vas avraid to let him know dot I only hat 'bout a tousand tollars vort of goots in der blace, so I says, 'You ton't dink I hat more as dree tousand tollars in dis leedle schtore, vould you?' He says, 'Vos dot bossible!' I say 'Yaw.' I meant dot id vos bossible, dough id vasn't so, vor I vas like Shorge Vashingtons ven he cut townder 'olt elm' onPoston Gommons,andgouldn'tdellsomeliesaboud id. 
"'Veil,' says der shentleman, 'I dinks you ought to know vot you haf in der schtore.' Und den he takes a pig book vrom unter his arm and say, 'Vell, I poots you town vor dree tousand tollars.' I ask him vot he means, und den he says he vas von off der dax-men, und he tank me pecause I vas sooch an honest Deutscher, und tidn't dry und sheat der gofermants. "I dells you I tidn't veel any more petter as a hundert ber cent., ven dot man valks oudt, und der nexddimeImakes freemitstrangers Ivindsfirstdeirpeesnisoudt." 
Mark Twain tells us that an impoverished descendant of Audubon, in straits,waswilling tosellacopy ofhisgreatvolumeon "Birds" forahundred dollars, when it was worth in a market a thousand dollars; the purchaser chuckledover his mean bargain. 
"How different was Hammond Trumbull," he says. "A lady in the South, in straitened circumstances, wrote him that she had an Eliot's Indian Bible, which she would gladly dispose of for a hundred dollars. He wrote to her that, if a perfect copy, it had its market value, one thousand dollars; and he would sell it to the British Museum for that sum. It proved such a copy, and she got her thousand dollars in gold. That is the honorable dealing which exalts humanity." 
Modern adulteration is satirized in the following neat little fable: "Four flies were hungry. The first settled on a sausage of singularly appetizing appearance, and made a hearty meal. But he speedily died of intestinal inflammation, for the sausage was adulterated with aniline. The second fly breakfasted on flour, and forthwith succumbed to contraction of the stomach, owing to the inordinate quantity of alum with which the flour had been adulterated. The third was slacking his thirst from the milk-jug, when violent cramps suddenly convulsed his frame, and he gave up the ghost, a victim to the chalk adulteration. Seeing this, the fourth fly, muttering to himself, 'The sooner it's over the sooner to sleep,' alighted on a moistened sheet of paper exhibiting the counterfeit presentment of a death's head, and the inscription ' Fly Poison.' Applying the tip of his proboscis to the liquid, he drank to his heart's content, growing more vigorous and cheerful at every mouthful, although expectant of his end. But he did not die. On the contrary, he throve and waxedfat. Eventheflypoison wasadulterated!" 
George T. Angell said that a large merchant told him there was only one kindoftea inhisestablishmentthathewouldlethis familyuse. 
In these days, many employers require some deception, a certain compliance with the existing order of things, a certain shutting of the eyes to defects and little irregularities and customs. They say competition demands this policy. 
Can we wonder that, with such models before them, our young men and womenbecomewarpedand crookedintheir views,andadopt falseidealsand standards? 
What the world wants today is young men who will not offer "English woolens" manufactured in American mills; who will not sell "Irish linen" made in New York. The world wants physicians who will not pretend to know the nature of a disease when they do not, or experiment upon patients with questionable doses of drugs; statesmen who will not pack caucuses or pull wires; lawyers who will not urge their clients to press their suits into court to get their fees, when they know there is no chance of winning; clergymen who can hear a larger call than that of a large salary or popular applause. It wants business men who will give thirty-six inches for a yard, and thirty-two quarts for a bushel. It wants journalists who will not write scurrilous, scandalous articles merely because the chief editor wants them. It wants men who will not say they "do it because everybody does," — young menwhowillnotthink anythingprofitablethatisdishonest. 
A. T. Stewart determined that the truth should always be told over his counters, whatever the consequences. No clerk was allowed to misrepresent, or cover up a defect. He once asked the opinion of an employee in regard toa large purchase of goods of novel patterns, and was told that the designs were inferior, and some of them in very bad taste. The young man was just pointing out the defects of one particular style, of which he held a sample in his hands, when a large customer from an interior city came up and asked, "Haveyou anythingnew andfirst-classto showme today?" 
The young salesman replied promptly, "Yes, sir; we've just brought in somethingthatwillsuit youtoa dot." 
Throwing across his arm the very piece he had criticized a moment before, heexpatiated upon its beauty so earnestly that a large sale was the result. Mr. Stewart, who had listened in wondering silence, here interrupted, warningthe customer to give the goods further and more careful examination, and telling the young man to call upon the cashier for any wages due him, as his final account would be made up at once. "Why did you not sell her something?" asked the proprietor, as a lady went out of a dry-goods store in Boston without purchasing. "Because," replied the clerk, "she asked for Middlesex, and we did not have it." 
"Why did you not show her the next pile, and tell her that was Middlesex?" "Because itwasnot,sir," saidtheclerk. "You are too mighty particular for me," exclaimed the proprietor. "Very 
well," said the boy, "if I must tell a lie to keep my place, I will go." The honest clerkbecameawealthy,respected merchantin theWest. 
"There are few people," says Beecher, "who will not be benefited by pondering over the morals of shopping. The wish to get more than you have means to pay for is a wish to injure your neighbor, — to obtain his possessions without a just compensation; and although a thing may occasionally come into our hands which we never could have had, had it not been cheap, yet the uniform desire to depress another's property for the sake ofmakingitourownisdishonesty indisposition,whethercustomsanctionsit ornot." 
"What pretty illuminated cards!" exclaimed one woman; "that one, especially, withthemotto, 'Honesty istheBestPolicy.'" 
"Yes," replied the other, "I brought them from Europe; and wasn't I fortunate? I got them through with a lot of other things, without paying a cent ofduty." 
We need what Carlyle used to call "upright, downright, straightforward, all-round men." 
Afarmer inMaine putup somebarrelsof applesofsuperiorquality,sound and fineall the way through. In each he placed his name, and the request that the buyer would be so kind as to send him word in regard to the condition in which they were received, and how they were liked. In the course of time a letter came from England, speaking in terms of the highest praise of those apples, and requesting that the whole crop might be shipped direct to the dealer. 
The fact that every barrel of flour which bore the brand of "George Washington, Mount Vernon," was exempted from the otherwise uniform inspection in the West India ports, — that name being regarded as an ample guaranty of the quality and quantity of any article to which it was affixed, — suppliesa striking proofthathisexactness was everywhereunderstood. 
"But," says a young man, "I have been honest, yet I have not been successful." Of course you have not. Merely negative virtues are absolutely valueless. The office-boy is promoted not because he never stole stamps, but onaccountofhisenergyandvigilance,his abilityandintelligence. 
That "we eat and drink and wear perjury and fraud in a hundred commodities," is strikingly illustrated by the following letters captured by the MassachusettsBoard ofHealth: —Boston,Mass.,Oct. 25. 
Dear Sir,—I would like to call your attention to, for which I am the agent. It is the article which all milkmen in Boston and vicinity use to improve the quality of their milk, and to help them out when milk is scarce. It is perfectly harmless, and the milk inspectors and State Board of Health cannot detect it inthemilk. Theamountof water youcanadd toyourmilk inone daywithout detection will pay for enough to use three months. If you have any friends in thebusiness,pleasetell themof this. Yourstruly, 
Boston, Mass.,Nov. 8, 
Dear Sir,—Yours received. Sent by Adams' Express one bottle. Give it a goodtrial. Don'tbe afraid of the color, taste, or smell, as you will find it to be all right when in the milk. A sample of milk taken from a batch put up with and analyzed, will prove to the inspector to be all right, as the counteracts the chemicalstheyhavetouse in theanalysis. Yours truly, 
Directions also accompanied the above letters, in which, after specifying the amount of water, sugar, and salt to be used in addition to the coloring matter, the writer adds, "If you take cream off the milk, add a trifle more. Some don't use sugar only when sticking their milk pretty hard. It gives a goodbody, however." 
Suppose we lived in a world where natural things would lie and deceive us as does man, — a world where the mountains, the sea, the forests, and the rivers were all shams; where the earth, which looks rich and fruitful, would mock us by refusing harvest in return for our seed; where what appears like a beautiful landscape would prove only a deceptive mirage; where gravitation could not be depended upon; where the planets would not keep intheirorbits; where theatomswerenot true tothelawwritten withinthem. 
"The twenty years which I spent at the shovel works were the pleasantest part of my life," once said Governor Ames. "Everywhere that I went on business I was known, and our name was the synonym of honesty. "There was a time when the price of the Ames' shovels did not vary a cent for twenty years. So, in the days of wild-cat money out West, the Ames' shovels were usedas currency. Amancouldalwayspayhisdebts withourshovels. 
"Though our goods went to all countries, we never had an agency anywhere. We made them so attractive that all the world wanted them. Instead of our going out and trying to sell goods, the world came and begged for them." 
A man who journeyed in a wagon one thousand miles in South Africa said that, among all the Boers, Bushmen, and half breeds, he never found men so ignorant or kraals so small, that they did not appreciate the Ames' shovels. Thename "Oliver Ames & Sons" meant, to them, honest material and faithful work. It is pleasant to know that at the Cape of Good Hope, in Australia, and at the ends of the world, this Massachusetts brand, — the "Old Colony," — stands allover theglobeforthoroughwork, tough asash andtrueassteel. 
"We will give you ten thousand guineas, Mr. Reed," said one of the commissioners sent by George III., "if you will use your influence to adjust the difficulties between England and the colonies, and to bring this long war to a close." "I am not worth purchasing," replied Joseph Reed of New Jersey; "butsuchas Iam, theKing of Great Britainisnotrich enoughtobuy me." 
When an attempt was made to secure the passage of an ordinance of repudiationin Illinois, Stephen A. Douglas lay ill at a hotel in Springfield. He asked to be carried to the convention; and, while lying upon his mattress, wrote as a substitute for the repudiation bill: "Resolved, That Illinois will be honest, although she never pays a cent." It was adopted, and was the death­blowto repudiation,notonlyinIllinois,butalso inallthe otherStates. 
The credit and prosperity of the whole nation rose at once. "I don't think the devil will ever make a higher bid for me than that," replied George Jones, when offered one million dollars to simply keep silent on Tammany frauds, and fill his paper, the New York "Times," with other matter. He had obtained evidence of the gigantic defalcations of the "Tweed Ring," which, to protect itself, tried to buy his paper; and then, finding that it was not for sale, endeavored to purchase its owner. But the publication of the evidence was not delayed a single day, and under his tremendous attack the corrupt political leaders were driveninto exile. 
He died at an advanced age, and fills an honored grave. But what has been the fate of the great "Tweed Ring," which seemed more powerful than the City of New York, or even the State? What good did the millions stolen from the city treasury ever do them? Poverty, disgrace, despair, abject misery, and premature death have proved the certain crop of all their sin and crime, in nearlyeveryinstance. 
"I won't hear him," exclaimed a man, as he left the hustings where Lincoln was speaking in 1856; "for I don't like a man that makes me believe in him in spite of myself." "Honest Old Abe" has passed into the language of our time and country asa synonymforallthatisjustandhonestin man. 
Lincoln was very poor when he began to practice law. One day a post-office agent called upon the young lawyer, who had recently closed a term of service as postmaster, and asked for the balance due the government. Dr. Henry went with the agent, to loan the money, feeling sure that the young man was too poor to have any. Lincoln excused himself, went to his boarding-house, and soon returned with an old stocking, from which he took seventeen dollars and sixty cents, the exact balance due, in the identical coins that had been paid to him. He never used, even temporarily, money not his own. 
"You must tender $30,000 first," said he to a client who consulted him about a land claim. "But I can't get so much money." "I'll get it," said Lincoln; and, stepping into a bank, he told the cashier that he wanted to take $30,000 to make a legal tender with, adding, "I will bring it back in an hour or two." The cashierhandedhim themoney withouteventaking areceipt. 
"Mr. Lincoln would not take a case unless he really thought the client ought to win," said a lawyer of Springfield, Ills.; "and it came to be understood by court, bar, jury, and spectators, when Abraham Lincoln brought a suit, that his client was in the right, and ought to obtain a verdict. I donotsay this from political favoritism, for we belonged to opposing parties, butsimplybecauseit isthetruth." 
He refused to argue a case when he learned that his client had deceived him by representing that his cause was just. His partner, however, took the case, and won it, receiving a fee of nine hundred dollars, of which Lincoln refused to take his half. He had an ambition to be right, and yearned for wholeness and symmetry of character. When he received a joint fee, he would always divide the very money received, and tie his partner's half in a separate parcel. 
The honesty that compelled him as a storekeeper to walk six miles after dark to make right a needy woman's change, rather than wait for a chance to explain the matter later, made "Honest Abe" the most conspicuous figure in thepantheonof humanintegrity. 
When his friends telegraphed from the Chicago convention that his nomination could be obtained only by securing the votes of two opposing delegations, and that these votes could be obtained by promising positions in the cabinet to leaders of the delegations, he replied, "I authorize no bargains, and willbe bound by none." He had Burke's "chastity of honor, which feels a stainlikea wound." 
What a lesson in honesty is the story of Meyer Anselm, the founder of the fabulous fortune of the Rothschilds, who lived at the close of the eighteenth century, in that Little corner of Frankfort known as Jews' Lane, where his fellow-countrymen were so frightfully persecuted. Even after Napoleon battered down the gates of the city that had locked them in at night and on holidays and Sundays, they were still required to retire at a certain hour, under penalty of death; and they were hounded in a manner which seemed designed to drive them to the lowest condition of life, and far from the practice of honest dealings. Anselm, proving an exception to the ordinary Jew,establishedhimselfin humble quarters, over which he hung a red shield, giving to his family the name of "Rothschild," the German for "red shield." Hereheconductedthebusiness ofamoney lender. 
When Landgrave William of Hesse-Cassel was driven from his estates by Napoleon, he gathered together five millions in silver, and left it with Anselm, not daring to hope for the possibility of getting it back, for he thought the invaders would surely capture it. The Jew, however, was very sharp; and, after hiding it in his garden till the danger from the enemy was over, put it at such interest that, on William's return, Anselm was able to send by his eldest son, to the landgrave's great surprise, a report that the sum loaned, with the usual interest, was at his disposal. In all the generations of thefamily,notone member ofit has brought astainon his character,either as regards integrity or purity of life; and it is prophesied today that, at the close of the next century, the Rothschilds will be worth five thousand million dollars. It is a sad day for a young man when he gets the idea that he can obtain adollarwithoutsquarely earningit. 
Anytransactioninwhichyou expecttoget somethingfornothing,ormore than a fair equivalent for what you give, is a dishonest and dishonorable transaction, whether it be a raffle, a lottery, or any game of chance; whether thesumbe anickeloramillion dollars. 
Every time you utilize funds not your own in your private business, even temporarily, you are perilously near dishonesty. "Monday, I dabbled in stock operations; Tuesday, owned millions, by all calculations; Wednesday, my Fifth Avenue palace began; Thursday, I drove out a spanking bay span; Friday, I gave a magnificent ball; And Saturday, ' smashed,' with nothing at all." 
4 

HABIT —THE SERVANT, —THE MASTER 
Habit, if wisely and skillfully formed, becomes truly a second nature.— Bacon. 

The chain of habit coils itself around the heart like a serpent, to gnaw andstifleit.—Hazlitt. 

You cannot, in any given case, by any sudden and single effort, will to be true,ifthehabitofyour lifehasbeeninsincerity.—F. W. Robertson. 

It is a beautiful provision in the mental and moral arrangement of our nature, that that which is performed as a duty may, by frequent repetition, become a habit; and the habit of stern virtue, so repulsive to others, may hang around our neck like a wreath of flowers.—Paxton Hood. 

WHENshall Ibegin totrain mychild?" asked a young mother ofa learned physician. "How old is the child?" inquired the doctor. "Two years, sir." "Thenyou havelost justtwoyears," repliedhe, gravely. 
You must begin with his grandmother," said Oliver Wendell Holmes, whenaskeda similar question. 
"Atthemouth oftheMississippi," says Beecher, "howimpossiblewould it be to stay its waters, and to separate from each other the drops from the various streams that have poured in on either side, — of the Red River, the Arkansas, the Ohio, and the Missouri, — or to sift, grain by grain, the particles of sand that have been washed from the Alleghany, or the Rocky Mountains; yet how much more impossible would it be when character is the river,andhabits are theside-streams!" 
"We sow an act, we reap a habit; we sow a habit, we reap a character." While correct habits depend largely on self-discipline, and often on self-denial, bad habits, like weeds, spring up, unaided and untrained, to choke the plants of virtue, and, as with Canada thistles, allowed to go to seed in a fair meadow,wemayhave " oneday'sseeding,ten years' weeding." 
We seldom see much change in people after they get to be twenty-five or thirtyyearsof age, except in going further in the way they have started; but it is a great comfort to think that, when one is young, it is almost as easy to acquire a good habit as a bad one, and that it is possible to be hardened in goodnessas wellasinevil. 
Take good care of the first twenty years of your life, and you may hope that the last twenty will take good care of you. A writer on the history of Staffordshire tells of an idiot who, living near a town clock, and always amusing himself by counting the hour of the day whenever the clock struck, continued to strike and count the hour correctly without its aid, when at one timeit happenedtobe injuredbyanaccident. 
Dr. Johnson had acquired the habit of touching every post he passed in the street; and, if he missed one, he was uneasy, irritable, and nervous till he wentbackandtouchedthe neglected post. 
"Even thought is but a habit." Heredity is a man's habit transmitted to his offspring. 
A special study of hereditary drunkenness has been made by Professor Pellman ofBonn University,Germany. Hethustracedthe careers of children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren in all parts of the present German Empire, until he was able to present tabulated biographies of the hundreds descended from some original drunkard. Notable among the persons described by Professor Pellman is Frau Ada Jurke, who was born in 1740, and was a drunkard, a thief, and a tramp for the last forty years of her life, which ended in 1800. Her descendants numbered 834, of whom 709 were traced in local records from youth to death. One hundred and six of the 709 werebornoutof wedlock. 
There were 144 beggars, and 62 more who lived from charity. Of the women,181led disreputable lives. There were in the family 76 convicts, 7 of whom were sentenced for murder. In a period of some seventy-five years, this one family rolled up a bill of costs in almshouses, prisons, and correctional institutions amounting to at least 5,000,000 marks, or about $1,250,000. 
Isaac Watts had a habit of rhyming. His father grew weary of it, and set out to punish him, which made the boy cry out:— "Pray, father, on me mercy take, AndIwillno more versesmake." 
A minister had a bad habit of exaggeration, which seriously impaired his usefulness. His brethren came to expostulate. With extreme humiliation over his fault as they set it forth, he said, "Brethren, I have long mourned over this fault, and I have shed barrels of tears because of it." They gave him up as incorrigible. 
Men carelessly or playfully get into habits of speech or act which become so natural that they speak or act as they do not intend, to their discomfiture. Professor Phelps told of some Andover students, who, for sport, interchanged the initial consonants of adjacent words. "But," said he, "retribution overtook them. On a certain morning, when one of them was leading the devotions, he prayed the Lord to 'have mercy on us, feak and weeble sinners.'" The habit had come to possesshim. 
Many speakers have undesirable habits of utterance or gesture. Some are continually applying the hand to some part of the face, the chin, the whiskers; some give the nose a peck with thumb and forefinger; others have the habit characterized as,— "Washing the hands with invisible soap In a bowl of invisible water." 
"We are continually denying that we have habits which we have been practising all our lives," says Beecher. "Here is a man who has lived forty or fiftyyears;and achanceshot sentenceorwordlanceshim,andrevealsto him a trait which he has always possessed, but which, until now, he had not the remotest idea that he possessed. For forty or fifty years he has been fooling himself about a matter as plain as the nose on his face." Had the angels been consulted, whether to create man, with this principle introduced, that, if a 
man did a thing once, it would be easier the second time, and at length would bedonewithouteffort,theywouldhave said, "Create!" 
Remember that habit is an arrangement, a principle of human nature, which we must use toincrease theefficiencyandeaseofour workinlife. 
"Makesobriety ahabit, andintemperance willbehateful;makeprudencea habit,and reckless profligacywillbeas contrarytothe course of nature in the child, or in the adult, as the most atrocious crimes are to any of us." Out of hundreds of replies from successful men as to the probable cause of failure, "bad habits" was in almost every one. How easy it is to be nobody; it is the simplest thing in the world to drift down the stream, into bad company, into the saloon; just a little beer, just a little gambling, just a little bad company, justalittlekillingof time, andtheworkisdone. 
New Orleans is from five to fifteen feet below high water in the Mississippi River. The only protection to the city from the river is the levee. In May, 1883, a small break was observed in the levee, and the water was runningthrough. 
A few bags of sand or loads of dirt would have stopped the water at first; but it was neglected for a few hours, and the current became so strong that all efforts to stop it were fruitless. A reward of five hundred thousand dollars was offered to any man who would stop it; but it was too late — it could not bedone. 
Bewareof "smallsins" and "whitelies." 
A man of experience says: "There are four good habits, — punctuality, accuracy, steadiness, and dispatch. Without the first, time is wasted; without thesecond,mistakesthemost hurtfulto our owncreditandinterest, and those ofothers,may becommitted;without thethird,nothingcanbewell done; and without the fourth, opportunities of great advantage are lost, which it is impossible torecall." 
Abraham Lincoln gained his clear precision of statement of propositions by practise, and Wendell Phillips, his wonderful English diction by always thinkingandconversingin excellent style. 
"Family customs exercise a vast influence over the world. Children go forth from the parent-nest, spreading the habits they have imbibed over every phase of society. These can easily be traced to their sources." "To be sure, 
this is only a trifle in itself; but, then, the manner in which I do every trifling thing is of very great consequence, because it is just in these little things that Iam forming my business habits. I must see to it that I do not fail here, even if thisisonly asmalltask." 
"A physical habit is like a tree grown crooked. You cannot go to the orchard,and take hold of a tree grown thus, and straighten it, and say, ' Now keepstraight!'andhaveit obey you. What can you do? You can drive down a stake, and bind the tree to it, bending it back a little, and scarifying the bark on one side. And if, after that, you bend it back a little more every month, keeping it taut through the season, and from season to season, at length you will succeed in making it permanently straight. You can straighten it, but you cannotdo itimmediately; youmusttake one ortwo yearsforit." 
Sir George Staunton visited a man in India who had committed murder; and in order not only to save his life, but what was of much greater consequence to him, his caste, he had submitted to a terrible penalty, — to sleepfor seven years on a bed, the entire top of which was studded with iron points, as sharp as they could be without penetrating the flesh. Sir George saw him during the fifth year of his sentence. His skin then was like the hide of a rhinoceros; and he could sleep comfortably on his bed of thorns, and he said that at the end of the seven years he thought he should use the same bed fromchoice. What a vivid parable of a sinful life! Sin, at first a bed of thorns, afteratimebecomescomfortablethroughthedeadeningofmoralsensibility. 
When the suspension bridge over Niagara River was to be erected, the question was, how to get the cable over. With a favoring wind a kite was elevated, which alighted on the opposite shore. To its insignificant string a cord was attached, which was drawn over, then a rope, then a larger one, then a cable; finally the great bridge was completed, connecting the United States withCanada. 
First across the gulf we cast Kite-borne threads till lines are passed, And habit builds the bridge at last. "Launch your bark on the Niagara River," said John B. Gough; "it is bright, smooth, and beautiful. Down the stream you glide on your pleasure excursion. Suddenly someone cries out from the bank, 'Youngmen, ahoy!' 
'Whatisit?' 
"The rapids are below you.' 'Ha! ha! we have heard of the rapids, but we are not such fools as to get there. If we go too fast, then we shall up with the helm, and steer to the shore. Then on, boys, don't be alarmed — there is no danger.' 
"'Young men, ahoy!' 'What is it?' 'The rapids are below you!' 'Ha! ha! we will laugh and quaff. What care we for the future? No man ever saw it. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. We will enjoy life while we may, willcatchpleasureasitflies. There'stimeenoughtosteeroutofdanger.' 
"' Youngmen,ahoy!''Whatisit?' 
'Beware!Beware!Therapidsarebelowyou!' 
"Now you see the water foaming all around. See how fast you pass that point! Up with the helm! Now turn! Pull hard! Quick, quick! Pull for your lives!Pulltillthe bloodstarts fromthenostrils,andthe veinsstand like whip­cords upon the brow! Set the mast in the socket! hoist the sail! — ah! ah! it is too late! Shrieking, cursing, howling, blaspheming, over you go. "Thousands go over the rapids every year, through the power of habit, crying all the while, 'WhenIfindoutthatitisinjuringme,Iwillgiveitup!'" 
A community is often surprised and shocked at some crime. The man was seen on the street yesterday, or in his store, but he showed no indication that he would commit such a crime today. Yet the crime committed today is but a regular and natural sequence of what the man did yesterday and the day before. Itwas but aresultof thefearful momentumofallhispasthabits. 
A painter once wanted a picture of innocence, and drew from life the likeness of a child at prayer. The little suppliant was kneeling by his mother. The palms of his hands were reverently pressed together, and his mild blue eyes were upturned with the expression of devotion and peace. The portrait was much prized by the painter, who hung it up on his wall, and called it "Innocence." Years passed away, and the artist became an old man. Still the picturehungthere. 
He had often thought of painting a counterpart, — the picture of guilt, — buthad not found the opportunity. At last he effected his purpose by paying a visittoa neighboring jail. On the damp floor of his cell lay a wretched culprit heavily ironed. Wasted was his body, and hollow his eyes; vice was visible in his face. The painter succeeded admirably; and the portraits were hung side bysidefor "Innocence" and "Guilt." 
The two originals of the pictures were discovered to be one and the same person, — first, in the innocence of childhood; second, in the degradation of guilt and sin and evil habits. Will-power can be so educated that it will focus the thought upon the bright side of things, upon objects which lift and elevate. Habits of contentment and goodness may be formed the same as any others. 
Walking upon the quarter-deck of a vessel, though at first intolerably confining, becomes by custom so agreeable to a sailor that on shore he often hems himself within the same bounds. Lord Karnes tells of a man who, having relinquished the sea for a country life, reared an artificial mount, with a level summit, resembling a quarter-deck not only in shape, but in size, where hegenerallywalked. 
When Franklin was superintending the erection of some forts on the frontier, as a defense against the Indians, he slept at night in a blanket on a hard floor; and, on his first return to civilized life, he could hardly sleep in a bed. Captain Ross and his crew, having been accustomed, during their polar wanderings, to lie on the frozen snow or a bare rock, afterwards found the accommodations of a whaler too luxurious for them, and the captain exchanged his hammock for achair. 
Two sailors, who had been drinking, took a boat to pull off to their ship. They rowed but made no progress; and presently each began to accuse the other of not working hard enough. Lustily they plied the oars, but after another hour's work still found themselves no farther advanced. By this time they had become tolerably sober; and one of them, looking over the side, said totheother," 
Why, Tom, we haven't pulled the anchor up yet." And thus it is with those who are anchored "to something of which they are not conscious, perhaps, butwhich impedestheirefforts,even though theydotheirvery best. 
"A youth thoughtless, when all the happiness of his home forever depends onthe chancesorthepassionsofanhour!" exclaims Ruskin. 
"A youth thoughtless, when his every act is a foundation-stone of future conduct,andevery imagination afountainof lifeordeath! 
Be thoughtless in any after years, rather than now, — though, indeed, there is only one place where a man may be nobly thoughtless, — his death­bed. Nothinking shouldever belefttobedonethere." 
Sir James Paget tells us that a practised musician can play on the piano at the rate of twenty-four notes a second. For each note anerve current must be transmitted from the brain to the fingers, and from the fingers to the brain. Each note requires three movements of a finger, the bending down and raising up, and at least one lateral, making no less than seventy-two motions in a second, each requiring a distinct effort of the will, and directed unerringlywithacertainspeed,and acertainforce, toacertainplace. 
Some can do this easily, and be at the same time busily employed in intelligentconversation. Thus, by obeying the law of habit until repetition has formed a second nature, we are able to pass the technique of life almost whollyover tothenervecenters,leavingour minds freetoactor enjoy. 
Allthroughour livesthebrainisconstantly educatingdifferentparts ofthe body to form habits which will work automatically from reflex action, and thus isdelegatedtothe nervoussystem alargepartoflife'sduties. 
This is nature's wonderful economy to release the brain from the drudgery of individual acts, and leave it free to command all its forces for higher service. Man's life-work is a masterpiece or a botch, according as each little habit has been perfectly or carelessly formed. It is said that if you invite one ofthedevil'schildren to your home the whole family will follow. So one bad habitseems tohavearelationshipwithalltheothers. 
For instance, the one habit of negligence, slovenliness, makes it easier to form others equally bad, until the entire character is honeycombed by the invasion ofafamilyofbadhabits. 
A man is often shocked when he suddenly discovers that he is considered a liar. He never dreamed of forming such a habit; but the little misrepresentations to gain some temporary end, had, before he was aware of it, made a beaten track in the nerve and brain tissue, until lying has become almost a physical necessity. He thinks he can easily overcome this habit, but he will not. He is bound to his habit with cords of steel; and only by painful, watchful, and careful repetition of the exact truth, with a special effort of the will-power at each act, can he form a counter trunk-line in the nerve and brain tissue. 
Societyisoften shocked by the criminal actof aman who hasalways been considered upright and true. But, if they could examine the habit-map in his nervous mechanism and brain, they would find the beginnings of a path leading directly to his deed, in the tiny repetitions of what he regarded as trivial acts. All expert and technical education is built upon the theory that these trunk-lines of habit become more and more sensitive to their accustomedstimuli, andrespondmoreand morereadily. 
We are apt to overlook the physical basis of habit. Every repetition of an act makes us more likely to perform that act, and discovers in our wonderful mechanism a tendency to perpetual repetition, whose facility increases in exact proportion to the repetition. Finally the original act becomes voluntary froma naturalreaction. 
It is cruel to teach the vicious that they can, by mere force of will-power, "turn-about face," and go in the other direction, without explaining to them the scientific process of character-building, through habit-formation. What we do today is practically what we did yesterday; and, in spite of resolutions, unless carried out in this scientific way, we shall repeat tomorrow what we havedonetoday. 
How unfortunate that the science of habit-forming is not known by mothers, and taught in our schools, colleges, and universities! It is a science, comparedwithwhichotherdepartments ofeducationsink intoinsignificance. 
The converted man is not always told that the great battle is yet before him; that he must persistently, painfully, prayerfully, and with all the will­power he possesses, break up the old habits, and lay counter lines which will lead to the temple of virtue. He is not told that, in spite of all his efforts, in some unguarded moment, some old switch may be left open, some old desire may flash along the line, and that, possibly before he is aware of it, he may find himself yielding to the old temptation which he had supposed to be conqueredforever. 
An old soldier was walking home with a beefsteak in one hand and a basketofeggs in theother, when someoneyelled, "Halt! Attention!" Instantly the veteran came to a stand; and, as his arms took the position of "attention," eggs and meat went tumbling into the street, the accustomed nerves responding involuntarilyto the old stimulus. 
Saint Paul understood the force of habit. "I find, then," he declares, "the law,thatto me who would do good, evil is present. For I delight in the law of God after the inward man; but I see a different law in my members, warring against the law in my mind, and bringing me into captivity, under the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver mefrom the body of this death!" He referred to the ancient custom of binding a murderer face to face with the dead body of his victim, until suffocated by its stench and dissolution. "I would give a world, if I had it," said an unfortunate wretch, "to be a true man; yet in twenty-four hours I may be overcome and disgraced withashilling'sworth ofsin." 
'How shallI ahabitbreak?' Asyoudidthathabitmake. Asyougathered, youmust lose; Asyouyielded,now refuse. Threadbythreadthe strandswetwist, Till theybindus,neckandwrist; Threadbythreadthe patienthand Mustuntwine,erefreewestand; Aswebuilded,stoneby stone, We musttoil unhelped,alone, Till thewallisoverthrown." 

5 TRIFLES 
On a single winged word hath hung the destiny of nations.—Wendell Phillips. 

Pluck one thread, and the web ye mar; Break but one Of a thousand keys,andthe painingjar Throughallwillrun.—Whittier. 

“Alittlebitof patienceoftenmakes the sunshinecome, Andalittlebitof lovemakes avery happyhome; Alittle bit ofhopemakes arainydaylook gay, Andalittlebitof charitymakesglad awearyway." 

THE San Francisco "Post" says that a bookkeeper in a wholesale house in that city passed sleepless nights for three weeks in fruitless efforts to make his books balance. There was an apparent shortage of nine hundred dollars that could not be accounted for. He added up columns and struck balances untilhewas almostinsane. 
He finally worked himself into the frame of mind that usually lands a man in Canada, the insane asylum, or a suicide's grave, when the manager of the houseinvitedhisconfidence. Then they went over the books together, but the ninehundreddollarsshortagewas still there. 
The head of the house was called in, and the work of overhauling accounts commenced again. The two had not gone far before they came to an entry of nineteen hundred dollars. "Why, that should be one thousand dollars!" declaredtheemployer. "Howdidit happen tobeenterednineteen hundred?" 
A careful examination showed that a fly had been crushed between the pages of the cash-book, and one of its legs made a tail of the first cipher of theone-thousand-dollar entry, convertingitinto anine. 
It is said that, when the first clock to keep accurate time was made, it was carriedbyits maker,HenryVick,to CharlesV. of France. 
The king looked at it, and said: "Yes, it works well; but you have got the figures on the dial wrong." "I think not, your majesty," said Vick. "Yes; that four should be four ones." "Surely not, your majesty," protested the 
clockmaker. "Yes,itshouldbefourones," persistedthe king. 
"Youarewrong, yourmajesty." 
"I am never wrong!" answered the king, in anger. "Take it away, and correctthe mistake." 
The clockmaker did as he was commanded; and so we have IIII instead of IVonthe dialsofour clocks. 
At the end of the fourth year of the Plymouth Colony, there were only one hundred and eighty persons in New England. The managers had expected profitable returns, and were disappointed. They had expended thirty-four thousand dollars; there was neither profit, nor the hope of any. In November, 1627, eight of the leading men of Plymouth purchased from the Londoners their entire interest for the sum of nine thousand dollars. Yet the leaven of PlymouthColonyideasand enterprisehasleavenedthewhole United States. 
To that little boy, James Watt, sitting on a bench in the chimney-corner, waiting for his supper, the world is indebted for the discovery of the power there is in steam. What a mighty power it is! What would become of the railroads, the steamships, and the ten thousand industries of the world, of which steamis now the propelling power, should it cease to "turn the wheel," or fire and water should fail to generate steam? Every wheel, every shaft, every spindle now driven by steam, would come to a standstill; the hum of the manufactories of the world would be hushed into silence; millions of people would be thrown out of employment, millions would be driven to the wall, tostarvation,to death. 
One of the hardest things to learn is that the greatest lives are made up of trifles. Emergencies, great things, occur rarely in our lives. It is the steady stream of little things, trifles, unimportant events, experiences so small as scarcely toleaveatracebehind,which make upthe sumtotaloflife. 
The great Helmholtz attributed his career to typhoid fever, which confined him tothe house. With a little money he bought a microscope, which led him into thefield of science,where hebecame sofamous. 
A fair face and a winsome smile led to the ten-year siege of Troy, and inspired Homertowriteoneofthegreatepicsof the world. 
The Bucket of Modena is a striking illustration of the Wise King's saying about the "beginning of strife." In 1005 some soldiers of the commonwealth of Modena ran away with this bucket from a public well belonging to the state of Bologna. The thing might be worth a shilling; but it produced a quarrel, andawarwhichlasted for ascoreof years. 
"The Crimean war, with its appalling loss of life and treasure, in which were engaged the four great powers, England, France, Turkey, and Russia, grew out of the refusal to give up a key. A shrine in the church of the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem was claimed by the Greek Church, which locked it up and declined to surrender the key. This refusal made the Latin Church angry. The controversy became so warm that Russia stepped in as the patron of the Greek Church, and France of the Latin Church, and the complications increased. Russia demanded of Turkey that some repairs be made to the church. Turkey refused the demand. 
As England had been in the habit of helping the Turks, she took sides with them, and drifted into an alliance with France against Russia. From that trifling and contemptible beginning came the charge of the 'Six Hundred,' the costly assault of the Malakoff, the destruction ofthousands of bravemen who died in the trenches before Sebastopol, and the slaughter of many desperate battles." 
"The history of France was changed, and a powerful dynasty overthrown, becauseofa glass of wine. The Duke of Orleans, son of King Louis Philippe, while breakfasting with friends, was tempted to drink a glass too much. On parting from his companions he took a carriage, the horses became frightened; he leaped to the ground, and, being slightly unbalanced, lost his footing. His head was dashed against the pavement; and he was carried away bruisedandunconscious,soon todie. 
But for that extra glass of wine, he would probably have kept his seat, or, when springing to the ground, would have alighted on his feet. That glass of wine brought about the death of the heir-apparent to the throne, the exile of hisfamily, andtheconfiscationoftheir immensewealth." 
"Abouthalf acenturyagoatraveler stoppedtorestina little country tavern in the North of England. While he remained there, the carrier came with a letter for the landlady, who took it, examined it for a moment, and then gave it back, saying that she could not afford to pay the postage on it, which amounted to two shillings. Upon this the traveler insisted upon paying the postage forher. 
When the carrier had gone, she confessed that there was nothing in the letter, but that she and her brother, who lived at a distance, had agreed upon certainmarks on the outside, by which each could ascertain whether the other was well. 
The traveler was Rowland Hill, a member of Parliament, who was at once struck withthepeople'sneedofa low rate of postage. Within a few weeks, he introduced a plan into the House of Commons to secure this result. From that littlecircumstancegrewthesystem ofcheap postage." 
General Grant relates that his mother sent him to a neighbor's to borrow some butter. There he heard read a letter as to a possible vacancy at West Point. He applied, and the way opened for him to obtain the military education which made him so useful in the crisis of his country. He declared that it was because his mother happened to be out of butter that he became generaland president. 
The upsetting of a gig was the occasion of Washington's being born in the United States; an error of a miner in sinking a well led to the discovery of Herculaneum; and a blunder in nautical adventures resulted in the discovery of the Island of Madeira. In Chicago, a boy paring an apple scratched his palm with the point of a knife-blade, and died of lockjaw in ten days; in Philadelphia, a man jumped out of bed, stepped on a tack, which entered the sole ofhisfoot, anddiedin aweek. 
One of the most fatal of all diseases, blood poisoning, seems totally out of proportion to the apparent cause that may produce it. A man cut his finger with the sharp edge of a sheet of paper he was folding; from that little wound blood-poisoningset in,causingdeath. A person addicted to the habit of biting the finger-nailsbitinto the quick, anddiedintwo weeks. 
A gentleman in New York had a mote in his eye. He neglected it so long that,when heatlengthwenttoan oculist,itwasbeyond his power to save the eye. The whole side of his face swelled, erysipelas set in, and in a week he died. 
A man in England approaching middle age, had a few gray hairs above his forehead which displeased his youthful fiancée; to please her, he allowed her to pull them out. Noticing a little inflammation where they had been removed, he thought little of it till a day later, when it spread so alarmingly that he consulted a physician; but the mischief was done, and, in spite of all efforts, helivedbutaweek. 
The child of Princess Alice of England was ill with diphtheria, and begged itsmotherforakiss. She gavethe kissandherlife. 
Neglect to dot an "i" or cross a "t" has swept away more than one Fortune. Failure to close a door or to turn a key has laid great blocks of buildings in ashes, causing not only loss of property, but throwing hundreds of poor peopleoutof employment. 
A child playing with matches caused the destruction of two hundred and thirty-two houses in the Hungarian village of Nemethi. The entire population was thereby renderedbankrupt. 
"Thebad thingabout alittlesinisthat itwon'tstaylittle." 
It may be only the breaking of a hair-spring in a conductor's or an engineer's watch, and two minutes' silence, and two crowded express trains, under fearful headway, come together. The effect of the breaking of so small a thing may be felt around the world, spreading the pall of sorrow over scores ofhappyhomes, and causing tenderfeettotravellife'sroughjourneyalonein sorrow'sdarkening path; Guard carefully against all the big "little things," but remember that the man who can ignore small worries is sometimes greater than he who can overcome great obstacles. "Ten thousand tedious trifles attended to, — ten thousand orders given and disappointments borne, — go tothemakingup ofa triumph." 
Yet Mr. Careless Nevermind and Miss Notparticular think that great men deal only with great things. The man who has no detail in his nature, who feelsabovethe smallestthings,will never succeedin anything. 
When legal papers are served by mail the postage must be prepaid in full to make the service valid. The office-boy of a prominent Broadway firm one day put a two-cent stamp on a letter containing the summons and complaint 
in a case, and mailed it to the defendant's counsel. The postage was two cents short, and the defendant's counsel, after paying the additional two cents, was in a position to claim judgmentby default,on the ground that he had not been legallyserved. 
The plaintiff's attorney immediately got an order to show cause why the default should not be opened. There was a long argument in court, and several lengthy affidavits were submitted. The case was finally reopened, upon paymentofthirtydollarsforcosts. Thus, the time of the court for nearly two hours, thirty dollars in costs, and the fees of two leading lawyers were madenecessaryto correctthemistakeoftwocentsmadebyan office-boy. 
Charles Dickens, in "All the Year Round," says, "Someone was asked, 'Whatisa genius?'Hereplied, 'Abeingwho pays attentiontotrifles.'" 
One of Handel's matchless harmonies was suggested to him by hearing the sounds from ablacksmith'sanvil. 
A child of a Dutch spectacle-maker, playing with his brothers and sisters, put two glasses together in sport, and was startled to see that the church steeple had apparently come forward to meet him. All looked in turn with equal surprise, and then got their father to look. He, too, was astonished, but thoughthe saw a chance for profit in making a scientific toy for older people. He consulted Galileo, who at once perceived the value of the idea to astronomers, and constructed a rude telescope. With this he made greater discoveries than many a modern astronomer, though equipped with lenses threefeetindiameter, andofthemost delicateadjustment. 
A lame man, walking in Pittsburg one day, when the sidewalks were slippery, fell, and his hat rolled along the walk in front of a boy, who kicked it into the street. Another boy came along, helped the old man up, picked up his hat, and assisted him to a hotel. The man asked the boy's name, and thanked him for his kind assistance. About a month after, there came to the secondboyadraftforone thousanddollars. He didalittlething, but itpaid. 
Kind words are but little things; but they have changed the aspect of the whole world tomany adespairingcreature,and saved manyasoul. 
A true story in the "Congregationalist" is that some girls in extremely low walks of life once expressed their gratitude to Mrs. Gale for what she had done for them. One of them went on to say, that "when Mr. Gale went out, you handed him his hat, and he said, bowing, 'Thank you, dear!' Mrs. Gale, none of us girls ever heard a man say 'dear' to a woman before." Going home, MaggyBurnssaid, "Girls,wasn'tthatgrand, thewayhe treated her!" 
They decided to try something similar. "Well, I thought I'd try it first whenfather camehomefromwork, andsays, 'Dinner ready?' andIsaid, 'Yes, dear;'andhenever said nothing, just looked at me. Now, Mrs. Galemyfather cared for my mother, and was good to her; but I never heard him use such a word to her. NextI tried it on Jack (my brother), an' he said 'Softie!" so I kept still till Tom called, — Tom and me has kep' company two years now, — an' when he asked me something and I answered, 'Yes, dear,' he liked it awful, an' we'vesaid iteversince," —withsuch ahappysigh. 
A person was once watching the great sculptor Canova, while he was completing one of his marvelous statues. The taps of the artist's mallet were seemingly so trivial and meaningless that the visitor thought he was making sport of his work; but the artist rebuked him with these words: "The touches Which you ignorantly hold in such small esteem are the very things which make the difference between the failure of a bungler and the perfection of a master." 
When Canova was about to begin his famous statue of Napoleon his keen eye detected a tiny red line running through the splendid block of marble that atgreatcosthad been fetched from Paros, and he refused to touch chisel to it. It has been calculated that, if a single grain of wheat produces fifty grains in one year's growth, and these and succeeding crops be counted, and yield proportionately, the product at the end of the twelfth year would suffice to supply the inhabitants of the earth for centuries. The single grain would have multiplied itself 244,140,625,000,000,000,000 times. 
Our sun is 886,000 miles in diameter; yet, if sought from a distant star throughatelescopehavingasilk threadacross itslens, it wouldbeinvisible. 

6 COURAGE 

Shakespeare. 
Fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns. Shakespeare. Success is the child of audacity.—Beaconsfield. If courage is gone, then all is gone.— Goethe. There are some things I am afraid of; I am afraid to do a mean thing.—JamesA. Garfield. 
HOW long have I to live?" asked Captain de L, an aide-de-camp of the Duke of Wellington, when he heard that Napoleon had escaped from Elba, and was againat Paris. 
"Although you are in an advanced stage of consumption," replied the captain'sphysician, "withcareyoumayliveseveralmonths." 
"Several months only!" exclaimed de L , "then I may as well die in battle asinmy bed." 
He rejoined his regiment, fought at Waterloo, received a wound which removedall thediseasedpartofhislungs,andlived forseveralyears. 
While Charles the Twelfth, during the siege of Stralsund, was dictating a letter to his secretary, a bomb was thrown upon the house, pierced the roof, and fell into the very chamber of the king. At this fearful sight, the pen droppedfromthetremblinghandofthe secretary. 
"Whatisthematter?" said the king,calmly. 
"Ah,your majesty, the bomb." 
"Well," replied the king, "what has the bomb to do with the subject of the letter? Writeon." 
Zedlitz, the famous Prussian general, won his spurs by an act of daring. The eagle-eyed Frederick had singled him out as a hero, when he was a lieutenant in the army. He was ordered to attend the king in a reconnaissance. While crossing a bridge, the king suddenly said to the young soldier, "What would you do if both avenues to the bridge were in possession of the enemy?" "I would do this," said Zedlitz, and leaped his horse over the rail into the Oder. He swam safely ashore, and was saluted by the delighted king asmajor beforehe landed. 
Von Moltke was a man of great courage. When a young officer, he said to the German Diet, after they refused to accept his system of frontier defenses and plan of reorganizing the armies of the various states on a uniform basis, "Verywell, thenPrussiamustdo it alone." 
At the bridge of Lodi, Lannes was the first to cross, and Napoleon the second. Lannes, in utter recklessness, dashed among the Austrians and seized a banner, when his horse fell dead under him. He jumped on a horse behind an Austrian officer, ran his sword through the man's body, and hurled him from the steed. Taking his seat, he fought and killed six Austrians, alone, and madehisway back tohistroops. Hewaspromoted onthe field. 
It was moral courage which enabled George Stephenson to test the efficacy of the safety lamp he had invented for the use of miners. Determined to give it a thorough trial, he surprised his friends by descending a mine, and inquiring for the most dangerous passage. He was told of one level that was filled with gas, and at once started forward to make his test. The rest of the partyshrankback,and got intosafe quarters. 
He was moving forward, perhaps to death, and to failure, which was worse;buthisheartdidnotquail,norhishand tremble. 
Having arrived at the place of danger, he stretched out his lamp in the full rushofthe explosivegas,and patientlyawaitedthe issue. At first the flame of thelampincreased,then itwavered, —itwaned, — andgradually it expired. 
The foul air made no further sign. There was no explosion, and it was evident that Stephenson had discovered a tolerably safe means of lighting up a mine without risk of igniting its combustible air. In other words, he had provided for the safety of hundreds and hundreds of lives. This was "the first practicalminers'safety lamp." 
An instance of heroic devotion is recorded of John Maynard, "the helmsman of Lake Erie," who, with the steamer on fire around him, held fast tothewheelinthevery jaws of the flames, until he had guided the vessel into harbor, and saved the many lives within her, at the cost of his own fearful agony,while slowlyscorched todeathbytheflames. 
Every boy reader of "Tom Brown at Rugby" has thrilled when he came to the dormitory scene. George Arthur was a slender youth, and this his first day outofhis mother's care,amongthesturdyboysofRugbyschool. 
He was made Tom's roommate, and they had gone to the dormitory. No boy had been known to kneel to pray in that company. The boys were laughing and talking, as they slowly undressed for bed. Gentle, homesick Arthur asked if he might wash. "Certainly," said Tom, and went on talking with the fellows. Then Arthur dropped on his knees by his bedside, as he had done every day from his childhood. The light burned clear, the noise went on. It was a trying moment for the little lonely boy. One of the crowd shied a slipperathim. 
Tom turned and saw what had happened, and in a moment he turned champion; "the boot he had pulled off flew straight at the head of the bully. 'Ifany other fellowwantsthe other boot,he knowshow togetit.'" 
But this courageous defense of the praying boy proved the beginning of better daysatRugby. 
Hannah Dustin, in Colonial history, was captured at the burning of Haverhill,Mass., butescaped after killingnineIndians. 
Women have prompted men to courage, and then bestowed the wreath of reward. 
The Spartan mother said to her son, who complained that his sword was short, "Add a step to it." "Return with your shield, or on it," was said by anotherSpartanmothertotheboy shesenttothefield. 
In our late war, one woman said to another, "I would rather be a soldier's widowthanacoward's wife." 
In Scotland, two women who refused to accept the established worship were sentenced to be drowned. They were fastened to stakes in the sand 
between high and low water mark, the elder woman nearest the advancing tide, inthehopethatthesightofherdeathfirst might persuade the younger to renounceher faith. 
The sight was terrible, but the courage of the survivor was not wanting. She sang until the water choked her, when she was unbound and given a last chanceto yield;but, truetoherfaith, sherefused, andwas drowned. 
"From the crowd A woman's voice cried, a very bitter cry, 'Gie in, gie in, my bairnie, dinna ye drown, Gie in and tak' the oath.'And still the tidi flowed in, And drove the people back, and silenced them. She sang the psalm, 'To Thee I lift my soul.' The tide flowed in, and, rising to her waist,— 'To Thee, my God, I lift my soul,' she sang. The tide flowed in, and, rising to her throat, — 
She sang no more, but lifted up her face; And there was glory over all the sky, "And there was glory over all the sea, A flood of glory—and the lifted face Swam in it, till it bowed beneath the flood, And Scotland's noble martyr wentto God." 
The last four years of Palissy's life were spent in prison. Henry III. gave way at last to the evil counsel of the Guise party, and issued an edict condemning all who exercised the reformed faith to death. Under this edict Palissywascommittedtothe Bastille;and there Henry visited him, and urged him to renouncethenew religion. 
The king told the potter that he would be compelled to order Palissy, and two girls who were his fellow prisoners, to death, unless they recanted. Palissy returned the following characteristic answer to the monarch: "You havesaid severaltimes that you feel pity for me; but it is I who pity you, who have said 'I am compelled.' That is not speaking like a king. Thesegirls andI, who have part in the kingdom of heaven, will teach you to talk royally. The Guises, all your people, and yourself, cannot compel a potter to bow down to images of clay." 
The greater part of the courage that is needed in the world is not of a heroickind. Courage may be displayed in everyday life as well as on historic fields of action. The common need is for courage to be honest, courage to resisttemptation, couragetospeak the truth,couragetobewhat wereallyare, and not to pretend to be what we are not, courage to live honestly within our means, andnotdishonestlyuponthemeansofothers. 
A great deal of the unhappiness and vice of the world is owing to weaknessandindecision, inotherwords,to lackofcourage. 
Write on your doors the saying wise and old, "Be bold! be bold!" and everywhere—" Be bold; Be not toobold!"—Longfellow. 

For man's great actions are performed in minor struggles. There are obstinate and unknown braves who defend themselves inch by inch in the shadows against the fatal invasion of want and turpitude. There are noble and mysterious triumphs which no eye sees, no renown rewards, and no flourish of trumpets salutes. Life, misfortune, isolation, abandonment and povertyarebattlefields whichhavetheirheroes.—VictorHugo. 

Then to side with Truth is noble when we share her wretched crust, Ere hercausebringfameandprofit,and 'tisprosperoustobe just.—Lowell. 

7 SELF-CONTROL 

Iwillbelord overmyself.—Goethe. 

He that would govern others first should be the master of himself.— Massinger. 

Keepcool,andyou command everybody.—St. Just. 

Strength of character consists of two things,— power of will and power of self-restraint It requires two things, therefore, for its existence,— strong feelingsandstrong command overthem.— F. W. Robertson. 
Reader,attend—whetherthy soul Soarfancy's flightsabovethe pole, Or darklygrubthisearthlyhole, Inlow pursuit: Know,prudent, cautiousself-control Iswisdom'sroot.—Burns. 
“SO YOU think," asked Mrs. Rasper, "that a little temper is a bad thing in a woman?" "Certainly not," replied her husband; "it is a good thing, and she 
ought never tolose it." Mrs. Livingstone, the mother of the missionary, and Mrs. Byron, the mother of the poet, had each put into their hands one of nature's finest gems: the calm Christian temper of the one preserved her gem for a life of almost unqualified nobility; the uncontrolled temper of the other made hers little better thanasplendidruin. No one has a temper naturally so good that it does not need attention and control; and none a temper so bad but that, by proper culture,itmaybecomepleasant. A medical authority of highest repute affirms that excessive labor, exposure to wet and cold, deprivation of sufficient quantities of necessary and wholesome food, habitually bad lodging, sloth, and intemperance, are all deadly enemies to human life; but are none of them as bad as violent and ungoverned passions, — that men and women have frequently lived to an advanced age in spite of these, but that instances are very rare where people ofirascibletempers livetoextremeold age. The celebrated Mr. Fletcher of Saltoun was possessed of a very irritable temper. His butler intimated his intention of seeking another place, when Mr. Fletcher proceeded gently to urge him to continue in his service. "I cannot bear your temper, sir," said the butler. "I am passionate, I confess," said Mr. Fletcher; "but my passion is no sooner on than it is off." "Yes," rejoined the butler, "butthenit'snosooner off thanit's on again!" Dumont heard Mirabeau deliver a report on Marseilles; every word was interrupted by abusive epithets, — “calumniator, liar, assassin, scoundrel." Mirabeau paused, and, in honeyed tone, addressing the most furious, said, "I wait, Messieurs,tillthese amenities be exhausted." "I have heard," says Matthew Henry, "of a married couple, who, though both of a hasty temper, yet lived comfortably together by observing a rule on which theyhad agreed, —neverto bebothangryat thesame time." "I am Apollyon," said a crank who invaded the library of the Duke of Wellington; "I am sent to kill you." "Kill me? Very odd." "I am Apollyon, and must put you to death." "Obliged to do it today?" "I am not told the day or the hour, but I must do my mission." "Very inconvenient," said the duke, "very busy, — great many letters to write. Call again, and write me word, — I'll beready for you." Thedukewenton withhiscorrespondence. Themaniac was appalled and calmed by the matter-of-fact coolness of the stern, 
immovableoldman,and backedout oftheroom. 
When Socrates found in himself any disposition to anger, he would check it byspeakinglow. 
If conscious of being in a passion, keep your mouth shut, lest you increase it. Many a person has dropped dead in a rage. Fits of anger bring fits of disease. 
"Be calm in arguing," says George Herbert, "for fierceness makes error a fault,and truthdiscourtesy." 
"How do you keep out of quarrels?" asked a friend of another. "Oh, easily enough; if a man gets angry with me, I let him have the quarrel all to himself." 
In the window of a room in Queen's College, Oxford, is an inscription which records that it was once occupied by the young hero king, Henry V, who is described as,— "victor hostium et sui," conqueror of his enemies and of himself. He conquered his enemies at Agincourt; but the conquest of himselfrequired afarmore desperatestruggle. 
Beaconsfield was asked how he managed to retain the favor of the queen. His answer was, "You see, I never contradict, and I sometimes forget," — a goodrulefor others besidesprime-ministers. 
A new-fledged nominee of his political party was directed to an experienced politician as one who would give him lessons in political success, and the way to gain votes. The elder gave his terms and "five dollars forevery timeyou break mydirections." 
"All right," said the nominee. 
"When will you begin?" asked the instructor. 
"Right off, this moment." 
"Very well; the first lesson is, you must never resent any evil you hear of yourself. Be on your guard all the time." 
"Oh, that I can do; I can brace up against what people say of me. I care nothing for that." 
"Very well; that is the first of my lessons; though, after all, I must be frank to say that I don't want such an unprincipled rascal as you are elected." 
"Sir, how dare you " — "Five dollars, if you please." 
"Oh! Ah! it's a lesson, is it?" 
"Well, yes; it's a lesson. But then, I mean it all just the same." 
"You impudent " 
—"Five dollars, please." 
"Oh! Ah!" he gasped, "another lesson. 
That makes ten dollars so soon." 
"Yes, ten dollars; would you mind paying as we go; for, unless you pay better than you have the name of paying your debts in general " 
—"You infernal rascal!" 
"Five dollars, please." 
"Ah! another lesson. Well, I would better try to keep my temper." 
"Well, I'll take it all back; I didn't really mean it, of course. For I think you 
are a very respectable sort of man, considering what a low-lived family you come from, and what a disreputable man your father was." 
"You infamous scoundrel!" 
"Five dollars, please." 
This was the first lesson in self-control, for which he paid so dearly. 
"Now," said the elder politician to the nominee, "instead of a five-dollar bill, bear in mind that you lose one vote, at least, every time you lose your temper or resent an insult, and that votes are worth more to you than bank-bills." 
Children should be early taught the power of patience, of an even and unruffled temper, of quiet contentment with their lot, to keep the body in harmonyandwardoffdisease. 
They should be taught that a pure, clean life, a good conscience and cheerfulness are better medicines than the physician or the druggist can supply. They should be taught that bad morals, evil thoughts, a poisoned imagination, whatever produces moral discord, tend to produce physical discordalso,and maydevelop latent disease lurking in the body, or lessen the power ofresistance. 
Nothing else makes such havoc in the lives ofordinary menand women as yielding to sudden fits of anger. How sweet the serenity of habitual self­command! Howmany stinging self-reproachesit sparesus!Whendoesaman feel more at ease with himself than when he has passed through a sudden and strong provocation without speaking a word, or in undisturbed good humor! When, on the contrary, does he feel a deeper humiliation than when he is conscious that anger has made him betray himself by word, look, or action? Nervous irritability is the greatest weakness of character. It is the sharp grit which aggravates friction, and cuts out the bearings of the entire human machine. 
"G. Washington," says Artemus Ward, "was about the best man this world ever sot eyes on. He was a clear-headed, warmhearted, and steady-going man. He never slopt over! The prevailing weakness of most public men is to Slop Over. They rush things. They travel too much on the high presher principle. They git on to the first hobbyhorse whitch trots along, not carin' a sent whether the beest is even-goin', clear-sited, and sound, or spavined, blind,andbawky. Ofcourse, theygitthrowed eventooally,if not sooner. 
When they see the multitood goin' it blind, they go Pel Mel with it, instid of exertin' theirselves to set it right. They can't see that the crowd which is nowbearin'them triumfantly onitsshoulders, willsoon diskiverits error,and cast them into the horsepond of Oblivion, without the slightest hesitashun. Washingtonneversloppedover. 
Thatwasn'tGeorge'sstile." 
At Chester, Penn., lived a shopkeeper who was noted for his patience. One day a man determined to try it. He asked for this cloth and that, of half a dozen kinds andcolors. 
Atlastone seemed tosuit him. "That's whatI want. Nowyoumaygiveme a cent'sworth." The imperturbable shopkeeper took out a cent, cut a piece of cloth to cover it, did it up in a paper, and passed it to the discomfited customer. 
John Henderson was debating with an Oxford student, when the latter grew angry, and threw a glass full of wine in his face. Henderson calmly wiped his face, and coolly said, "This, sir, is a digression; now for the argument." 
"Can a mother," asks the author of "Mother at Home," "expect to govern her child when she cannot govern herself? Family government must most 
emphatically begin at home. It must begin in the bosom of the parent; she must learn to control herself, to subdue her own passions; she must set her children an example of meekness and of equanimity, or reasonably expect that all herefforts tocontroltheirpassionswillbe ineffectual." 
Spies have exhibited self-control in the highest degree; a moment off guard,andthey hang for it. One spy, when captured, pretended to be deaf and dumb. The most ingenious devices were resorted to, but he kept deaf and dumb; at last his captors said, "Well, you can go," but he did not show by the slightest sign that he knew the ordeal was over. They said, " He is what he pretends to be,ora fool." Hisperfectself-controlsaved hisneck. 
Professor Blaikie once put the notice on his recitation-room door, "Will meet the Classes tomorrow." A wag erased the C, making the notice read, "Will meet the lasses tomorrow." The professor, happening to pass by the room before he left town, saw, smiled, and erased the "1," —" Will meet the asses tomorrow." His self-control and ready wit made the students "asses" to themselves. 
Donald McCrie was a Scot, whose canniness once stood him in good stead. Down in the country he kept a small grocery and variety store, with dim windows, dusty cobwebs, and slow sales. He sent up to London for " forty pons" (pounds) ofindigo, replenishmenttolast a dozen years. The order was misread;butwhatwas knownofDonald wasfavorable,andhissupposed orderwas honored, andtheinvoiceof forty tonswas sent. 
Amazement possessed poor Donald. For a week he went about as if dazed, but kept his counsel. He thought of all the ways indigo could be used, — but 
— forty tons! Yet he kept still. Down came a spruce drummer from the metropolis, with coach and span, found Donald in his close quarters, glibly told him that the London firm were convinced there was a mistake, and that he had come to rectify it, and take back the consignment, and would generously paythefreight. 
"Thefirm would notsenda man in this style for nothing," thought Donald, and would not admit there was a mistake. The agent said, "Come over to the public-house;" but Donald controlled his love for the good wine, thinking, "Now is the time for a clear head." By every means the agent tried to make him talk; but Donald parried, and said that "he must not suppose aScotchman would act without knowing what he was doing." The clerk lost his self­control, and said, "The fact is, we have had a call for more indigo than we had by us, and we will pay you a bonus of five hundred pounds, and the freight." Donald shook his head; his thought was that he must see the length of that rope. Another offer was refused; at last the clerk pulled out his instructions and said: "Here, obstinate man, that is as far as I can go, — five thousand pounds." 
Donald calmly accepted. The crop had failed in the West Indies, and government troops had to have blue for their army coats. Donald McCrie madea fortune byhisself-control. 
Aself-controlledmindisa freemind,and freedom ispower. 
Abraham Lincoln in early manhood was quick-tempered and combative; but he learned self-control, and became as patient as he was forceful and sympathetic. "Igotinto the habit of controlling my temper in the Black Hawk war," he said to Colonel Forney, "and the good habit stuck to me as bad habits doto so many." 
Profanity never did any man the least good. It is a sign of weakness. No man is richer, happier, or wiser for it. It recommends no one to society; it is disgustingtorefined people,andabominabletothegood. 
"Mylads," saidanavalcaptain,when reading his orders to the crew on the quarterdecktotakecommandoftheship, "thereis a favor which I ask of you, and which, as a British officer, I expect will be granted by a crew of British seamen. What say you, my lads? Are you willing to grant your new, captain, who promises to treat you well, one favor?" Hi, hi, sir," cried all hands; "please to let's know what it is, sir." "Why, my lads," said the captain, "it is this;thatyou mustallow me tousethefirstoath onthis ship." 
Perfect self-control means such thorough mastery over self as Robert Ainsworth, the lexicographer, possessed, who, when his wife, in a fit of passion, committed his voluminous manuscript to the flames, calmly turned tohis desk and recommenced his labors. You must measure the strength of a man by the power of the feelings he subdues, not by the power of those which subduehim. 
"Did you never see a man receive a flagrant insult, and only grow a little pale, and then reply quietly? Or did you never see a man in anguish, stand as if carved out of solid rock, mastering himself? — or one bearing a hopeless 
daily trial remain silent, and never tell the world what cankered his home peace? That is strength. He who with strong passions remains chaste; he who, keenly sensitive, with manly power of indignation in him, can be provoked, and yet restrain himself and forgive,— these are strong men, the spiritual heroes." 
When Ulysses sailed past the isle of the Sirens, he filled the ears of his crew with wax. and bound himself to the mast, lest they be overcome by the wonderful music which charmed all who listened to it. But when Orpheus sailed by this isle, in search of the Golden Fleece, he made so much better music thathecharmedtheSirens, andsailedbyin safety. 
Sailing past the isle of temptation, we may not be safe by mere morality (bound to the mast or with wax in our ears); but if we are filled with the divine music of Christian manliness and noble character, we can defy all sirens. 
The passions are the winds which urge our vessel forward, and reason is the pilot which steers it; the vessel could not advance without the winds, and withoutthepilotitwould be lost. 
Alexander won the day at Issus, the Granicus, and Arbela, and founded one of the most colossal and enduring of the empires of the world, before he was thirty-threeyears old; yet, hopelessly subdued by his own baser instincts, the glorious young Greek died as a fool dieth, drunken and debauched, at Babylon. The little word no would have saved that famous youth, while the delusive plea, 
"Only for once," consummated his ruin. Napoleon won a hundred terrible battles amid all the pomp and circumstance of magnificent war; yet, when he was flung to die on a barren Atlantic rock, he condescended to ignoble squabbleswithSirHudson Lowe aboutetiquetteandchampagne. 
Shakespearepictures manyphasesofthe ruin ofbodyandsoulwroughtby ungoverned passions. His King John, in ever-increasing lust for power, gradually stifles every noble impulse, every higher attribute of manhood, and sinks almost to the level of a brute. Lear is shown as a victim of uncontrolled rage. In Macbeth and Lady Macbeth, ambition overmasters all sense of duty and honor,and prompts even to murder, after which horror and remorse bring swift and terrible retribution. Othello is slowly consumed by the fires of his own jealousy; and many other characters enforce the lesson that all who yield topassion mustexpectto bewhippedby the scorpionlash oftheirmaster. 
Writing to a lady about some companions, Burns said, "Madam, they would not thank me for my company if I did not drink with them, so I must give themaslice of my constitution." Do not give a sliceofyour constitution, young man,fortheapplause ofa millionfools. 
A vessel, sailing from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario, when a mile or two above Niagara Falls, took fire. The flames soon obtained completemasteryof the ship; and crew and passengers having been taken off in their boats, she was abandoned to her fate. It was night; and, as the huge vessel glided down the river, she seemed a floating furnace, the flames shooting high into the heavens. Watchheras sheapproaches the rapids. 
The banks are lined with people in breathless suspense, waiting for the inevitable moment. On she glides, calmly and steadily, toward the awful verge. At length, with frightful plunge and hissing noise, and coruscations of fire, and gleaming spray, she makes the bound, and instantly disappears amid the whelmingflood. 
There are hundreds of men on fire with evil habit, floating down the current through the dark night of temptation toward the eternal plunge. They stretch out their pleading hands, and entreat us to stop them. We cannot stop them. Godonlycanarrest. 
How often we read the following sign over the threshold of life: "For sale 
— 
grand opportunities, for a song;" "golden chances, for beer." For exchange 

— 
a beautiful home, devoted wife, lovely children, for drink; for sale cheap, all the possibilities of a brilliant life, a competence, for one chance in a thousand at the gaming-table; for exchange, bright prospects, a brilliant outlook, a cultivated intelligence, a college education, a skilled hand, an observant eye, valuable experience, great tact, all exchanged for rum, for a muddled brain, a bewildered intellect, a shattered nervous system, poisoned blood, a diseased body, for fatty degeneration of the heart, for Bright's disease,forashamefuldeath. 


A young man was found in the Mersey River, England, drowned. On a paper found in his pocket was written: "A wasted life! Do not ask anything about me. Drink was the cause. Let me die; let me rot." Within a week the coroner received over two hundred letters from fathers and mothers all over England, asking for a description of that young man. Two hundred homes made sad by the intelligence of one young man's untimely death! Two hundred homes in mourning over absent sons, and hearts made to bleed afresh becauseno tidingsoftheirmissingsonscamebacktothem! 
That demon that lurks in the whisky-bottle mantles millions of homes in thedeepestgloom. 
A German spoke thus at a temperance meeting: "I put my hand on my head, der vas one big pain. Den I put my hand on my pody, and der vas anodder. Den I put my hand in my pocket, and der vas nutting. Now der is no more pain in my head, de pains in my pody are all gone, and der is twenty tollarsinmypocket. Ishallstaymitder temperance." 
The monosyllable no, one of the easiest learned by the child, but the most difficult to practise by the man, contains within it a life's import, and an eternity's weal or woe. The philosophy of the ancients and the wisdom of the moderns maywellbe summedupinthis utterance —no. 
The power to utter the word no is given to the weakest, and the weakest mayutter it stronglyand defiantly; but thepowercomes from itsexercise. Let no man think that at any advanced period of his life he has simply to resolve, and thattheresolutionwill arm himwithstrengthand skillfortheconquest. 
Think you that the purpose of a moment shall in a moment demolish a life's practise? He who reigns within himself, rules passions, desires, and fears, is more than a king. No man can hope to obtain any degree of advancement in life, in character-building or success, without self-control. It is thevery essence ofmanlinessand ofcharacter. 
The truly successful man has all his faculties under self-control. He has a strong grip upon himself, and holds himself to his task, under good fortune and bad, through prosperity and adversity. The man without self-control, however great his abilities, is always at the mercy of his moods and circumstances. 
He cannot fling himself against the enemy. Self-control will succeed with one talent, while self-indulgence will fail with ten. Clarendon said of the great Hampden: "He was supreme governor over his passions, and he had thereby great power over other men's." Self-control gives confidence, not only in the possessor, but in others. Self-control gives credit among business men. Banks will trust a young man who can control himself; he is more reliable. Business men know that the young man who cannot control himself can control neither his own nor others' affairs. A young man may succeed without education and without health; but he cannot succeed without self-control — that mighty grip upon himself which enables him to march to the frontthroughopposition and misfortune. 
Plutarch says of "Olympian," Pericles'name of honor: "So dispassionate a temper, a life so pure and unblemished in the height of power and place, might well be called Olympian, in accordance with our conception of the divine beings." "When Pericles went up to the bema to speak, he prayed the gods that no word might slip unaware, unsuitable to the matter and the occasion. There was a rude fellow who dogged and reviled him, all the afternoon, and at night followed him home, still reviling him at the door. Pericles called his servant, and told him to get a lantern and light the man home." 
A "Fabian policy" in war is a famous expression, derived from Fabius Maximus, the great Roman antagonist of Hannibal. The "Fabian policy" was that of "masterly inactivity," which saved Rome in a critical time. This great general was not deficient in daring. Sent to Carthage as ambassador, he rose, after an unsatisfactory session, folded his cloak so as to form a cavity, then addressed the nobles of Carthage: "Here we bring you peace and war; take which you please." Being answered that he might give which he pleased, he indignantlyexclaimed, "ThenI giveyouwar." 
Hannibal, the Carthaginian Alexander, rapidly overran Spain, climbed and crossed the Alps, poured down into northern Italy, and defeated the Roman army at Lake Thrasimene. Then all Rome called on Fabius. But this was the time for self-control; and he decided at once on the policy which gained him hisnameCunctator,or "Delayer." 
"He dogged his enemies' steps, but would never risk an engagement. The richest districts of southern Italy were laid waste under his very eyes. But he could not be provoked into any rash movement. By a succession of skilful movements, marches and countermarches, always choosing good defensive positions, he harassed his antagonist, who could never draw him into ground favorableforattack, while Fabius watched every opportunity from mistake or neglectonHannibal's part." 
"Maneuvering among the hills, where Hannibal's horses were useless, he cut off his supplies, harassed him incessantly, did everything except fight. His steady adherence to this plan, in spite of all misconceptions which his cautionhad aroused atRome,evincedthe moral strengthoftheman. 
He was suspected of an ambition for prolongation of his command. Hannibal was one of the few men in Italy who understood him. The policy was newtothe Romans,accustomed toattack. 
The tactics of Fabius disgusted the men. Minucius, in his absence, gained a slight victory; he was given half of the army, and would have been annihilated, but Fabius came to the rescue. Fabius' six months being passed, hewithdrew, warningthenew commanderagainstattacking. 
Disregard of that warning was followed by the disaster at Cannae, in which the Roman army was cut to pieces; eighty senators were killed, and a bushel of rings taken from the fingers of the Roman knights was gathered from the field. The self-control of Fabius was seen in the fact that, instead of taunting his rival, he thanked him, "because he had not despaired of the republic." 
Again hewas called to the command, with Marcellus, together "the Shield and Swordof theRepublic." The FabianpolicysavedRome. 
"Let others write of battles fought, 
Of bloody, ghastly fields, 
Where honor greets the man who wins, 
And death, the man who yields; 
"But I will write of him who fights 
And vanquishes his sins, 
Who struggles on through weary years 
Against himself, and wins." 
"Here lies a soldier, whom all must applaud; 
Who fought many battles at home and abroad. 
But the hottest engagement he ever was in, 
Was the conquest of self in the battle of sin." 
Who conquers self,—he is a hero born, 
His name may die, forgotten by his peers, But yet the seed he sowed in care and tears 
Shall bear rich harvests through immortal years. 
F. A. Shaw. 
A few rash words will set a family, a neighborhood, a nation, by the ears; they have often done so. Half the lawsuits and half the wars have been broughtaboutbythetongue. —James Bolton. 
Half the sorrows of women would be averted if they could repress the speech they know to be useless, — nay, the speech they have resolved not to utter.—GeorgeEliot. 
The "last word" is the most dangerous of infernal machines; and the husband and wife should no more fight to get it than they would struggle for thepossessionofalightedbombshell.—Douglas Jerrold. 
Give me a man so trained in youth that his body is the ready servant of his will, and does with ease and pleasure all the work that, as a mechanism, it is capableof, — whoseintellectisa clear,cold logic engine, with all its parts of equal strength and in smooth working order, ready, like a steam-engine, to be turned to any kind of work, and spin the gossamers as well as forge the anchorsof themind. — Huxley. 
He is a good divine that follows his own instructions; I can easier teach twentywhat were good to be done, than to be one of the twenty to follow my own teaching. The brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leapso'eracolddecree.—Shakespeare. 
If men had only temptations to great sins, they would always be good; but thedaily fightwithlittle onesaccustoms themtodefeat. RICHTER. 

8 THE SCHOOL OFLIFE 

Welearnnotatschool,butin life.—Seneca. 

I am persuaded that the best education in the world is that which we insensibly acquire from conversation with our intellectual superiors.— Bulwer. 

Experience keeps a dear school, but fools will learn in no other, and scarce in that; for it is true we can give advice but we cannot give conduct. But they that will not be counseled cannot be helped; and if you will not hearreason,shewillsurelyrapyour knuckles.—Franklin. 

thousand-fold more for other men than he is trying to do even for himself; for in the economy of God's providence every right and well-organized business is a beneficence and not a selfishness; and not the less so because themerchantthinksmostly ofhisownprofit.—Beecher. 
SHOEMAKER, shoemaker, work by night and run about by day," shouted a little boy through a keyhole to Samuel Drew, who was working verylatetomake upfortime lostthedaybeforein the discussion ofpolitics. 
"Did you not run after the boy and strap him?" asked a friend to whom Drewafterwardstoldthe story. 
"No, no," was the reply; "had apistol been fired off at my ear, I could not have been more dismayed or confounded. I dropped my work, and said to myself, 'True, true;butyoushallneverhavethattosay ofmeagain.' 
To me that cry was as the voice of God, and it has been a word in season throughout my life. I learned from it not to leave till tomorrow the work of today, or to idle when I ought to be working." From that moment he dropped gadabout politics, and became independent as a businessman and famous as a scholarand author. 
"Go on, sir, go on," were the words the discouraged Arago found when he examined the waste leaf used to stiffen the cover of a text-book on mathematics which he was binding. "The difficulties you meet will resolve themselves as you advance. Proceed, and light will dawn, and shine with increasing clearness on your path." It was a copy of a letter from D’Alembert to a young friend; but Arago made it his motto, and became the foremost astronomical observer of his age. "That maxim," said he, "was my greatest masterin mathematics." 
"Our antagonist," said Edmund Burke, "is our helper. This conflict with difficultymakes us acquainted with our object, and compels us to consider it inallits relations. Itwillnot sufferusto besuperficial." 
The following was placed in the cornerstone of Cooper Institute by its grandfounder: "ThegreatobjectthatIdesiretoaccomplish by the erection of this institution is to open the avenues of scientific knowledge to the youth of our city and country, and so unfold the volume of nature that the young may see the beauties of creation, enjoy its blessings, and learn to love the Author fromwhom comethevery goodand perfect gift." 
"A boy who is coddled by his parents," says Charles Nordhoff, "who sits behindthestove in winter when others are playing in the snow, who lies abed late and has his pockets full of candy, who must not go into the water until he has learned to swim, and whose precious life and breath are the objects of his own and his parents' incessant solicitude, may look with pity upon his neighbor who runs about barefooted, gets up early to feed the cows, has few clothes and no candy, and must work for his food; but all human experience and all history show that the hardier boy has by far the best chance of becoming a useful man, and making an honorable figure in the world." Naturecurses inaction, whetheramongrich or poor. 
A student gets forms, rules, and guideboards in college, but he must get power fromactual contact with the acting, living world. While the inhabitants of North America are distinguished for energy, perseverance, and intelligence, those of South America are noted for indolence, superstition, and ignorance. 
If you look over a history of eminent Americans, you will find that the ablest among them, as well as the greatest number, sprang from rock-bound and mountainous New England. The greatest of our orators, poets, preachers, artists, inventors, hail from Yankee-land. There has been published a little bookin which the author gives an account of no fewer than one hundred and ninety-one eminent men and women, artists, orators, poets, and prose writers, who were born or who lived, spoke, wrote, or became otherwise eminent, within the borders of Essex County, Massachusetts. What flat region can showarecordlikethat? 
"Andtheclassicsarethevoices 
Ofthemountainandtheglen 
Andthemultitudinousocean 
Andthecityfilled withmen,— 
Voicesof adeeper meaning 
Thanalldrippingsof the pen. 
"Yes,the mountains areaclassic, 
Andan older wordtheyspeak 
ThantheclassicsoftheHebrew 
OrtheHindooortheGreek. 
Dumb arethey,like allthe classics. 
Till thechosen onedrawsnear, 
Whocancatch theirinnervoices 
Withtheearbehindtheear; 
Andtheir wordsarehigh andmystic, 
Butthe chosenone canhear. 
"Andtheoceanis aclassic; 
Where'sthescribeshallreadits word?— 
Wordgrownoldbefore the Attic 
OrIonian bards were heard, WordoncewhispereduntoHomer, Sownwithinhisfruitful heart,— Andhe caughtabrokenmessage, Butheonlyheardapart. Listen, thou;forgetthebabblings Andthepedantriesofart "Andthecityisaclassic,— Aye, the cityfilledwithmen: Herethecomic, epic,tragic, Beyondpainting ofthepen. Andwhorightlyreadstheclassic Ofthecity,million-trod, Rangesfartherthan the sky-line, Burrows deeperthanthesod, Andhis soulbeholdsthesecrets OfthemysteriesofGod. "Giveto metoreadtheseclassics:— Lifeisshortfromyouthtoage; Butitsfleetnessisnotwasted IfImaster butapage." 
Beecher said that newspapers are the schoolmasters of the common people, —a greater treasureto themthanuncountedmillions of gold. 
The daily newspaper is the modern miracle, giving the services of an army at the price of a postage-stamp. The average newspaper is higher than the average conversation. Its language is sometimes coarse and gross; hut as a rule it does not swear, and is not very vulgar. Newspapers have put us in sympathy with all mankind, broadened our charities by acquainting us with themiseriesandmisfortunesof others. 
Children should be taught to look for beauty everywhere, to read the great poem of creation in the great panorama of Nature. To the cultivated mind the objects of Nature are the Almighty's hieroglyphics by which He records the storyof creation,andHismessageto mankind. 
As Nature tries in every way to induce us to obey her laws by rewarding theirobservance with health, pleasure, and happiness, and by punishing their violation by pain and disease, so she resorts to every means to induce us to expand and develop the great possibilities she has implanted within us. She nerves us to the struggle, in which all great blessings are involved, and beguiles the tedious marches, by holding up before us glittering prizes, which we may almost touch, but never quite possess. She covers up her ends of discipline through trial, of character-building through suffering, by throwing a splendor and glamour over the future; lest the hard, dry facts of the present dishearten us,andshefail inhergreat purpose. 
How else could nature call a youth away from all the charms that hang around young life, but by presenting to his imagination pictures of future bliss and greatness which will haunt his dreams until he resolves to make themreal? 
As the mother teaches her babe to walk, by holding up a toy at a distance, not that the child may reach the toy, but that it may develop its muscles and strength, compared with which the toys are mere baubles, so Nature goes before us through life, tempting us with higher and higher toys, but ever with theobjectinview, —thedevelopmentoftheman. 
When we make our own that which the vision shows us in the distance, she holds up another prize, more alluring still. If we have been faithful in pursuit of the last, our eyes are opened to catch a glimpse of the hand which beckons us up and on, our muscles are stronger for the struggle. Our hearing is more acute through listening for the still small voice, and every sensibility is keenerfor the severediscipline. 
To him who in the love of nature holds 
Communion with her visible forms, she speaks 
A various language: for his gayer hours, 
She has a voice of gladness, and a smile And eloquence of beauty, and she glides 
Into his darker musings, with a mild 
And gentle sympathy, that steals away 
Their sharpness, ere he is aware.—Bryant. 
One impulse from a vernal wood 
May teach you more of man, 
Of moral evil and of good, 
Than all the sages can.—Wordsworth. 
Labor is the great schoolmaster of the race. It gives the grand drill in life's army, without which we are only confused and powerless when called into action. What a teacher industry is! It calls us away from conventional instructors, and books, and brings us into the world's great school — into actual contact with men and things. The perpetual attrition of mind upon mind rasps off the rough edges of unpractical life, and gives polish to character. It teaches patience, perseverance, forbearance, and application; teachesmethod and system, by compelling us to crowd the most possible into every day and hour. Industry is a perpetual call upon the judgment, the power ofquickdecision; itmakes ready men,practicalmen. 
Men are naturally lazy, and require some great stimulus to goad on their flagging ambition, and enable them to overcome the inertia which comes from ease and consciousness of inherited wealth, which is the great barrier to self-elevation. Whatever lessens in a young man the feeling that he must make his own way in the world cripples his chances of success. Poverty has everbeenthepriceless spurgoadingmanup tohisown goal. 
Omuchmaligned Want, thouartthegreat teacherofourrace! 
Thou hast educated men from obscurity, and led them up through the wilderness of difficulties into the land of promise. What brave souls hast thou revealed, whatunselfishdevotion begotten! 
Thou hast found woman a barbaric slave, and hast given us a Nightingale, a Victoria, aFrancesE. Willard,a JuliaWard Howe,a MaryA. Livermore. 
Thou hast given a soul hands with which it subdues the earth and grasps heaven. 
Thou hast found a Poussin painting signboards on the road to Paris, and madehimone of thegreatestofartists. 
Thou hast met a Chantrey driving an ass with milk-cans on its back, to supply his mother'scustomers,and made him one of the great sculptors of the century. 
Thou hast found Richard Foley fiddling his way to Sweden, to learn the Swedish method of nail-splitting, and hast made him a man of renown. Thou hast seen a Shakespeare holding horses at a theater door, and hast driven him towritetheimmortalHamlet. 
Thou hast found a Homer wandering on the shores of Greece, and made him singtheIliad of all time. 
9 BEINGANDSEEMING 

What's that, the King? What, that man there! Why, I seed a man at Bartlemy Fair Morelikea kingthanthatmanthere. PeterPindar. Godmade him,andthereforelethimpassforaman. Shakespeare. 

Pygmiesarepygmies stillthough perchedon Alps, Andpyramidsarepyramidsinvales.—Young. 

NoramIeventhethingIcould be, Buttwenty timesIratherwouldbe Anatheistclean, Thanundergospelcolorshidbe Justforascreen.—Burns. 
THE "Philosopher's Scales," as described by Jane Taylor, weighed everything put into themat their realintrinsic value. For instance, we are told, 
— "Next time he put in Alexander the Great With a garment that Dorcas had made, for a weight; And though clad in armor, from sandals to crown, The heroroseupand the garmentwentdown." 
Self-overvaluation is offensive and ridiculous assumption, which the world is prompt to see, resent, and discount. Esse quam videri, "To be rather than to seem," is the motto of more than thirty English families, an honorable exhibitof sturdyAnglo-Saxonhonestyofthought. 
"Paint me as I am, warts and all, or I will not pay you for the picture," exclaimed Oliver Cromwell to the painter who was smoothing his rugged features inaportrait. 
Wedgwood, though risen from a workman, was never satisfied till he had donehisbest. He would tolerate no inferior work. If it did not come up to his idea of what it should be, he would break the vessel, and throw it away, saying, "That won't do for Josiah Wedgwood." Character makes reputation and Wedgwood pottery, with Wedgwood's character behind it, won world­widecelebrity. 
It is a common saying, that in Boston, where they worship intellect, the mainquestion is, inregardtoanynewarrival, "How much does he know?" In Philadelphia,where theyworshiprank,itis, "Whowas his father?" 
And in New York, where they worship the dollar, it is, "How much is he worth?" 
One's estimate of a man is not to be determined by his wealth, or by his birth,orevenbyhislearning,butbywhathe is. 
"The man's the gowd for a' that." "A jewel is a jewel still, though lying in thedust; And sandissand,though uptoheavenby the tempestthrust" 
Yet it is unmeet to allow the jewel to remain in the dust; for, as Horace reminds us, "Excellence, when concealed, differs but little from buried worthlessness." 
"A man's reputation is like a shadow, which sometimes follows, sometimes precedes him, and which is occasionally shorter, occasionally longer, thanheis." 
"Silence does not always mark wisdom," says Coleridge. "I was at dinner sometime ago, in company with a man, who listened to me, and said nothing for a long time; but he nodded his head, and I thought him unusually intelligent. 
At length, toward the end of the dinner, some apple-dumplings were placed on the table; and my man had no sooner seen them than he burst forth with —.'Them'sthejockeysforme.'" 
In time the reputation fades, however acquired, if character is not behind it. A true character and reputation are like the vitality of the tree, which exhibitsitselfinasteadyexpansionofbranch,bough,andfoliage. 
As J. G. Holland says, "Character lives in a man, reputation outside of him." 
"It is an Age of Shams," wrote an American reviewer. "Shoddy is the Grand Duke of Shams. Alas! we have sham idols, sham heroes, sham politicians, sham scholars, and sham schools." Is this complaint of a generation agotruetoday? 
"How little do they see what is," says Southey, "who frame their hasty judgments uponthat whichseems." 
Lucien tells of a hollow statue whose surface was of the purest Parian marble, but the interior was filled with rags and refuse. Longfellow likens one whois outwardly virtuous but inwardly vile to "those panels of doors and altar-pieces the old monks painted in convents, with the Virgin Mary on the outside, andontheinsideVenus." 
Dr. Hall tells the story of a Scotchman who sang most piously the hymn, 
—"Were the whole realm of nature mine, That were a present far too small," and all through the singing was fumbling in his pocket to make sure of the smallest piece ofsilver for thecontribution-box. 
"We pass for what we are," says Emerson. "Character teaches above our wills. Men imagine that they communicate their virtue, or vice, by overt actions, and do not see that virtue or vice emits a breath every moment." It is easier tobethan toseem, —toacquire powerthantohide thelackofit. 
How a young man is tempted on every hand to pass off counterfeits and imitations, chromos for real paintings, — chromos of thought and feeling, of love and friendship, of dress and worship, of virtue and manhood; but we can easily tell a star from a planet, — both shine, but only one twinkles. Imitation suns can only shine when the real sun is gone. It matters but little how cunning or crafty our counterfeits, or how perfect our imitations, someone at sometimewilldetectthem. 
Dr. Livingston came across tribes in the interior of Africa who had never seen a looking glass, or any of its substitutes. Once, when some of them were lookingattheir ownfaces in his mirror, and seeing for the first time how they looked, he heard them exclaiming about themselves, "How ugly I look!" "What a queer fellow!" "What a homely nose!" Thus we are astonished when weseeour heartsforthefirsttime inthemirroroftruth. 
Geikie tells of a gin-house keeper who, instead of going to church on Sundays, sat before his bar waiting for custom, with the Bible open on his whiteapron. Menwith badcharactersoftenhavegood reputations. 
The rose of Florida, the most beautiful of flowers, emits no fragrance; the bird of Paradise, the most beautiful of birds, gives no song; the cypress of Greece,thefinestoftrees, yields no fruit. 
Soldiers in Southern prisons were not allowed to send letters home until they had been read by Confederate officers. But after a prisoner had written in ink what he wanted the officer to read, he wrote a different letter between the lines in lemon-juice or some other invisible fluid. These hidden lines did not appear until the letter reached the soldier's home, and was heated. Then the thought, which had been concealed for weeks and sometimes months, would-appearon thepaperas iftracedby aninvisiblehand. 
We write with a bold hand whatever we wish the world to see, and that by which we wish to be judged; but our real opinions and criticisms, our real estimate of others, in short, most of our real life, we write between the lines, hoping that society will never apply the test of heat. But the lines, once written, can never be erased. They may be forgotten; but like the spark which sleeps intheflint, theyonlywait for friction tocallthemout. 
The heat of momentary passion, or a single unguarded act, will often call outlinestraced years before. Judas was never suspected of treachery until the money-bagbetrayedhim. 
At Ticonderoga, Quebec, and Saratoga, Arnold was writing in a bold hand thestory of his heroism. These lines were written in ink for the world to read. But see him at Philadelphia at midnight, deliberately planning the doom of theverycountryforwhich hepublicly declaredhimselfreadytodie. 
Neither Saratoga, Quebec, nor even Philadelphia suspected what he was writing between the lines. West Point furnished the heat which revealed the hidden story of that infamous plot to sell our country to the British. It was at West Point that the staff upon which a nation had leaned was found to be onlyabrokenreed. 
A story nearly as dark was written between the noble lines of one who rosefrom abed of fever to march with Arnold through the trackless forests of the North. A bright star set when Aaron Burr became a licentious man, a duelist, and a scheming politician. It is said that it is one of the most difficult things in the world for a lawyer to convince a jury unless he believes in his heart that his client's cause is just. Somehow the truth will come out in the manner, as by a glance of the eye, an unguarded tone, or even an unintentional expression. In spite of all our efforts to deceive, there is a little monitor within watching every opportunity to declare the truth. Swedenborg tells of a group in the spiritual world who were trying to articulate a proposition which they did not believe; but, in spite of great efforts, they couldnotgiveit utterance. 
"We cannot conceal shoddy in the great web of life," says Emerson. "Every wicked, rotten, sleazy thread will stretch itself across the fabric, and testifyagainst usforever." 
We cannot long cover up our blemishes. Every guest that enters the heart leaves his autograph upon the character. Our scars and stains tell of our weaknesses, and they are cut so deep in the marble of our lives that he who runsmayread. Thefingeroftimehas no power to erase the scars of folly, nor theblasts offourscorewintersto bleachthestains ofyouth. 
Probably no other thing so stands in the way of a young man's advancement as the constant temptation to pass himself off for more than he is worth. We seem to forget that, sooner or later, the world will know to a hair's breadth how much we measure, and to a grain how much we weigh. Perhapsnot today, possibly not tomorrow, but in the long run we pass for just whatweareworth. 
What we are, like our shadows, always follows us. "Consider the importance of a good character to your success in the world. If a young man completes the time of his apprenticeship or clerkship with good principles and a fair character, he is made for life. His reputation is better to him than the richest capital. It makes friends; it creates funds; it draws around him patronage and support; and opens for him a sure and easy way to wealth, to honor,andtohappiness." 
How startled and chagrined some of us would be if we could see the tables of our rating which all who know us hold. For instance, one acquaintance is rated a hundred for his politeness, seventy-five for his kindness, fifty for his veracity,twenty-fiveforhissagacity,and soon. Ourgreataim should ever be to keep near the hundred mark in the estimation of every person with whom we deal, or with whom we come in contact, for after every interview each personrearranges histableofrating. 
Every time we come in contact with others, we must step upon the scales of their estimate, and be weighed; and our loss or gain from the last weighing will be carefullynoted. The worldknowswhether we aregoingupordown. 
Think upward, strive upward, look upward, live upward. How few of us realizethat we gothroughlifelabeledall overwiththetags ofestimatesofall who know us! How many of us rank high in most respects, but our average is cut down very low by some contemptible weakness or some vicious habit! You put your whole self into all that you do. If that self be small and lean and mean, your entire life-work is paltry, your words have no force, your influence has no weight. If that self be true and high, pure and kind, vigorous and forceful, your strokes are strong, your notes staccato, your work massive, your influencecogent, —youcan dowhatyouwill. 
An artist puts his painting upon exhibition, but exhibits himself. The painting has gathered up into itself the whole character of the man. Every thought, emotion, deed, and circumstance of that artist's life is brought to a focus upon his canvas. But, paint as we may, it is an inexorable law that only the fittest will survive. Only the true and pure can stand the test of time. All that is false, impure, affected; all shoddy, shams, and imitations must disappear,likethecrumbling clayin theimageofNebuchadnezzar'sdream. 
A Californian sent a box of gold-dust to a Boston chemist to be assayed; notthatthere was any doubt of its worth, but he wanted the value of his mine established by scientific endorsement. The chemist reported the dust to be merelyiron pyrites. 
Thousands of men pass for gold until tried by the chemistry of disappointment, of trouble, or of misfortune, when they are found to be only iron pyrites. Thousands of real paupers live in palaces, while millionaires of character oftendieinpoorhouses. 
Many a man who is called rich here will find that all his millions will not buy him a seat beside his faithful servant in the land where character, not gold, is legal tender. "Eh, man," said a worthy Scot, "he maun ha'e ben a wonderfu' man, that Shackspear. There war things cam' into his heid thatwad neverha'ecoomintomineava." 
"Even Wordsworth," said Charles Lamb, "one day told me he considered Shakespeare greatly overrated. 'There is an immensity of trick in all that Shakespeare wrote,' he said, 'and the people are taken by it. Now, if I had a mind, I could write exactly like Shakespeare.' So you see," proceeded Lamb quietly, "itwas onlythemindthat waswanting." 
"How easily you earn your bread and butter," said a merchant to an editor; "Iam inmyoffice ninehoursa day, whileyousit downatyourdesk, dashoff a few anecdotes or fancies, and get well paid for them." "Did it ever occur to you," replied the journalist, "that my work is of the sort that is never done, or that I never take one step or glance which I don't utilize? My friend, I never see a stranger without wondering if his face or form will work into a story; I never hear a conversation without separating the wheat from the chaff to use as material; I never see anything lovely in nature without longing to put it into wordsforothereyes toenjoy throughthemediumofa printed page." 
A stranger at Aldworth asked a farmer where Tennyson lived, adding: " He is a great man, is he not?" "I don't know about that," said the farmer; "he onlykeepsonemanservant,andhedoesn'tsleepinthe house." 
It was the brain of Alexander H. Stephens that directed the Confederate Cabinet, and his was the skill that planned the foreign alliances that were so nearly successful. When Lincoln, who had heard much of Stephens, met him for the first time, he was thunderstruck at sight of the diminutive, sickly man who stood before him, the body seeming altogether too small for the soul that animatedit. 
Stephens wore a big ulster, and Lincoln looked to see a large figure appear when it was taken off. "Well," he remarked, with one of his peculiar smiles, "you are the biggest pea in the smallest pod I ever met." "The gentleman is solidmahogany. The fashionable man is only veneer. Oneseeks only to make the world useful to himself, the other to make himself useful to the world." "Away withyourmasks," criesCarlyle; "let us see your true features. Enough of comedy, masking, lying philosophies, false philanthropic sentiments, and empty hypocrisies. Show us what you are, let your thoughts be your own; dare to be yourself, have the courage to dare to be something, anything, so that youarenotfalse." 
Every deed we perform has a tongue in it which betrays its origin, and prophesies our future. Every act is a guide-board that tells the world which way we have gone along. The light we give betrays the oil we use. However discreet we may be, we sometimes leave the heart's doors ajar, and our most secret thoughts steal out and betray us. Our premeditated acts point to what weseemto be,butour spontaneous deeds point towhat weare. 
The great battles of life are fought in the heart, yet the world knows when our higher nature has lost or won. The world knows when shame and disgrace have pulled down the chaste banner of virtue and manhood, and raised their own flag there; for we carry in our very faces and bearing the record of our defeats and victories. As truly as the influence of calm or tempest, of sunshine and dew, is stamped upon every fiber of the mountain oak, from pith to bark, so every thought we think, every motive we cherish, writes its autograph indeliblyuponeveryfiberof our lives. 
Thought externalizes itself. What we think, that we become. Nor does it takethewholeofamanto tell his wholehistory. 
As each ray of light reveals every element that enters into the sun's composition, so a single original thought or spontaneous act gathers up into itselfallthe characteristics of the man, and gives us his whole life in epitome. Each thought intersects every previous thought of his life, and gives us a cross-section of the whole man. The minutest part of his individuality, under themicroscopeofadissectingmind,would reproducethewholeman. 
A Persian sage, poorly clad, attended a great banquet. He was slighted, and even insulted. No one seemed willing to sit near him. He went home, bedecked himself with robes of silk and satin adorned with lace and jewels, placed a diamond aigrette upon his head, fastened a saber with jeweled hilt to his belt,and returnedto thebanquet. 
Theguests all paid him great honor. Stretching out his jeweled slipper, he took hold of his golden robe, and said, in a sarcastic manner, "Welcome, my lord coat!welcome,mostexcellent robe!Whatwill yourlordship pleaseeat? 
For," said he to his chagrined host, " I ought to ask my coat what it will eat,sincethewelcomeis solelytoit." 
Be what you wish others to become; let yourself, and not your words, preach for you. It is not well for a man to pray cream and live skim-milk. — Beecher. 
Hypocrisy desires to seem good rather than to be so; honesty desires to be 
goodrather thanto seem so.—Warwick. Let us abandon this miserable false artificialism, and take up again with thegood wholesome sinceritythat willstandusinthe time of need. When the days shall come, — as they must come, — that the silver cord is loosed, the golden bowl broken, we shall want to look back on a life of earnestness, not ononeofactedhypocrisy. —"Argosy." 
"Angels may dress in rags, and devils wear silks and broadcloths; Fools may sit on thrones, with real kings and queens for vassals." His be the praise, who, looking down with scorn On the false judgment of the partial herd, Consults his own clear heart, and boldly dares To be, not to be thought, an honest man. Philemon. 
Sooner or later every man will shine for all he is worth. — Talmage. 
True worth is in being, not seeming,— In doing, each day that goes by, Some little good, not in the dreaming Of great things to do by and by. For whatever men say in their blindness, And spite of the fancies of youth, There's nothing so kingly as kindness, And nothing so royal as truth. Alice Cary. 
10 DECIDE 

Oncetoevery manand nationcomesthe momenttodecide, Inthestrife ofTruthwithFalsehood,forthegoodor evilside.—Lowell. 

Thekeenspirit Seizesthepromptoccasion—makes the thought Start intoinstant action,andatonce Plansandperforms, resolvesandexecutes. HannahMore. 

Vacillation is the prominent feature of weakness of character.— Voltaire. 

and inconstancy in pursuing them, are the greatest causes of all our unhappiness.—Addison. 
Begin; to begin is half the work. Let half still remain; again begin this, andthou wilthavefinished.—Ausonius. 

WHILE you stand deliberating which book your son shall read first," says Dr. Johnson, "another boyhas readboth." 
The secret of Joanne d'Arc's success was that she saw the problem, and moved to solve it. Not in her courage nor her visions, but in her decision, or therarequalitieswhichgo tomakeupdecision,was herstrength. 
She pronounced Charles VII. the heir, in God's name, reassured him of his legitimacy, and sanctified this declaration by gaining the victory over the English. 
Columbussucceeded because hehadadefiniteaim,andadeterminationto go straight on at whatever cost. It did no good to rebuff him. He had nursed hisyouthfulpurpose untilit hadbecomeapassion. 
How many young men and women we all know who have no rudder in their lives! Shiftless, purposeless, nerveless, aimless, characterless, they drift about from day to day without aim or purpose, without direction or plan; they arecreaturesofcircumstances. 
They have no strong purpose running through their lives, which alone can unifyand givemeaning totheir faculties and powers. A chest oftools without a trade is of very little use, and a headful of faculties is but a chest of tools without the carpenter's purpose or aim. One without a definite aim in life can neitherbeusefulnorhappy. 
A single stroke without a definite outline of the image in the mind might ruin the statue; we should never strike a blow until we have decided upon the statue. 
Some people seem to think that, if they pound away hard on the marble all day, if they only keep at work, no matter if they have no definite image in view, they will accomplish something. But no; they would better never touch thechisel andmallet thanspoilthe block. Itwouldbetterbeleftuncutthan be ruined. 
One with a purposeless life, a life which acts upon impulse, never makes a strong character; his ship does not ^draw any depth of water. He does not make much of a figure in a community, because no one can foretell today what he will do tomorrow, or whether he will do anything, because he may notfeel like it; he may not have the impulse or the decision: he is like a ship at sea without arudder; if the wind favors him, he may drift into port; if not, hemay gotopieces onthe rocksorfloataboutindefinitely. 
A hesitating, wavering, halting, undecided policy will ruin the most brilliant genius. In the dark days of the Colonies' peril it would have rendered independence forever impossible. Very seldom in history has there been 
displayed such clear "grit" and sublime decision as were shown by the men who framed the Constitution and signed the Declaration of Independence, thus layingthefoundationsof ourliberty. 
All along the shores of life we see stranded ships upon the rocks and bars, splendidly built and finely equipped, but powerless to float. We see human wrecks thrown up on either side, and left stranded because they allowed themselves to be whirled into this eddy or that, to be turned out of the current of the tide by overhanging branches, stopped in their career as leaves and chips and driftwood are stopped, and turned from their course by every obstructiontheyencountered. 
Theweakandvacillating character,like, a vane, is ever at the mercy of the breeze,of temptation, opinion,oroutwardpressure. He cannotsay "Yes," and hedaresnotsay "No." 
How fortunate the man who possesses a mind superior to doubt and fluctuation;who is disdainful of ease and pleasure, who laughs at opposition; who feels within himself the power to will and to do, who believes in his lucky star, who has a sublime confidence in his own power to carry out whatever he wills; who knows that no timid lingerings, no ghosts of distrust, no pleadings of ifs or buts, no doubts or misgivings, can keep him back from the trial; who can laugh at the menacing glare and the ominous tones of obstacles and opposition; who easily knows and dares to do all that becomes a man; who is larger than his calling, superior to opinion; who cannot be intimidated by reproaches, nor bought by favor nor applause; who is impervious to contempt and ridicule, and who can laugh at scoffers and persecutors! 
William Pitt was a remarkable example of definiteness of purpose and singlenessofaim. From a child he was made to realizethat a great career was expected of him, worthy of his renowned father. This was the one keynote of all his instruction. Wherever he was, or whatever he did, whether in school or college, whether at work or play, he was never once allowed to forget this grand parental idea, — that great things were expected of him as a statesman. It was ingrained into every fiber of his being, and with such energy of purpose and determined aim did he bend himself to this one task, that at twenty-two he was in Parliament, at twenty-three chancellor of the exchequer,and attwenty-five prime-minister of England. What an inspiration is suchanexample ofone unwaveringaim! 
He bent every energy, all his moral forces, and his imperious will-power, sacrificing everything that interfered, to this one, all-absorbing passion of his life. 
Who can estimate the great advantage of this early training and direction of his studies? He did not waste years, after leaving college, trying to make up his mind what he would better do, but rushed straight to his goal. "This man neither advances nor recedes," said Webster of an opponent; "he simply hovers." 
"Nine men out of every ten," says Dr. William Mathews, "lay out their plans on too vast a scale; and they who are competent to do almost anything donothing, because they never make up their minds distinctly as to what they want,or whattheyintendtobe. 
Hence the mournful failures we see all around us in every walk of life." An evenly balanced mind, no matter how strong, will never accomplish anything if it lacks decision of will. A man who can see two sides to the question equally well can never be a prompt actor without a strong and decisive will-power. The arguments for and against any action come up beforehimso vividly, each side urging its claims, that, unless he has a strong will-power, hecannotmake thenecessarysacrificeof theonefortheother. 
And even when he has made his choice of one and sacrificed the other, unless he has grit, tenacity, and unflinching determination, he will be thwarted again and again by the perpetual claims of the side he has sacrificed beforehe accomplisheshisobject. 
The man who would succeed must ever hear dinning in his ears, "Be wise today; 'tis madnesstodefer." 
"The secret of the whole matter was," said Amos Lawrence, "that we had formed the habit of prompt acting, thus taking the top of the tide, while the habit of some others was to delay till about half-tide, thus getting on the flats." 
Calling upon others for help in forming a decision is worse than useless. A man must so train his habits as to rely upon his own courage in moments of emergency. Alexander, when asked how he had conquered the world, replied that hedid itby notdelaying. 
Napoleon did not hesitate in an emergency. He seized instantly what he considered the wisest course, and sacrificed all others, which he would not allow to tempt him by constantly arguing their side. It is a rare mind which has the decisive vigor which can choose instantly upon the wisest course, and sacrifice everyother. 
Napoleon was the master of Europe, until he seemed to lose the power of prompt decision. He lost Waterloo because he did not exercise that swiftness of decision which had ever before characterized him in great emergencies, which promptstoanimmediate choiceand sacrifice. 
Napoleon's mighty will, which subdued nearly the whole of Europe, was as prompt and decisive in the minutest detail of command as in the greatest battle. It was like a huge burning-glasswhichconcentrates thesun'srays until it meltseven the hardest diamond. Nothingcouldstandbefore it. 
A remarkable example of firmness of decision was exhibited by a juryman in a noted murder trial. Eleven were for conviction; but this man told them frankly that he would never yield, that he would starve in confinement rather than give his consent to condemn a man whom he considered innocent. The others were firm on the opposite side; but after twenty-four hours of waiting, findingthere was no possibility of winning over their opponent, they acceded tohisverdict ofacquittal. 
The decision must be intelligent. A mule may make a decision; but his decision is to thwart, and his resolution we call mulishness. Do not confound obstinacy with manly resolution. Obstinacy is the dogged tenacity in holding toill-considered plans orobjects, reasonornoreason. 
An educated will must be self-reliant, self-restrained, self-directed, and under self-control. Sometimes a person encounters emergencies where he must make a decision, although aware that it is not a mature decision, approved by the whole cabinet of his mental powers. In that case he must bring all his comprehension and comparison into active, instant exercise, and feel that he is making the best decision he can at the time, and act. Many importantdecisionsof lifeareofthis kind, —off-hand decisions. 
Fanny Fern (Mrs. James Parton) said that when with General Butler, during wartime, she was astonished at his power of prompt conclusion. "Matters of grave importance would be brought to his tent for decision," she said. "He focused his thought, like a burning-glass, upon the topic brought to him, decided it, and then, once decided, he seemed to have dismissed the matterfromhis sphereofthought." 
There is a story of a father who attempted to redeem his two sons, who had been captured in war by the army of a tyrant. He offered his own life as a ransom, and a sum of money. He was informed that this offer would be accepted as a ransom for one son only, and he might choose which he would redeem. The afflicted father was only too anxious to save one, even at the expense of his own life; but he could not decide which should die by choosing that the other should live, and in the agony of his dilemma he remaineduntilbothwereexecuted. 
There is nothing which will help a vacillating mind like forming a habit of always acting promptly and energetically. One should then never allow the contemplative or reflective faculties to continually bring up first one side and then the other, balancing motives, and splitting hairs over non-essentials. The decision would better be final and irrevocable, and carried out with energy, even if sometimes wrong, than for one to form a habit of forever balancing, contemplating, and procrastinating. After this habit of prompt decision has been pursued, even mechanically for a time, confidence in one's judgment willbegin tobeborn, andanew spiritofindependence will beacquired. 
"The man who is perpetually hesitating which of two things he will do first," says William Wirt, "will do neither. The man who resolves, but suffers his resolution to be changed by the first counter-suggestion of a friend, — *who fluctuates from opinion to opinion, from plan to plan, and veers like a weathercock to every point of the compass, with every breath of caprice that blows, — can never accomplish anything, great or useful. Instead of being progressive in anything, he will at best be stationary, and, more probably, retrograde in all. It is only the man who carries into his pursuits that great quality which Lucan ascribes to Caesar, nescia virtus stare loco; — who first consults wisely, then resolves firmly, and then executes his purpose with inflexible perseverance, undismayed by those petty difficulties which daunt a weakerspirit, —that can advancetoeminenceinanyline." 
Hamlet is a good example of indecision, one of the diseases of the will. There was a disproportion between the practical and the ideal faculties of his mind. Amanwho canseeonly onethingcaneasilydecideortellwhat course to take, but Hamlet saw all sides. His mind was crowded full of ideas, fears, conjectures, and he was unable to decide. He could not tell whether the ghost was really his father's spirit or not. Indecision is sometimes a disease of excessive mental culture, where the intellect is highly cultivated, and the powersforaction almostparalyzed. 
The vacillating man, however strong in other respects, is always pushed asideinthe race of life by the determined, the decisive man, who knows what hewantstodo,and doesit;evenbrainsmustgive wayto decision. 
Thousands of men owe their failures in life simply to procrastination. Many a business man has made his fortune by promptly deciding at some juncture to expose himself to a considerable risk. Says a wise man, "To educate one's self up to a just decision of character is part of that moral and mental training which constitutes the chief work of life, by which alone one can attainto 'thestatureofthe perfect man.' 
"So important to us seems the habit of decision of character, that we are quite pre pared to risk the chance of an occasional premature act or judgment. It can do no more harm for a man to decide wrongly than never to decide at all. He must be hopelessly crazed in intellect and awry in morals if his decisions be invariably erroneous. But as decision of character almost necessarily implies accuracy of perception and clearness of reasoning, there is little fearthat itwill ever leadto illconclusions." 
"Better at once to set about trying to enlighten one man," says 'another, "thanto dreamforalifetime ofenlightening the world." 
Promptdecisionandsublimeaudacityhave carried many a successful man overperilous crises,where deliberation wouldhavebeen ruin. 
When the preliminary survey was being made for the line between St. Petersburg and Moscow, Nicholas learned that the officers entrusted with the task were being influenced more by personal than technical considerations, and he determined to cut the Gordian knot in true imperial style. When the minister laid before him the map with the intention of explaining the proposed route, he took a ruler, drew a straight line from one terminus to the other, and remarked in a tone that precluded all discussion, "You will construct theline so." Andthe linewassoconstructed. 
Immediately after the battle of Antietam, the President said to his cabinet, "Thetime for the enunciation of the policy of emancipation can no longer be delayed." He thought public sentiment would support this policy, and had promised his God that he would adopt it. He had made a solemn vow that, if Lee were driven back from Pennsylvania, he would crown the result by declaring freedom for theslaves. 
Nothing is more destructive of character than for a man to lose faith in his ownresolutions,becausehehasoftenfailedtodowhat hehas resolved. 

"Ishall remember: WhenCaesarsays, 'Dothis,'itis perform'd.” —Shakespeare. 

Themostmiserablepettifoggingin theworldis thatof aman inthecourt ofhisownconscience. —Beecher. 

Irresolution is a worse vice than rashness. He that shoots best may sometimes hit the mark; but he that shoots not at all can never hit it.— Feltham. 

Nogreatdeed isdone By faltererswhoaskforcertainty. —GeorgeEliot. 
11 TENACITY OF PURPOSE 

Donot, for onerepulse, foregothepurpose That youresolvetoeffect.—Shakespeare. 

Allphilosophylies intwowords "sustain" and "abstain."—Epictetus. 

Perpetual pushing and assurance put a difficulty out of countenance, and makeaseeming impossibilitygiveway.—JeremyCollier. 

I'm proof against that word "failure." I've seen behind it. The only failure aman ought tofearisfailurein cleavingtothepurposeheseestobe best — George Eliot. 
"Never give up, there are chances and changes, Helping the hopeful, a hundred to one; And, through the chaos, High Wisdom arranges Ever success, if you'll only hold on. Never give up; for the wisest is boldest, KnowingthatProvidenceminglesthecup, And of all maxims, the best, as the oldest, Is the stern watchword of ' Never give up!'"hit it oftenest." All missed themark. 
THERE is a mark, and here is a ball," said a shrewd employer to thirty applicants who had answered his advertisement for a boy; "let me see which one of you, in seven chances, can "Come back tomorrow," said he, "and see if youcandobetter." 
The next day brought but one little fellow, who said he was ready for the test;and,when he tried, he hit the center every time. "How is this?" asked the man, in surprise. "Why, said the boy, "I wanted the place very much, to help my mother, so I practised all night in the shed." It is needless to say that he was engaged, for he was a boy made of the right stuff, and he brought it out for useand promotion. 
It is related of Tamerlane that, when closely pursued by his enemies, he tookrefuge in a ruined building, where, left to his solitary musings, he espied an ant tugging and striving to carry a single grain of corn. His unavailing efforts were repeated sixty-nine times, and at each brave attempt, as soon as he reached a certain projecting point, he fell back with his burden, unable to surmount it; when lo! the seventieth time he bore away his spoil in triumph, and left the wondering hero reanimated and exulting in the hope of future victory. 
Failure is the final test of persistence and of an iron will; it either crushes a life or solidifies it. Had Franklin Pierce not been one of the most persevering of men, he would never have been elected President of the United States. When he made his debut at the bar, he broke down completely. Although deeplymortified, he was not discouraged, as many would have been. He said he would try the experiment nine hundred and ninety-nine times more, and then, if he failed, he would repeat it for the thousandth time. Nothing is deniedtosuch perseverance. 
"Some of the good people of Georgetown, Ripley, and Batavia, go far in their attempt to show how very ordinary Ulysses S. Grant was," says Hamlin Garland. "A boy of thirteen who could drive a team six hundred miles across country and arrive safely; who could load a wagon with heavy logs by his own mechanical ingenuity; who insisted on solving all mathematical problems himself; who never whispered or lied or swore or quarreled; who could train a horse to pace or trot at will; who stood squarely upon his own knowledge of things without resorting to trick or mere verbal memory, — such a boy, at this distance, does not appear 'ordinary,' stupid, dull, or commonplace. That he was not showy or easily valued is true. His unusualness was in the balance of his character, in his poise, in his native judgment, and in his knowledge of things at first hand, and in his ability to persist. 
"Evenatsixteen yearsofage, hehad a superstition thatto retreatwasfatal. When he set hand to any plan, or started on any journey, he felt the necessity of going to the turn of the lane or the end of the furrow. He was resolute and unafraid always; a boy to be trusted and counted upon — sturdy, capable of hard knocks. What he was in speech, he was in grain. If he said,' I can do that,' he not merely meant that he would try to do it, but also that he had thought his way to the successful end of the undertaking. He was an unusuallydeterminedandresourceful boy." 
During a period of great anxiety, Frank B. Carpenter, the artist, painting "The Signing of the Proclamation," at the White House, asked the chief magistrate, "How does Grant impress you as compared with other leading generals?" "The great thing about him," answered the President, "is cool persistency of purpose. He is not easily excited, and he has got the grip of a bulldog. Whenheonce getshisteethin, nothingcanshakehimoff." 
Lincoln when young made up his mind to put himself before the public, and discussed his plans with his friends. "I have talked with great men," he told his fellow-clerk and friend, Greene, "and I do not see how they differ from others." In order to keep in practise in speaking, he walked seven or eight miles to debating clubs. "Practising polemics," was what he called the exercise. He sought Mentor Graham, the schoolmaster, and asked his advice aboutstudying grammar. 
"If you are going before the public," said Mr. Graham, "you ought to do it." But where could he get a grammar? There was but one in the neighborhood, Mr. Graham said, and that was six miles away. "Without awaiting further information, the young man walked immediately to the place, borrowed this rare copy of Kirkham's Grammar, and before night was deep in its mysteries. From that time on, for weeks, he gave every moment of his leisure to mastering the contents of the book. Frequently he asked his friend Greene to 'hold the book' while he recited, and when puzzled by a pointhewould consultMr. Graham. 
"Lincoln's eagerness to learn was such that the whole neighborhood becameinterested. The Greenes lent him books, the schoolmaster kept him in mind, and helped him as he could, and even the village cooper allowed him to come into his shop and keep up a fire of shavings sufficiently bright to readby atnight. Itwasnotlong beforethegrammarwasmastered." 
"Well," said Lincoln, "if that's what they call science, I think I'll go at another." He had made another discovery — that he could conquer subjects by sticking to them. Daniel Webster as a boy had no remarkable traits of character. He was sent to Exeter Academy in New Hampshire, and stayed there only a short time. A neighbor, finding him crying on his way home, and asking the reason, Daniel said he despaired of ever making a scholar. He declared the boys made fun of him for always being at the foot of the class, and thathehaddecidedtogiveupandgo home. The friend said that he ought togo back and see what hard study would do. He went back, applied himself to his studies with a determination to win, and it was not long before he silenced those who had ridiculed him, by reaching the head of the class and remainingthere. 
Thousands of men have been failures in life because they did not go quite farenough. They did not quite learn a trade to the point of efficiency; in other words, they stopped just this side of success. The Patent Office in Washington is full of contrivances which are almost successes; if the inventors had had the persistence to hold on a little longer, they might have achieved thelonged-forsuccess,anddiedrichinstead ofpoor. 
"Alas!" said a widow, speaking of her brilliant but careless son, "he has notthegift ofcontinuance." Professor Drummond saw at a fair a glass model of a famous mine. The owner drove a tunnel a mile long through the strata he thought contained gold, spent one hundred thousand dollars on it, and in a yearanda half had failed to find the gold. Another company drove the tunnel a yard farther and struck ore. So the gold of life may be to us only a yard away. 
There is no other invention in any age that has exercised so powerful an influence upon the destinies of the nations of the world as the steam-engine, of which Watt may well be called the father; and yet it is a fact that a steam boiler, and an engine propelled by steam, were constructed by Hero two hundred and fifty years before the Christian era. The apparatus was very crude and elementary; but the fundamental idea was there. Had the ancient experimentalist persistently followed up the line of investigation which his curious experiments suggested, the history of mechanics might have been set forward twothousandyears. 
Denis Papin, in 1688, with his piston inclosed in a cylinder, and Thomas Newcomen, of later date, with his condensing engine, were both standing on the very threshold of the greatest mechanical invention of the age; but it was only when Watt brought his powers of intelligent and patient search to bear upon Newcomen's crude mechanism that the steam-engine of the nineteenth century was produced. 
The principle on which the magnetic telegraph depends had been known since 1774, but Professor Morse was the first to apply that principle for the benefit of man. He began his experiments in 1832, and five years afterwards succeeded in obtaining a patent on his invention. Then followed another long delay; and it was not until the last day of the session in 1843 that he procured from Congress an appropriation of $30,000. With that money was constructed, between Baltimore and Washington, the first telegraphic line in the world. Perhaps no other invention has exercised a more beneficent influenceonthe welfareofthehuman race. 
John Fitch was poor, ragged, and forlorn, jeered at, pitied as a madman, discouragedby the great, and repulsed by the rich; yet he and his friends kept on until, in 1790, they had a steamboat on the Delaware, which ran, with the tide,eightmiles anhour, and, against it, six miles. 
The bicycle was long restricted to the use of those who were acrobatically inclined. The introduction of the chain gave us the safety wheel, and the popularity of the bicycle was thereby largely increased, although the most important feature of all was yet lacking. It was only when the pneumatic tire, 
—an old idea, — was perfected and applied to it, that the wheel became the mostpopular means of recreation in our day and one of the greatest blessings ofthecentury. 
GeorgeStephenson, bycarefullynoticing thedefectsofothersandseeking a remedy, by careful attention to details, when a less persevering man would have been sure to fail, finally, in 1815, produced an engine,—• "The Puffing Billy," — thatwas reallyserviceableandeconomical. 
But he had a hard battle to fight before he conquered. He was the only man who had faith in the ultimate use of this method of travel. However, in spite of all obstacles, in 1830 he had a locomotive, "The Rocket," in essential principles the same as today, running on the Liverpool and Manchester Railway,and thesuccessof hisideaswasestablished. 
Stephenson was not the author of the iron rail, nor of the idea of a steam-driven vehicle running upon iron rails, and carrying its own water and fuel. These leading features were present in the earlier engine of Trevethick. Had Trevethick labored to remedy the defects of his locomotive with the perseverance which was so strong a characteristic of his successor, it is likely that he,and not Stephenson,wouldhavebeennamed the father of the modern locomotive. 
If you have not this persistence by nature, you must cultivate it. With it you can succeed, you can make difficulties bend, you can make opposition giveway,doubtand hesitancyyieldtoconfidence andassurance. 
Without it the more shining qualities of nature will not ensure your success, and will very likely bring nothing but failure. When Mr. Gladstone was on a visit to the north of England, a workingman traveled some distance to see him. Gladstone spoke to him in the kindest manner, and asked what he wanted. The man, in some confusion, apologized, but made bold to say, "I have comeallthewayfrom Bradfordtoseeyou. 
They are well pleased there with you and your government in the main, but they think that you hardly go fast enough." Mr. Gladstone kindly patted his admirer on the shoulder, and said, "You must keep knocking at the door," and there the interview ended. 
Von Moltke, the greatest master of strategy the world has ever seen, was sixty-six years at school to himself before he was ready for his task. Though born with the century, and an army officer at nineteen, he was an old man when, in 1866, as Prussian chief of staff, he crushed Austria at Sadowa, and drove her out of Germany. Four years later, the silent, modest soldier of seventy, ready for the still greater opportunity, smote France, and changed themapof Europe. 
Glory and the field marshal's baton were his, after fifty-one years of hard work. No wonder Louis Napoleon was beaten by such men as he. All Louis Napoleons havebeen,and alwayswillbe. 
We envy a man who has achieved great success, but we do not see the failuresand heartachesuponheartacheswhichhe buried beneathhistriumph. 
John Stuart Blackie declared that he never knew a man good for anything in the world, who, when he had a piece of work to do, did not know how to stick to it. "The foreman of the jury, however," says Whipple, "was a hard­hearted,practical man, a model of business intellect and integrity, but with an incapacity of understanding any intellect or conscience radically differing from his own. Mr. Choate's argument, as far as the facts and the law were concerned, was through inanhour. Stillhewent on speaking. Hour after hour passed, and yet he continued to speak with constantly increasing eloquence, repeating and recapitulating, without any seeming reason, facts which he had already stated and arguments which he had already urged. The truth was, as I gradually learned, that he was engaged in a hand to-hand — or, rather, in a brain-to-brain and a heart-to-heart — contest with the foreman, whose resistance he was determined to break down, but who confronted him for three hours with defiance observable in every rigid line of his honest countenance. 
"'Youfool!' wastheburdenof the advocate'singeniousargument. 
'You rascal!' was the phrase legibly printed on the foreman's incredulous face. 
But at length the features of the foreman began to relax, and, at the end, the stern lines melted into acquiescence with the opinion of the advocate, who had been storming at the defenses of his mind, his heart, and his conscience for five hours, and had finally entered as victor. The verdict was ' Not guilty.'" 
With what delight we read Hawthorne's"Scarlet Letter," perhaps the most powerful romance that ever came from an American pen. It seems impossible that such beauty of diction, such facility of expression, and delicacy of touch, could be elaborated by any amount of drudgery. But the note-books of this shyest and most bashful of mortals reveal the secret of his genius. Drudgery, 
drudgery, drudgery,iswrittenalloverhisefforts. 
Nothingwastootrivialforrecordin his notes. 
Everything he saw, or heard, or touched, or felt, was imprisoned in his notebook, and compelled to pay tribute to his fiction. The stream which floated his thought with such beauty and facility of expression was made up oflittlerivuletsfromtenthousand sources. 
Even while he was writing his immortal "Scarlet Letter," he believed it would go unrecognized, as had many other things which he had produced, some of which he had burned in disgust. He had been dismissed from his position in the custom-house in Salem, and many a day had made his dinner of chestnuts and potatoes, because he could not afford meat. For twenty years 
heworked on,unrecognizedandunknown. "Genius, that power which dazzles mortal eyes, Is oft but perseverance in disguise. Continuous effort, of itself, implies, In spite of countless falls, the power torise. 'Twixtfailureandsuccessthepoint'ssofine Men sometimes know not when they touch the line. Just when the pearl was waiting onemoreplunge. How many a struggler has thrown up the sponge!" "Fit, square, polish thyself," saysRichard C. Trench. " Thy turn will come. Thou wilt not lie in the way. The builders will have needof thee. The wallhasmoreneedofthee thanthouhastofthewall." "September, 1856, made a new era in my life," said George Eliot, "for it was then I began to write fiction. It had always been a vague dream of mine that some time or other I might write a novel; and my shadowy conception of what the novel was to be varied, of course, from one epoch of my life to another. But I never went farther toward the actual writing of a novel than an introductory chapter describing a Staffordshire village and the life of the neighboringfarmhouses; and, as the years passed on, I lost hope that I should ever be able to write a novel, just as I desponded about everything else in my future life. I always thought I was deficient in dramatic power, both of constructionand dialogue, but I felt I should be at my ease in the descriptive partofa novel. "One morning, as I was thinking what should be the subject of my first sketch, my thoughts merged themselves into a dreamy doze, and I imagined myself writing a story, of which the title was 'The Sad Fortunes of the Reverend Amos Barton!' The result was the now famous 'Scenes from Clerical Life,' which first appeared in 'Blackwood's Magazine,' and which achieved an instant success almost as great as that of 'Waverley' at its first appearance." Rarely has the world seen a more remarkable example of a tremendous task, a vast life-work, adhered to under so many discouragements, and especially after the failure of health, as Herbert Spencer's completion, at the age ofseventy-six, ofthetenthand last volumeofhisgreatwork. When starting the New York "Herald," James Gordon Bennett had no time towaste on "interviewers." When a "Herald" was wanted, he pointed with his 
pen to the pile, and the buyer laid down his copper and helped himself. The struggle was longer and harder than even that of the "Tribune," and often, after a hard week's toil of seventeen and eighteen hours a day, there would not be a quarter of a dollar left over for Saturday night. But he never swerved from his purpose, and, after nearly forty years of service in the editorial harness, handed down to his son one of the most valuable newspaper propertiesinthe world. 
A poor London boy started out, determined to visit every office and place ofbusinessuntil he found a situation, no matter how long it might take. After persisting in this for atime which would have utterly discouraged most boys, he called at an office, where he was told they never took boys who had had noexperience,and wasaskedwhosenthim there. 
The old gentleman was so pleased at the boy's pluck when he told him that he was calling at every office and should continue to do so until he found a situation, that he told him to go home and write him a letter in his best hand, and he would see what he could do for him. Many a boy has lost a situation by bad handwriting, bad spelling, or an unbusinesslike letter. But this boy's letter was neat, concise, and intelligent, and he got the situation. He proved valuable, andhasbeenwith the firmeversince. 
Pascal was forbidden by his father to mention mathematics, or to look at a book on that subject, even though he begged to see one. With no help whatever, not even knowing the name of a circle, which he called "a round," he worked out the first thirty-two problems of Euclid, or what corresponded tothem, inventingnamesashewentalong. 
The great scholar Erasmus could not afford, when a boy, to buy a torch, so he read by moon light. In the same way all great men have achieved success by unswerving diligence. The grand old German emperor, William I., was by no means a genius; the secret of his power lay in tireless perseverance. Although he climbed to a lofty height of glory, he remained to the last a simple, faithful, hard-working man. A friend says of him, "When I passedthe palace at Berlin, night after night, however late, I always saw that grand imperial figure standing up beside the green lamp, and I used to say to myself, 'Thatis howtheimperial crownofGermany waswon.'" 
A cobbler, when asked how long it takes to become a good shoemaker, answered, "Six years, — and then you must travel." That cobbler had the artist-soul. I told a friend the story, and he asked another cobbler the same question: "How long does it take to become a good shoemaker?" "All your life,sir." 
Thatwas stillbetter, —he wasaMichael Angelo ofshoes! 
Persistency is characteristic of all men who have accomplished anything great. They may lack in some other particular, have many weaknesses or eccentricities, but the quality of persistence is never absent from a successful man. No matter what opposition he meets or what discouragements overtake him, he is always persistent. Drudgery cannot disgust him, obstacles cannot discourage him, labor cannot weary him. He will persist, no matter what comes or what goes; it is a part of his nature. He could almost as easily stop breathing. Money, position, influence, — these are no match for energy, and perseverance. 
Keep at it, whatever your work may be, with a dogged determination. Set yourteeth, and say, I will." Let your motto be " Tenacity of Purpose!" When you hearit,itshould actonyouasthebuglecall doesonawarhorse. 
Blind Milton, who lost his eyesight because he persisted in writing a treatise necessary for his country's defense before the world, declared, as he sat in darkness: — Yet I argue not Against Heaven's hand or will, nor bate a jot Ofheartorhope;butstillbearupandsteer Rightonward. 
And he "steered right onward," in his blindness, to write his immortal masterpiece. "Await the issue," said Carlyle. "In all battles, if you await the issue, each fighter has prospered according to his right. His right and his might, at the close of the account, were one and the same. It is lesson after lesson with the scholar, blow after blow with the laborer, crop after cropwith the farmer, picture after picture with the painter, and mile after mile with the traveler,thatsecures what allsomuchdesire. 
12 THE ARTOFKEEPING WELL 

Healthisthefirst wealth.—Emerson. 

Lifeisnotmereliving,buttheenjoymentofhealth.—Martial. 

No man is in true health who cannot stand in the free air of heaven, with his feet on God's free turf, and thank his Creator for the simple luxury of physicalexistence.—T. W. Higginson. 

Be soberandtemperate,andyou willbehealthy. —Franklin. 

Iwaswell,wished tobebetter,took physic,anddied.—Epitaph. 

Water, air, and cleanliness are the chief articles in my pharmacopoeia.— Napoleon. 

I believe it is in the power of every one to become a centenarian.—Dr. DeBossy, at103. 

WELL, sir, how much longer do you expect to live?" asked Dr. Jackson, a distinguished physician,of JosiahQuincy. 
"TillIsend for adoctor," was the answer. " 
Andwhendidyoulastsendforone," continuedDr. Jackson. 
With a smile, Mr. Quincy replied, "Just eighty-six years ago," naming the preciseday ofhisbirth. 
"Men donotusuallydie;theykill themselves," saysaFrench authority. 
Henry Jenkins was born in Yorkshire, England, May 17, 1500, and died in his one hundred and seventieth year. He rose early, drank a pint of water every morning before breakfast, and lived principally upon cold meats and salads. Throughout life he continued the use of flannel and warm clothing. Hewas strictly temperate, exceptthat hedrank moderatelyofbeer. 
Thomas Parr, one of the most notable instances of longevity in English history, was born in 1483. He was first married when he was eighty-eight, and again at the age of one hundred and twenty. At one hundred and forty-five he was able to run races, thresh grain, and accomplish almost any kind of laborious work. He was accustomed to eat at night as well as in the daytime, butalways of the plainest food. His biographer says: "The cause of his death was attributed chiefly to the change of food and air; forasmuch as, coming out of a clear and free atmosphere, he came, even at that time, into the comparatively more impure air of London; and after a long practised plain and homely country diet, he was taken into a luxurious family, where he was encouraged, under the mistaken notion of thereby improving his health, and further prolonging his life, to feed high, and drink plentifully of the best wines,whereby the natural functions of his body were overcharged, his lungs obstructed,and the habit ofthe whole body quite disordered; the consequence of which was a certain speedy dissolution. Had such not been the case, the appearance of his body, internally, indicated that he might yet have lived for a number ofyears. He died in1635,aged onehundredandfiftytwo." 
The celebrated Galen, who died in 271, aged one hundred and forty, was, as he reports of himself, of a weak and delicate constitution; but by the observance of strict temperance and evenness of temper, he was enabled to attain his advanced age. His uniform rule was, always to rise from the table whilehisappetite wasgood. 
In a small town about eight miles from Boston, there recently lived an old gentleman who was hale and hearty at the age of eighty one, and whose erect carriagewouldputmany a youngermantoshame. 
Not long ago he had a visit from an old school-friend, a few years his junior, who exclaimed at the old gentleman's strength and youthful appearance. 
"I may look fairly young for my age," was the reply, made with some sadness, "but I'm not what I was. Why, last week I made one of my monthly trips to Boston, and I had to take to the cars coming home." "Take to the cars coming home!" repeated his friend. "You don't mean to say you're in the habitofwalkinganysuchdistance!" 
"Why, man alive, I'm only eighty-one!" cried the old gentleman, testily. "Of course I've always walked to Boston and back; and I can tell you, sir, that, when I took those cars to come home, I said to myself, 'If this thing's going on, Martin Foster, you might just as well take to your bed and done with it!' That's the way I felt, sir! Only eighty one, and obliged to take the carshomefrom Boston!" 
When Alexander the Great had conquered Porus, King of India, he took a great elephant which had fought valiantly for the king, and dedicated him to the sun, and let him go with this inscription: "Alexander, the son of Jupiter, dedicatedAjaxtothesun." 
The elephant was found with the inscription three hundred and fifty years afterwards. Cuvier considers it probable that whales sometimes live one thousand years. 
An eagle died at Vienna at the age of one hundred and four; ravens have frequently reached one hundred; swans have been known to live to three hundred. Pelicans, also, are long-lived. A tortoise has been known to live one hundredand sevenyears. 
The average life in Rome during the time of the Caesars was but eighteen years, and but twenty years in England during the Elizabethian period. In Rome,today,theaverage isforty, whileinEnglanditis evengreater. 
In France, the average life during the past half century has increased from twenty-eight to forty-five years. In our country, America, we may boast of thegreatest averagelength oflifeofanypeopleon record. 
From the dawn of history, men have sought to discover how death may be averted,and life prolonged. TheancientEgyptian physiciansadvisedfrequent emetics, and keeping up perspiration. So general was the practise, that "How do you sweat?" became the customary salutation, instead of "How do you do?" Thedegreeofperspirationwassupposed toindicatethestateofhealth. 
What else is so grand as to stand on life'sthreshold, fresh, young, hopeful, with a consciousness of power equal to any emergency, — a master of the situation? The glory of a young man is his strength. Weakness of any kind minimizes him, belittles him, cripples him; it is a deformity. No industry nor willpower can eliminate it, no apology cover it, — no matter what the weakness is, whether a lack of energy, vigor, will-power, or of physical stamina. The most exquisite feeling possible is, perhaps, the sense of ability toovercomeobstacles, toconquer. 
The great prizes of life ever fall to the robust, the stalwart, the strong, — not to ahuge muscle or powerful frame necessarily, but to a strong vitality, a greatnervousenergy. 
It is the Lord Broughams, working almost continuously one hundred and seventy-six hours; it is the Napoleons, twenty hours in the saddle; it is the Franklins, camping out in the open air at seventy; it is the Gladstones, firmly grasping the helm of the ship of state at eighty-four, tramping miles every day, and chopping down huge trees at eighty five, — that accomplish the greatthings of life. 
As a rule physical vigor is the condition of a great career. The weak, chestless, calfless, forceless, languid, hesitating, vacillating young man may managetolivea respectable sortof life; buthe seldomclimbs, is not a leader, rarely gets at the head of anything important. It is said that one of these dandies in Iowa had legs so attenuated that the authorities had him arrested because he had no visible means of support. The very thought of such a fellow conducting a business or leading in a profession provokes but a jest. While the weak and half-developed physically do sometimes accomplish immortalthings,yetit is everata great disadvantage. 
What achievement is comparable to health? "What to it are nuggets or millions?" asked Carlyle, of the Edinburgh students. It was a bitter sense of his own crippled life from ill health, his sense of inability to perform that which his towering ambition urged him to do, that called out these words. Michael Angelo, in his great paintings, nowhere admitted either to heaven or hell any but the physically powerful. Such was the Romans' love of physical power. 
The race-horse must not be fed like the truck-horse. The brain workers' food must stimulate nervous energy; there must be phosphorus and albumen inittoconstantlyrenew the gray thinking matter of the brain. If he should eat roast beef and salt pork merely, he would get the day laborer's muscular force, but very little brain or nerve force. He must eat fish, chicken, relishes, thefinercereals, musthave avegetableandfruitdietlargely. 
On the other hand, the laboring-man wants food that will give muscular force, physical energy, stamina, vigor. He wants physical power which will lift and carry. A teacher requires very different food from a servant girl who performs heavy house-work. Students require a peculiar diet for brain-work; and, as most of them have not reached maturity, they need also building-up material. Children need a large amount of bone, nerve, and muscle material, fortheirwasteisvery great, onaccountoftheirgreatactivity. 
Carlyle was wont to remark that he was a happy man until he found out that he possessed a stomach. From that day on that stomach and functional dyspepsia made for Carlyle a life of misery. On the other hand, Prince Bismarck could stow away a dozen hard-boiled eggs, a quart of beer, and a quart of champagne, with numberless links of sausage, for his dinner, besides smoking either cigars or a pipe continuously when not eating. According to Sir John Lubbock, were a man to attempt to equal the comparative capacity ofan averagespiderbulkforbulk,he would have to stow away under his belt at least two oxen, thirteen sheep, a dozen of average-sized porkers, and four barrelsof fish within twenty-fourhours. 
A man out West, who attended a late dinner and ate heartily of oysters, roast beef, turkey, chicken, lobsters, mince-pie, plum-pudding, ice cream, cake, nuts, and raisins, was found dead in bed the following day. The medical examinerreported thathediedof "heart failure." 
Food and drink should not be taken together, because the salivary organs will supply sufficient fluid for proper mastication, and that fluid is far better for the purpose than any other liquid. Very fat meats and pastry are to be avoided, because they put too much work upon the digestive organs. One should not eat heartily when over-fatigued by hard labor, because the digestiveorgansare not inpropercondition todotheirworkwell. 
Professor Lorenzo N. Fowler, phrenologist, who died at eighty-five, gives these as his rules for long life: "Work hard, but easily. Avoid worry and chafing. Approach as near your ideal as possible, and use the talents given you. 
Do not live at too high a pressure. Keep within your income and your strength. Take three meals a day, and let these consist largely of fruits, nuts, cereals, eggs, and milk. Be a total abstainer at the outset, and remain one all your life. Never smoke, chew, or take snuff. Take regularly daily exercise. Remember that cleanliness is next to godliness. Avoid strong tea and coffee. Sleep the sleep of the just when you retire, and take one day in the week for rest,and tenchancesto oneyouwill succeedinbecominganoctogenarian." 
Daniel Webster visited John Adams a short time before his death, and found him reclining on a sofa, evidently in feeble health. He remarked to Mr. Adams, " I am glad to see you, sir, and hope you are getting along pretty well." "Ah, sir, quite the contrary," replied Mr. Adams. "I find I am a poor tenant occupying a house much shattered by time. It sways and trembles with every wind, and has in fact almost gone to decay; and what is worse, sir, the landlord,asnear asIcanfindout,don'tintend tomakeany repairs." 
When Mr. Gladstone and Lord Tennyson were at a great public dinner, it was said that, while the ex-premier enjoyed his food with a keen relish, and laughed and chatted and told anecdotes with all his wonderful brilliancy and animation, Tennyson was silent and sad, and looked horribly bored with the whole affair. 
The poet laureate was the younger man of the two, and had done far less work. He sadly neglected his health. He smoked far too much. He would sit by the hour with a number of clay pipes beside him, which he smoked one by one, breaking them after he had finished one "fill" of tobacco, and throwing them into his waste-basket. Mr. Gladstone, on the other hand, always made a wiseand careful study of health. No one ever found him gouty, or mopish, or disagreeable. 
"Twelve years ago," says Walt Whitman, "I came to Camden to die. But every day I went into the country, and, naked, bathed in the sunshine, lived with the birds and squirrels, and played in the water with the fishes. I receivedmyhealthfromnature." "Tired nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep," has become a proverb in epitome. "Of all the thoughts of God that are Borne inwardunto soulsafar, AlongthePsalmist's musicdeep, Nowtellme,ifthere any is, Ingift orgrace surpassing this, HegivethHisbeloved sleep!" 
"Water, air, and sunshine, the three greatest hygienic means, are free, and withinthe reachofall." 
"Tis the mind that makes the body rich." The mind is the natural protector of the body. A well-balanced, cultured, and disciplined intellect reacts powerfully upon the physique, and tends to bring it into harmony with itself. On the other hand, a weak, vacillating, one-sided, uncertain, ignorant mind will ultimatelybringthebodyintosympathywith it. 
Every pure and healthy thought, every noble aspiration for the good and the true, every longing of the heart for a higher and better life, every lofty purpose and unselfish endeavor, reacts upon the body, making it stronger, more harmonious, and more beautiful. Every thought tends to reproduce itself, and ghastly mental pictures of disease, sensuality, and vice of all sorts producescrofula and leprosy in the soul, which reproduces them in the body. The mind devours everything that is brought to it, — the true, the false, the good, the bad, — and it will produce soundness or rottenness, beauty or deformity, harmony or discord, truth or error, according to the quality of the foodwe give it. 
Chastity, virtue, holiness, pure thoughts, clean minds, tend to longevity; high ideals, noble living, a generous heart, charity, an unselfish love for humanity,all tendtolengthen life,while their oppositestendtoshorten it. 
Happiness is often another name for holiness. It is difficult for a fractious, fretting, discordant, ailing soul to be good. Healthy exercise of the body and brain tends to produce a healthy exercise of the moral faculties. For these three great strands, the mental, the moral, the physical, the triple cord of life, are all bound together; and whatever affects one, affects all. Every form of dissipation and vice tends to produce discord in the great temple so wonderfullyand fearfullymade, andtoshortenlife. 
Success is a powerful tonic simply because it brings into healthy exercise the faculties which produce it, and tends to bring about a harmony between ourambitionandour aspirationsor longings;andharmonyis health. 
When a man finds his place in life, and is doing the work which he likes to do, he is both healthier and happier. The successful attainment of what the heart longs for, as in happy marriages, as a rule improves health and brings happiness. Generally we not only find our treasure where our heart is, but our health also. Who has not noticed men of indifferent health, perhaps even invalids, and men who lack energy and determination, suddenly become roused to a realization of undreamed-of powers and unexpected health upon attainingsomesignalsuccess? 
Although superstition is not so prevalent as in former times, there is no lack of people who believe that, come what will, " a man will not die before his time comes;" and that, "when his time comes, nothing will save him." Such people show that they do not believe their own words, for they are very prompt and persistent in seeking medical advice for every ailment. Josh Billings touches their bubbles with a sharp-pointed pen: "Manifest destiny iz the science ov going tew bust, or enny other place before yu git thare. I may be rong in this centiment, but that iz the way it strikes me. The tru way that manifess destiny had better be sot down iz, the exact distance that a frog kan jump down hill with a striped snake after him; i don't kno but i may be wrong onst more, but if the frog don't git ketched the destiny iz jist what he iz a lookingfor. 
"When a man falls into the bottom ov a well, and makes up hiz minde tew stay thare, that ain't manifess destiny enny more than having yure hair cut short iz; but if he almoste gits out, and then falls down in agin 16 foot deeper, and brakes off his neck twice in the same plase, and dies and iz buried thare at lowwater,that izmanifessdestinyon the square. 
"Mi dear reader, don't beleave in manifess destiny until yu see it. Thare iz such a thing as manifess destiny, but when it occurs it iz like the number ov rings on the rakoon's tale, ov no great consequense onla for ornament. Man wa'n't made for a machine; if he waz, it waz a locomotiff machine, and manifess destiny must git oph from the trak when the bel rings, or git knocked higher then theprice of gold. Manifess destiny iz a disseaze, but it iz eazy tew heal; i hav seen it in its wust stages cured bi sawing a cord ov dri hickory wood." 
13 PURITYIS POWER 
Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? Or who shall stand in his holy place?Hethathath clean handsandapureheart.— Psalms. 

What? Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost? I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonableservice.—St. Paul. 

Aheartunspottedis not easilydaunted.—Shakespeare. 

TisthestainlesssoulwithinThatoutshinesthefairest skin.— A. Hunt. 

IF YE were re-elected tae Pairliment, what wa'd ye be inclined tae tak the tax aff?" shouted a dirty-looking man, interrupting a Scotch member of Parliament, whowas speaking fromthehustings. 
The speaker looked at his interlocutor's soot begrimed face and hands, and replied,grimly, "Off soap,myfriend." 
"I have such a rich story that I want to tell you," said an officer, who one eveningcame into the Union camp in a rollicking mood. "There are no ladies present, are there?" General Grant, lifting his eyes from the paper which he was reading, and looking the officer square in the eye, said slowly, and deliberately: 
"No,buttherearegentlemen present." 
"A great trait of Grant's character," said George W. Childs, "was his purity. I never heard him express an impure thought, or make an indelicate allusioninanywayorshape. There is nothing I ever heard him say that could not be repeated in the presence of women. If a man was brought up for an appointment, and it was shown that he was an immoral man, Grant would not appointhim, nomatterhowgreatthepressurebrought tobear." 
The writer has heard of several incidents characteristic of the great general'sanswerto impurestories. Ononeoccasion,whenhe formedoneofa dinner-party of American gentlemen in a foreign city, conversation drifted into references to questionable affairs, when he suddenly rose and said, "Gentlemen, pleaseexcuseme, Iwillretire." 
It is the glory of a man to have clean lips and a clean mind. It is the glory of a woman not to know evil, even in her thoughts. Isaac Newton's most intimate friendin youngmanhood wasanotedforeignchemist. 
They were constant associates until one day the Italian told an impure story,afterwhich Newton would never mate with him. Put purity before you, then, as a badge of the noblest manhood. A man will be what his most cherished feelings are. If he encourage a noble generosity, every feeling will be enriched by it; if he nurse impure, bitter, and envenomed thoughts, his own spirit will absorb the poison; and he will crawl among men as a burnishedadder, whoselifeismischief, andwhoseerrandis death. 
The fleshly passions are like mutinous sailors, — to be kept below decks. "Never allowyour lowernatureanythingbetterthan asteerage passage." 
"Young man, keep your record clean!" exclaimed John B. Gough, uttering thewords on the platform in Philadelphia, at the very instant when death laid his finger on his lips, — words in which the whole teaching of the eloquent orator seemed compressed. 
If the heart be not pure, you may be certain the thoughts will not be pure, nor the conversation, nor the life. It is impossible to overestimate the value of thorough transparency of character. Sometimes the remark is made regarding such and such a person, "I like that man, he is genuine and straightforward; you canseethroughandthrough him." 
"I should be a poor counselor of young men," wrote a true friend of youth, "if I taught you that purity is possible only by isolation from the world. We do not want that sort of holiness which can only thrive in seclusion; we want that virile, manly purity which keeps itself unspotted from the world, even amid its worst debasements, just as the lily lifts its slender chalice of white and gold to heaven, untainted by the soil in which it grows, though that soil bethereservoirofdeath andputrefaction." 
The Gulf Stream flows like a river through the ocean, so that a vessel may haveitsprow in warm water and the keel in cold. Just so, a pure and holy life may flow through worldliness and pleasure-loving associations, and not minglewith them atall. 
When Vice-President Wilson was on his deathbed, he said: "If I had to do, to think, to act, and vote just as I was directed by one man, I should choose Whittier. I believe him the purest man living on earth, — a soul as white as heaven." 
"No, no, these are not trifles," said George Whitefield, when a friend askedwhyhe was so particular to bathe frequently, and always have his linen scrupulouslyclean; "a ministermustbewithoutspot,evenin his garments." 
Shun evil thoughts as you would shun temptation to crime. Do not harbor them, for an instant, lest their foul contagion contaminate your soul with pictures which even religion is powerless to erase. A single glance at a bad picture,or abadbook, has ruinedthe peace ofmany afinelife. 
The mind's phonograph will reproduce a bad story while life lasts, even up to the point of death. Don't listen to even one; you can never get the stain out of your life; its deadly sound will haunt you forever. Physicians tell us that every particle of the body changes once in about seven years; but no chemistry, human or divine, can entirely expunge from the mind a bad picture. Like thepaintings buried for centuries in Pompeii, without the loss of tintorshade,thesepicturesare as brilliantinageasin youth. 
That which poor, imprisoned Queen Caroline Matilda, of Denmark, wrote on her chapel window, ought to be the prayer of all, — " Oh, keep me innocent! make others great." The blossoms of the Judas-tree appear before the leaves, and they are of brilliant crimson. The flaming beauty of the flowers attracts innumerable insects, and the wandering bee is drawn to it to gather honey; but every bee that alights upon the blossoms imbibes a fatal poison, and drops dead. Beneath this enticing tree, the earth is strewn with the victims of its fatal fascinations. At the river Lar, in Persia, there is a large rock with two apertures a few feet apart. It is called the Devil's Hill. Near the rock, one hearsadeepandperpetualroar, far down in the bowels of the earth. No one has ever ventured down to see what is going on below, for a deadly mephitic gas exhales from the openings, which causes death to every living thing that breathes it. Around the rock there are ever a score or two of birds dead from inhaling the air, and often a bear has been seen lying at the entrance, starkand stiff. 
There aresocialdepths wheredeathreigns, whichever diffusecontagion. 
Who that has caught the least waft of that intoxicating odor of impurity which fillsthe world, has not felt that something has gone out of his life, — a bloom, a fragrance, a blessed guilelessness, — and realized that something has come into it which has spread a contaminating darkness through the soul? How true it is that physical sin brings its own punishment! How many forms we see degraded, and how many eyes clouded, by secret indulgence; the natural harmony broken, and all fineness of perception destroyed; all that is highest and best shut out from the heart, and nothing that is desirable remaining. Inlosingtheirpurity,men losethemselves. 
"The man who is not virtuous can never be happy," said Epicurus. No other treasure in this world is so rich as the consciousness of purity, and in order to retain it one must avoid not only the acts, but also the impure thoughts which would destroy it. Men and women alike should venerate their physical as well as their spiritual natures. One might as well hope to escape fever while chained to a fever corpse, as to hope to remain pure while entertainingunchastethoughts. 
Innocency, like youth, once lost, cannot be recovered; but purity, which is higher, maybe attainedbyeveryone whostrivesandfaints not. 
Many a ruined life began its downfall in the dry rot of a perverted imagination. How little we realize that, by subtle, moral manufacture, repeated acts of the imagination weave themselves into a mighty tapestry, every figure and fancy of which will stand out in living colors in the character-web of our lives, to approve or condemn us. Perhaps the greatest power given us to bless or destroy is the imagination, which, without self­control,wouldruin a saint. 
How degrading and damning this power becomes when perverted! Very few realize the power of a diseased imagination to ruin a precious life. Perhaps the defect began in a little speck of taint. No other faculty has such power to curse or bless mankind, to build up or tear down, to ennoble or debauch,tomake happy or miserable, or has such power upon our destiny, as theimagination. PeterLillywould never lookuponabad picture,lesthis own pencil should catch the taint, which, like the spot upon Lady Macbeth's hand, would not out. 
One day, when Arthur was holding a high feast with his Knights of the Round Table, the Sangreal, or vessel out of which the last passover was eaten (a precious relic which had long remained concealed from human eyes because of the sins of the land), suddenly appeared to him and all his chivalry. 
The consequence of this vision was that all the knights took on them a solemn vow to seek the Sangreal. But, alas! it could be revealed only to a knight at once accomplished in earthly chivalry, and pure and guiltless of all evil. All Sir Lancelot'snobleaccomplishments were renderedvainbecausehe had yielded to temptation, and in his quest he encountered only disgraceful disaster. 
To be pure in heart is the youth's great commandment. Do not listen to men who tell you that "vice is a necessity." Nothing is a necessity that is wrong. Says Milton, "All wickedness is weakness." Vice and vigor have nothingwhateverin common. Purityis strength, health,power. 
"Children must be taught purity," says H. R. Storer. "There is no doubt that in many of them an improper tone of thought is established, even before the age of puberty. For a boy to reach his teens without learning from his associatessomething ofthosematters,is simplyimpossible." 
Why this foolish, fatal silence, in regard to these vicious plants which grow,flower out, and emittheirpestilentialodorsin the darkness? 
"I have noticed," says William Acton, "that all patients that have confessed to me that they have practised vice, lamented that they were not, whenchildren,made awareof its consequences; and I have been pressed over and over again to urge on parents, guardians, schoolmasters, and others interested in the education of youth, the necessity of giving their charges some warning, some intimation, of their danger. To parents and guardians I offer my earnest advice that they should, by hearty sympathy and frank explanation,aidtheirchargesinmaintainingpure lives." 
A prominent writer says that, "If young persons poison their bodies and corrupt their minds with vicious courses, no lapse of time, after a reform, is likely torestorethemto physicalsoundness andthesoulpurityoftheir earlier days." 
There is only one panacea for impurity. Constant occupation and pure, high thinking are absolutely necessary to a clean life. The spiders of impurity soonspintheirwebsin the chambers ofanidle life. 
We forget too easily the sanctity of life. It uplifts a man to feel respect for himself,to feel that life proceeds from God, and that it gathers up in itself all the pain of the past and hope of the future. When a man understands this, he willingly sacrifices a fleeting gratification in order to keep life pure, strong, invincible,andtotransmititundefiled ashe received it. 
When a resolute determination to resist the inroads of these contaminating and destructive evilsisnotmade andkept,fromthat hour thereis adifference in the feelings, the condition, and the prospects of the young man who thus relinquishes himself to the mastery of morbid and impure thoughts. He may not be aware of the change; but the ingenuous confidence of innocence is lost. Home is no longer the home that it has been. The presence and companionship of parents and sisters, hitherto affording delight in mutual confidence and intercourse, now only occasion embarrassment and confusion, — the result of the loss of innocence and the natural purity of thought. 
That which is obtained in exchange for previous, open, ingenuous, cheerful demeanor, is morbid sullenness, reserve, and passionate irritability. And what a punishment follows! — to have every fine feeling dulled, if not destroyed, to contract a repugnance to everything of a religious nature,— prayer and public worship becoming irksome, and a penance instead of an enjoyment! Against this destruction of life, — of all that is holy and all that makeslifehappy, —thebattlemustbefoughtwithallone'senergy. 
Some shepherds once saw an eagle soar out from a crag. It flew majesticallyfar upinto the sky, but by and by became unsteady, and began to waver in its flight. At length one wing dropped, and then the other, and the poor bird fell swiftly to the ground. The shepherds sought the fallen bird, and foundthat a little serpent had fastened itself upon it while resting on the crag. The eagle did not know that the serpent was there. But it crawled in through 
the feathers, and, while the proud monarch was sweeping through the air, its fangswerethrustintohisflesh,and hecame reeling intothedust. 
It isthestory ofSamson:itisthestoryof manyalife. 
Some secret sin has long been eating its way into the heart, and at last the proud life lies soiled and dishonored in the dust. "There is yet another fool whose portrait my album contains," says a noted writer; "he is known by many an ugly name, — libertine, prodigal, sensualist. I shall not affront my readers by describing him further than by saying he is a slave of his baser passions, and wallows in the mire of bestiality. The pure shrink from his lecherous touch; his very breath blights every innocent thing. The stenchful ichorofhislustfullife makesa Sodomofeveryplacewhich hehabituates. 
He leers in the face of virtue, and has only a sneer for every mention of purity. His literature is the refuse of Holywell Street; his haunts are the tavern, the casino, and places which I hardly dare to name. Ah! an awful Nemesis is at his heels. Rather would I see a son of mine laid in a pauper's grave,than seehimfallintothemawofthisbesotted devil." 
"Oh," cries the poor, soiled, broken-spirited man in his hour of shame, "createinme acleanheart,andrenew aright spirit within me!" 
Thousands of men would cut off their right hands to be free from the resultsofimpurity. To putitonthevery lowestground, 
Iam certain that if young men knew and realized the fearful risks to health that they run by indulging in grosser impurities, they would put it by with a shudder of disgust and aversion. It may very easily happen, it very often actually does happen, that one single step aside from the path of purity not only clouds a man's whole life with misery and suffering, but entails lifelong diseaseonchildrenyetun born. 
Keep good, pure company. Never take for companions or friends those who have no high aim in life, or those who sneer at virtue. Choose those who are clean, wholesome, and who want to be somebody and to do something in the world. Have no secret companions to whom you would not introduce yoursisteror mother. 
Jeremy Taylor shows the various effects of purity on all the mental and moral life: "A pure mind in a chaste body is the mother of wisdom and deliberation, sober counsels and ingenuous actions, open deportment and sweet carriage, sincere principles and unprejudicate understanding, love of God and self-denial, peace and confidence, holy prayers and spiritual comfort, and a pleasure of spirit infinitely greater than the sottish pleasure of unchastity." 
A preacher once took occasion to instance the way in which God judges purity, and spoke of men who had one standard of morality for women, and another — and much lower one — for themselves. He pointed out that in China, while infidelity in a wife would be visited by capital punishment inflicted in a manner too horrible to describe, yet, in case of a husband, the sinwas practicallyregardedas a veryunimportantmatter. 
Shortly after, a well-dressed man in the congregation rose from his seat, and, coming up to the preacher, said: "Sir, you have taught me today alesson which Ishall neverforget. Youhave made me feel that God requires purity in men as much as in women. I had never thought of these things in this way before. Ishallre member whatyouhave said,andIthank you for it." 
It would be loosening the foundations of virtue to countenance the notion that, because of a difference in sex, men are at liberty to set morality at defiance, and to do that with impunity which, if done by a woman, would stain her character for life. To maintain a pure and virtuous condition of society, therefore, man as well as woman must be virtuous and pure, both alike shunning all acts infringing on the heart, character, and conscience, — shunning them as poison, which, once imbibed, can never be entirely thrown outagain, but mentally embitters, to a greater or less ex tent, the happiness of after-life. 
In Eastern countries the leper is compelled to cry, "Unclean, unclean," upon the approach of any one not so cursed. What a blessing to humanity it would be if all the moral lepers were compelled to cry, " Unclean, unclean," beforetheyapproachinnocent victims withtheirdeadlycontagion! 
In the language of the Basutos the words "happiness" and "purity" are synonymous. The most dangerous writers in the English language are those whose artful insinuations and mischievous polish reflect upon the mind the image ofimpurity, without presentingthe impurityitself. 
A plain vulgarity in a writer is its own antidote. It is like a foe who attacks us openly, and gives us opportunity for defense. But impurity, secreted under beauty, is like a treacherous friend who strolls with us in a garden, and destroys usbytheodor of poisonousflowersprofferedto oursenses. 
Novels of the French school, and of English imitators, are sometimes called common sewers of society, into which drain the concentrated filth of the worst passions, of the worst creatures, of the worst cities. "I am ashamed and outraged when I think that wretches could be found to open these foreign seals and let out their plagues upon us, — that any Satanic Pilgrim should voyage to France to dip from the dead sea of her abomination a baptism for our sons. It were a mercy, rather, to import serpents from Africa and let them outon our prairies; lions from Asia, and free them in our forests; lizards and scorpionsandblack tarantulas,fromtheIndies,and putthem in ourgardens. 
Men could slay these, but those offspring reptiles of the French mind, who can kill them? You might as well draw sword on a plague, or charge a malariawiththe bayonet." 
"Keepthyselfpure." 
A mind, retaining all the dew and freshness of innocence, shrinks from the very idea of impurity, as if it were sin to have thought or heard of it, — as if even the shadow of the evil would leave some soil upon the unsullied whiteness of the virgin mind. "When modesty is once extinguished it knows nota return." 
A mayor of Philadelphia said he could rid the jails of two-thirds of the boy criminals in the next year, if he could banish bad plays from the boards ofthevarietytheaters,andputbad books outofprint. 
An officer of the British government declares that nearly all of the boys broughtbeforethecriminalcourtsowetheirdownfallto impurereading. 
To read authors whose lines drip with the very gall of death; to vault in elegant dress as near the edge of indecency as is possible without treading over; to express the utmost possible impurity so dexterously that not a vulgar word is used, but rosy, glowing, suggestive language, — this, with many, is refinement But to expose the prevalent vice; to meet its glittering literature with the plain and manly language of truth; to say nothing except what one desiresto sayplainly, —this,itseems, is vulgarity! 
Those authors who soften evil, and show deformity with tints of beauty; who arm their general purity with the occasional sting of impurity, — these are they who take the feet out of the straight road into the gulltiest path of seduction. He who feeds an inflamed appetite with food spiced to fire is less guiltythanhewhohidesinthemindtheleavenwhich produces thisappetite. 
Finally, O young man or young woman, guard your heart purity! Keep innocency! Never lose it; if it be gone, you have lost from the casket the most precious gift of God. The first purity of imagination, of thought and of feeling, if soiled, can be cleansed by no fuller's soap; if lost, cannot be found, though sought carefully with tears. If a harp be broken, art may repair it; if a light be quenched, the flames may kindle it; but if a flower be crushed, what artcan repairit?if anodorbe waftedaway,whocancollector bring itback? 
Our thoughts are heard in heaven.—Young. 
And there are things that blight the soul as with a mildew blight, And in the temple of the Lord put out the blessed light. Mrs. E. O. Smith. 
Love virtue, she alone is free; She can teach you how to climb Higher than the sphery chime, Or, if virtue feeble were, Heaven itself would stoop to her. Milton. 

14 A HOMEOF MYOWN 

To Adam, Paradise was home; to the good among his descendants, homeisparadise.—Hare. 
The strength of a nation, especially of a republican nation, is in the intelligentandwell-orderedhomesofthepeople.—Mrs. Sicourney. 

A happy marriage is a new beginning of life, a new starting-point for happiness andusefulness.— DeanStanley. 

WOULD say to every man, buy a home if you can, and own it. If a windfall has cometo you, buyahome. 
Do not let anyone tempt you to put all your earnings back into the pool. Take out enough to buy a home, and buy it. Put the rest back if you will, but buy the home first. Buy it, andsellit not. 
"To love, and to be loved, is the greatest happiness of existence," says SydneySmith. 
"Beauty is a great thing, but beauty of garment, house, and furniture are tawdryornamentscomparedwithdomestic love," says Holmes. 
"All the elegance in the world will not make a home; and I would give more for a spoonful of real heart-love than for whole shiploads of furniture and allthe gorgeousnessalltheupholsterersin the worldcan gather." 
"Marriage hath more of safety than the single life," says Jeremy Taylor; "it hathnot more ease, but less danger; it is more merry and more sad; it is fuller of sorrows, and fuller of joys; it lies under more burdens, but is supported by all the strength of love and charity, and those burdens are delightful. Marriage is the mother of the world, and preserves kingdoms, fills cities and churches, andpeoplesheaven itself." 
Byron had a miserable home and a passionate mother, and his whole life was blighted and unhappy. He sneered at purity, doubted all goodness, and scoffedatsacredthings. 
His wretched, profligate career was but the legitimate consequence of his defectivehome training. I have heard men tell in public discourse what a man is, but what is a woman? Until someone shall give a better definition, I will tell you what a woman is. She is direct from Heaven, a sacred and delicate gift,withaffectionssogreatthatnomeasuringline shortof that oftheinfinite God can tell their bound; fashioned to refine and soothe and lift and irradiate home and society and the world; of such value that no one can appreciate it, un less his mother lived long enough to let him understand it, or unless, in some great crisis of life, when all else failed him, he had a wife to re-enforce him witha faithinGod thatnothingcoulddisturb. 
The permanent union of one man with one woman establishes a relation of affections and interests which can in no other way be made to exist between two human beings." 
When General Lafayette was in the United States, two young men were introduced. He said to one, " Are you married?" "Yes, sir," was the reply. "Happy man!" quoth the general. He then put the same question to the other, whoreplied, "I am abachelor." 
"Lucky dog!" said the general. This is the best essay on matrimony extant. 
A man who avoids matrimony on account of the cares of wedded life, cuts himself off from a great blessing for fear of a trifling annoyance. He rivals thewiseacrewho secured himselfagainst corns byhavinghislegsamputated. 
There have been men, good men, whose lives, measured by ordinary standards,were successful, who never married; but those who hear or read of themfeel thatsuchcareers wereincomplete. 
The world is full of stage-struck girls who fancy that, if they could be in Calve's place, theywouldbeinparadise. DoesCalve, "the adored," fancy that sheisinparadise? 
A reporter asked her some time ago what advice she would give to a girl with a good voice who wanted to go on the stage. "I should tell her," replied the prima donna, "to go home and mend her stockings, do anything but go on the stage. There is no happiness in stage life. It is a life of continual worriment. The stage is no place for the woman who is not absolutely weddedtoherart. The artistshouldnotthinkofmarrying. While she isonthe stage,sheis not fittobethewife of any man. There is always a divided heart, and nomanwantsthat. Thehusbandshouldbethehead. 
He wishes his wife for himself. He does not wish his name to be upon bill boards, nor his wife's picture in every window. That is right. That is as it should be. No, no, the stage, alluring fascinating as it is, is not the place for the wife but for the woman who lives only for art. That is why I say to the stage-struck girls, 'Stay at home; sew, read, teach, marry, — do anything rather thangouponthestage.'" 
"Home! It is a charmed word! Through that one syllable thrills untold melody, and the laughter of children; the sound of well-known footsteps and thevoicesof undying affection." 
"There is something in the word 'home,'" says another writer, "that wakes the kindliest feelings of the heart. It is not merely friends and kindred who render that place so dear; but the very hills and rocks and rivulets throw a charmaroundthe placeofone's nativity. Itisnowonderthatthe loftiest harps have been tuned to sing of ' home, sweet home.'"Luther, a man full of human affection, speaking of his wife, said, "I would not ex change my poverty with her for all the riches of Croesus without her." An old darkey says:— "Woman'slub,like India rubber, Itstretchdemorede moreyoulubher." 
Woman's love is stronger than death; it rises superior to adversity, and towersin sublime beautyabove the niggardly selfishness of the world. 
Misfortune cannotsuppress it; enmitycannotalienateit;temptationcannot enslave it. It is the guardian angel of the nursery and the sick-bed; it gives an affection ate concord to the partnership of life and interest; circumstances cannot modify it; it ever remains the same to sweeten existence, to purify the cup of life on the rugged pathway to the grave, and melt to moral pliability the brittle nature of man. It is the ministering spirit of home, hovering in soothing caresses over the cradle and the death-bed of the household, and filling up the urn of all its sacred memories. "A great many difficulties arise fromfallinginlovewith thewrongperson," says Ruskin. 
The true girl, it has been well said, has to be sought for. She does not parade herself as show goods. She is not fashionable. Generally, she is not rich. But, oh! what a heart she has when you find her so large and pure and womanly. When you see it, you wonder if those showy things outside were women. If you gain her love, your two thousands are millions. She'll not ask you for a carriage, or a first-class house; she'll wear simple dresses, and turn themwhennecessary. 
She'll keep everything neat and nice in your sky parlor, and give you such a welcomewhen you come home that you'll think the parlor higher than ever. She'll entertain true friends on a dollar, and astonish you with the new thought, how little happiness depends on money. She'll make you love home (if you don't, you are a brute), and teach you how to pity, while you scorn, a poor, fashionable society that thinks itself rich, and vainly tries to think itself happy. 
Far wiser is the young man who marries the stupidest girl in the world, if she be affectionate, than he who marries the brightest girl in the universe, if she be cold, clammy, and unresponsive. Enough is it for him if she is affectionate in her nature, sympathetic with his work, responsive to his thoughts, appreciative of his best qualities. These are the traits in a woman which lastthelongest, andremainwitha manthroughout his life. 
The truest, best, and sweetest type of the American girl of today does not come from the home of wealth; she steps out from a home where exists comfortratherthan luxury. She belongs to thegreat middle class — that class which has given us the best American wifehood; which has given helpmates to the foremost American men of our time; which teaches its daughters the true meaning of love; which teaches the manners of the drawing-room, but the practical life of the kitchen as well; which teaches its girls the responsibilities ofwifehoodandthegreatnessof motherhood. 
The loving heart of a good girl is better than all the wealth and social accomplishments which she can bring to a man. It is something that comes back to a man three hundred and sixty-five times in a year. We can get along with a little money in this world if we will; but love is a quality of which we needto possessabundanceandof which wecannothave too much. 
When Theodore Parker was married, he entered in his journal, on his wedding-day, thefollowingresolutions: 
First. —Never, exceptforthe bestreasons, toopposemywife's will. 
Second. — To discharge alldutiesforher sake freely. 
Third. —Nevertoscold. 
Fourth. —Nevertolookcrossather. 
Fifth. — Neverto worryherwithcommands. 
Sixth. — To promoteherpiety. 
Seventh. —Tobear herburdens. 
Eighth. —Tooverlookherfoibles. 
Ninth. —Tosave,cherish,andforeverdefendher. 
Tenth. — To remember her always in my prayers. Thus, God willing, we shallbeblessed. 
These commandments which Parker put upon himself are like the old Decalogue, all comprehended in one — love. Love is the fulfilling of the matrimonialaswellasofthe Jewishlaw. 
The heart of every woman is like a page written with sympathetic ink. It seems blank, but warm it sufficiently, and you will find a love-letter written onit. 
"Much friction," said Mrs. P. T. Barnum, "comes of the inability of the average woman to comprehend that her husband has many thoughts, moods, and feelings in which she has absolutely no part. If wives could realize this, and accept the fact, how many unhappy moments would be spared them. 
Love may be, and is with a good man, the greater and better part of his life, butit isnotallhis life. 
It is unfortunately true that with a woman, love — the love she bears her husband — is her 'whole existence.' She cannot disassociate herself, ever so little, for even the briefest time, from that love. It tinges every thought, affects every action. Men are not made that way; and the most devoted has hours when he is as uninfluenced by the existence of his truly loved wife as if shehad never been. This is not treason, for it is unconscious; and woe to the womanwho con foundsthis phaseof man'smentalitywith dis loyalty,forshe will weary her husband with reproaches he does not merit, and cannot understand. A husband may at times be silent and preoccupied, and yet it doesnotargue that heisindifferentto, ortiredof, his wife. 
He may be depressed, and yet not feel that marriage for him is a failure. He may be captious and fretful, and yet feel no irritation against his wife. I am not absolving men from the obligation to be agreeable to their womenkind, nor extenuating their frequent lack of marital amenities; I am only assuring you, for your own good, that these things are often the outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual disaccordance which you have not caused, andaboutwhichyou would beunwise togrieve." 
"Above all things, my dear nephew," says Thackeray, "try to have a cheerful wife." To have a happy home, there must be a similarity of tastes between husband and wife, a congeniality of desires and aspirations. If the husband is an ignoramus, and the wife a lady of refinement and culture, there willnot be much socialenjoymentaroundtheevening lamp. 
"A girl who is always finding fault with her beau during courtship is sure to scold him intolerably after marriage, and one who is hard to please before marriagewillbemuch harderafter." 
"The whole endeavor of both parties, during the time of courtship," says Dr. Johnson, "is frequently to hinder themselves from being known; to disguisetheirnaturaltemper andrealdesires inhypocriticalimitation, studied compliance,andcontinuedaffectation. 
From the time that their love was avowed, neither sees the other but in a mask; and the cheat is managed often on both sides with so much art, and discovered afterwards with so much abruptness, that each has reason to suspect that some transformation has happened, and that by a strange imposture, as in the case of Jacob, one has been courted and another married." 
To the prospective bride and bridegroom I would say; Be very plain with each other. Deformities and defects are best borne while love is hot. Perhaps nothing else so shocks one after marriage as the discovery of defects and blemishes of character or condition, which were kept secret before the ceremony. It is better to be too plain than not plain enough, for wedlock brings out all the little imperfections of character, as well as all the finer traits. Alwaysbenatural,and show yourselfexactlyas youare. 
"You must take two bears with you into your home, my dear," said a quaint old lady to her nephew, "if you want to be happy." "Two bears?" he asked in astonishment. "Yes," she said, "bear and forbear." "When thee went a courting, I told thee to keep thy eyes wide open," said a Quaker to his son, on his wedding-day. "Now that thee is married, I tell thee to keep them half shut." 
Were the kitchen more of a studio in American homes, we should see a higher style of art in the drawing-room. The worst preparation for a day's work is a poor breakfast, and its shabbiest reward is a bad supper. I believe it would bea wiseprovisionof lawthatnogirl could marrywithouthaving first passed an examination, and received a diploma certifying to her qualifications,in knowledgeandexperience ofthehygiene of thekitchen. 
A good English education and a knowledge of domestic economy will add more to a young man's happiness than all the foreign languages or polite accomplishments that it is possible for any one young lady to be the mistress of. 
"There is a good deal of domestic happiness in a well-dressed mutton-chop or a tidy beefsteak for breakfast. The woman who can cook contributes moretothehappinessofsocietythantwenty whocannot." 
If a wife cannot make her home bright and happy, so that it shall be the cleanest, sweetest, cheerfulest place her husband can find refuge in, — a retreat from the toils and troubles of the outer world,—,then God help the poor man, for he is virtually homeless. If we can make our faces to shine on strangers, why darken them on those who should be dear to us? Is it because we have so squandered our smiles abroad that we have only frowns to carry home? Is it because while out in the world we have been so prodigal of good temperthatwe havebutour ill humorswithwhichtocloudourfiresides?Is it because it requires often but a mere passing; guest to enter, while we are speaking daggers to beings who are nearest to us in life, to change our tone, to give us perfect self-command that we cannot do for love what we do for appearance? 
Themother makesanEdenor adesert. 
"A wife and mother in prosperous circumstances and greatly admired was giving her chieftime tosocial life. Thehusbandspent hiseveningsaway. The son,fifteenyearsof age, got the same habit; and there was a prospect that the other children, as they got old enough, would take the same turn. One daythe wife aroused to the consideration that she would better save her husband and her boy. Interesting and stirring games were introduced into the house. The motherstudied tofindinterestingthings totellher children. 
One morning the son said, ' Father, you ought to have been home last night. Wehad a grand time, — such jolly games,and such interesting stories.' This went on from night to night, and, after a while, the husband stayed in to see what was going on, and he finally got attracted; and added' something of his own to the evening entertainments; and the result was that the wife and mothersaved her husband and saved her boy, and saved herself. Was not that an enterprise worth the attention of the greatest woman that ever lived since 'Abigail at the foot of the rock arrested the four hundred armed warriors?" Every true home should be a real "Old Point Comfort" in the memory of all who dwellwithinit. 
Mrs. Henry Ward Beecher, in her papers in the "Ladies' Home Journal" on "Henry Ward Beecher as I Knew Him," tells of the first of their life in Brooklyn, after her husband became pastor of Plymouth Church. Each morning, after breakfast and prayers, Mr. Beecher left the house for his study at the church. Mrs. Beecher says she had an abundance of work to keep her busy, but somehow a feeling of loneliness would always creep over her, as Mr. Beecher's study had previously been in the home, and every little while heused tocall herforsomething. 
"In an hour or two," says Mrs. Beecher, "my husband would return, and instantly detect a look of trouble. "Nothing but a little nonsense, dear," she would say, in answer to his anxious inquiry. But he would insist on knowing. "Well, I hardly know myself; it all seems strange, our life here. I know you willcall me foolish, but when you have your study at the church, we seem so separated. Ifeel thatwehavequarreled." 
After 'one of his real old-time hearty laughs, he would reply, "I imagine weare both foolish, then, for that is just the way I was feeling, and ran round to find out if we really had quarreled." He said they must conquer that little foolishness. "Yet," he continued, "I am not sure if it is childishness. Our lives and work havebeenso close together,andthey always shallbe." 
"The last few years of his life," Mrs. Beecher goes on to say, "brought us more closely together than ever, for ' Age upon the heart can never creep.'" "You ought to acquire the faculty of being at home in the best society," said a fashionable womantoher honestnephew. "Imanage thateasilyenough," was thereply, "bystaying athomewithmywifeandchildren." 
Men give up a great deal for their families, — their time, their strength, the knowledge they have gained in life's experiences,— they spend everything freely for their home's sake; and the home should pay its debt in much outspokenlove. 
"Home is a residence, not merely of the body, but of the heart. It is a place for affectionstounfold anddevelopthemselves, forchildren toloveandlearn and play in, for husband and wife to toil smilingly together, and make life a blessing. The object of all ambition should be to be happy at home. If we are not happy there, we cannot be happy elsewhere. It is the best proof of the virtues of afamily toseea happyfireside." 
Theodore Parker says of marriage, "Men and women, and especially young people,do not know that it takes years to marry completelytwo hearts, even of the most loving and well sorted. But nature allows no sudden change, 
— marriage is gradual, a fraction of us at a time. A happy wedlock is a long falling in love. But the golden marriage is a part of love which the bridal-day knows nothing of. Youth is the tassel and silken flower of love; age is the full corn, ripe and solid in the ear. Beautiful is the morning of love with its prophetic crimson, violet, purple, and gold, with its hopes of day to come. Beautiful also is the evening of love, with its glad remembrances and its rainbow sideturned towardheavenaswellasearth." 
What domestic life was to Lord John Lawrence may be seen from the following anecdote. He was sitting in his drawing roomatSouthgate, with his sisterand others of the family; all were reading. Looking up from the book in which he had been engrossed, Lawrence discovered that his wife had left the room. "Where's mother?" said he to one of his daughters. "She's upstairs," re plied the girl. He returned to his book, and, looking up again a few minutes later, put the same question to his daughter and received the same answer. Oncemorehereturned to his reading; once more he looked up, with the same question on his lips. His sister ex claimed, "Why, really, John, it would seem as if you could not get on five minutes without your wife!" "That's why I married her," he replied. The great German general, Von Moltke, married Miss Burt, an English girl, and lived most happily with her until her death, which took place on Christmas Eve, 1868. Very touching was his devotion to hermemory. 
Upon his estate at Kreisau he built a mausoleum, situated on an eminence, emboweredin foliage. In front of the altar of this little chapel was placed the simple oak coffin, always covered with leaves, in which the remains of his wife reposed. Sculptured in the apse was a finely carved figure of our Lord in an attitude of blessing. Above were inscribed the words: " Love is the fulfillmentofthe law." 
It was, no doubt, from feeling his helping hand in her daily life that the wife of Sir Henry Bartle Frere thus described her husband. She had driven to meet him at a railway station, and had told the footman to go and find the general. The servant, who was a new one, and had been engaged in his master's absence, asked, "But how shall I know him?" "Oh," replied Lady Frere, "look for a tall gentleman helping somebody," The description was sufficient. The servant went, and found the general helping an old lady out of a railway carriage. 
Writing of the greatness of Dwight L. Moody, Professor Drummond said, "If you were to ask Mr. Moody what, apart from the inspirations of his personal faith, was the secret of his success, of his happiness and use fullness inlife,he wouldassuredlyanswer, 'Mrs. Moody.'" 
The professor meant more than merely to state the fact that Mrs. Moody greatly aided her husband in his successful and useful life. He intended to show that Mr. Moody knew she powerfully helped him to attain his commanding position, and was willing that the world should also know his indebtedness to her. 
This acknowledgment, Professor Drummond thought, was one evidence of Mr. Moody's greatness. 
The professor was right. There are too many successful men who trade upontheir wives' capital, and never acknowledge that, though silent, they are effectivepartners. Daudet, the famous French writer, resembles the American evangelistinconfessinghisindebtedness tohiswife. 
"I must say," he remarked to a friend, " that in my literary work I owe nearly all to my wife. She re-reads all my books, and ad vises me on every point. She is all that is most charming, and has a wonderful mind, and a sympatheticspirit." 
All that was worth admiration in the character of Henry VI. was a reflection of the services of his wife Margaret. William, Prince of Orange, was restored to the right path by the grand qualities of his wife Mary. Justinian confesses that his wise laws were the suggestions of his wife Theodora. Andrew Jackson had his mightiest reinforcement in his plain wife, whose inartistic attire was the amusement of the elegant circles to which she was invited. 
Washington wore, for forty years, a chain around his neck, that chain holding the miniature likeness of her who had been his greatest inspiration, whether at Valley Forge, or amid the honors of the presidential chair. Pericles said hegot all hiseloquence andstatesmanshipfrom his wife. 
Robert Burns married a farm-girl, with whom he fell in love while they worked together in a plowed field. Milton married the daughter of a country squire, and lived with her but a short time. He was an austere literary recluse, while she was a rosy, romping country lass, who could not endure the restraint imposeduponher, sotheyseparated. 
Subsequently, however, she returned, and they lived tolerably happy. Queen Victoria and Prince Albert were cousins — of fidelity rare in the long line of English monarchs, wherein the marital vows were scarcely observed, 
— and between them sincere affection existed. Shakespeare loved and weddeda farmer'sdaughter. 
Washington married a widow with two children, and they lived as married people should live — in perfect harmony with each other. John Adams married the daughter of a Presbyterian clergyman, although her father objectedon account ofAdamsbeinga lawyer. 
John Howard, the great philanthropist, married his nurse. She was altogether beneath him in social life and intellectual capacity; and, besides this, was fifty-two years old, while he was but twenty-five. He wouldn't take "no" for an answer, and they were married and lived happily until she died, which occurred two years afterwards. Peter the Great of Russia married a peasant. She made an excellent wife and a sagacious empress. Humboldt married apoorgirlbecause helovedher,andthey were happy. 
The idea of the great electrician Edison's marrying was first suggested by an intimate friend, who told him that his large house and numerous servants ought to have a mistress. Although a very shy man, he seemed pleased with the proposition, and timidly inquired whom he should marry. The friend, annoyed at his apparent want of sentiment, somewhat testily replied, "Anyone." ButEdisonwas notwithoutsentimentwhen the timecame. 
One day, as he stood behind the chair of Miss Stillwell, a telegraph operator inhis employ,he wasnotalittlesurprisedwhen she suddenly turned round and said: "Mr. Edison, I can always tell when you are behind me or near me." It was next Miss Still well's turn to be surprised, for, with characteristic bluntness and ardor, Edison fronted the young lady, and, looking her full in the face, said, "I've been thinking considerably about you of late, and, if you are willing to marry me, I would like to marry you." The young lady said she would consider the matter, and talk it over with her mother. The result was that they were married a month later, and the union proved a very happy one. Referring to the obscurity of much of Browning's poetry, Wordsworth said, when he heard that the poet was going to marry MissBarrett, thepoetess, "I hopethey'llunderstand oneanother." 
Certainly Mrs. Browning did think that she understood her husband, for she wrote to a friend, "Nobody exactly understands him except me, who am inthe inside of him, and hear him breathe." If it is a risk to marry any poet, it seemed to Miss Barrett's friends a tempting of Providence, and a doubling of the risk, for two of this irritable profession to wed. Contrary to expectations, the result was exceptional happiness. Mrs. Kemble, who saw a great deal of the Brownings in Rome, remarked that "Mr. Browning was the only man she had ever knownwhobehaved likeaChristianto his wife." 
What a happy man must Edmund Burke have been, when he could say of his home, "Every care vanishes the moment I enter under my own roof!" Of marriage Luther observed, "The utmost blessing that God can bestow on a man is the possession of a good and pious wife, with whom he may live in peace and tranquility, — to whom he may con fide his whole possessions, even his life and welfare." Again he said, "To rise betimes, and to marry young,arewhatnoman ever repentsofdoing." 
One of the most helpful adjuncts to a man's largest success is, surely, a restfulhome-life. 
"I once asked the late Hepworth Dixon," writes a well-known authoress, " with whom I happened to be talking on this subject, what he thought was the reason why some women hold their husband's hearts securely and forever, while others are but the brief tenants of a few months or years. 'What,' I asked, 'is the quality in a woman that her husband loves the longest?' 'That sheshouldbe apillow,' answered Mr. Dixon;andthen, meetingthe inquiryin myeyes,he wenton, 'Yes, that is what a man needs in his wife, — something to rest his heart on. He has excitement and opposition enough in the world. Hewants to feel that there is one place where he is sure of sympathy, a place that willgivehimease as apillowgivesittoa tiredhead. Doyou thinkaman will be tempted to turn from a, woman whose eyes are his flattering mirror, 
— who heals where others wound?' And surely," adds this gifted lady, "he was right." 
The wife should do what the wife of Mo hammed did for him, — believe in him when other people do not. Prince Bismarck, in speaking of his wife, hasdeclared, "Sheitiswho has mademe whatIam." 
Very different would have been the verdict concerning Walter Savage Landor. His was a case of marrying in haste and repenting at leisure. The poet met his future wife at a ball, and determined on the instant to marry her. Not long after he had done so, Mrs. Landor came to think that "a conversation with her husband was incomplete without a quarrel," and generally ended with the remark that she should not have married a man so many years older than herself. Even in the honeymoon she wounded the poor man'svanity. 
Landor was reading some of his own verses to his bride — and who read more exquisitely?— when all at once the lady, releasing herself from his arm, jumped up, saying, "Oh, do stop, Walter, there's that dear, delightful Punch performinginthe street;I mustlook outofthewindow." 
A judicious wife is always snipping off from her husband's moral nature little twigs that are growing in the wrong direction. She keeps him in shape by continual pruning. If you say anything silly, she will affectionately tell you so. If you declare you will do some absurd thing, she will find means of preventing you from doing it. And by far the chief part of all the common sense there is in this world belongs unquestionably to woman. The wisest things which a man commonly does are those which his wife counsels him to do. A wife is the grand wielder of the moral pruning knife. When you see a manappearingshabby, hair uncombed, and no buttons on his coat, ninetimes outoftenyouare correctinconcluding thatheisa bachelor. 
Someone gives this wise counsel as to the manner of treating a wife: " First, get a wife; second, be patient. You may have great trials and perplexities in your business with the world, but do not, therefore, carry to your home a clouded or contracted brow. Your wife may have many trials which, though of less magnitude, may have been as hard to bear. A kind, consoling word, a tender look, will do wonders in chasing from her brow all clouds ofgloom." 
While your trials often take place in the fresh open air, your wife is usually shut up from morning till night at home, where her health and spirits gradually become weakened. "Notice kindly her efforts to promote your comfort. Do not take them all as a matter of course, and pass them by, at the sametime being very sure to observe any omission of what you consider her dutytoyou." 
Don't treat her sincere affection within difference; and, above all, do not think it undignified and ill befitting a "man" to yield to her wishes. Her preferences are as strong as yours, and it is harder than you ever think for her to yield to you the thousand and one little things which you never so much as notice. 
Did you ever think of that? If not, consider it sometime, when you feel the difficulty of "giving in "; and then have more compassion and feeling, when you see your wife doing her best (and she generally succeeds, you know,) to makeyourwishes hers. Don't treat your wife so that she will think youdonot love her. She is very liable to mistake that habitually cold and indifferent manner that you affect. Be manly, so that she will look up to you, rely upon you always, andfeelsecureinputtingherconfidence in you. 
"There is no doubt," said Frances E. Willard, "that marriage offers the most effective opportunities for spoiling the life of another. Nobody can debase, harass, and ruin a woman so fatally as her own husband; and nobody can do a tithe so much to chill a man's aspirations, to paralyze his energies, as his wife. A man is never irretrievably ruined in his prospects until he marries a bad woman; and nothing much worse can happen to a woman than marryingabad man. 
"On the other hand, as George Eliot says, 'What greater thing is there for two human souls than to feel that they are joined for life, — to strengthen each other in all labor, to rest on each other in all sorrow, to minister to each other in all pain, to be one with each other in silent, unspeakable memories at the last parting?' 
"Each is a good half, but an impossible whole; it is only when the wrong halvesare joinedthatunhappiness follows. 
"A real happy marriage of love and judgment between a noble woman and a worthy man is one of the things so very beautiful that, if the sun were, as the Greek poets fabled, a god, he might stop the world in order to feast his eyesupon sucha spectacle. 
"This happy state of married life is possible to all, in the degree that the husbandand wife are inearnest;inthedegreeof theirlovefor eachother, and theirdesirefor whatwemean bya truehome. 
"He must indeed be a poor apology for a man who, in this land of opportunity, cannot get a home of his own. There is perhaps no other country in the world where a young man can so easily become the possessor of a home as in America, provided he is not imbued with the false philosophy which isnow sofullybelieved inbymanyof bothsexes. 
It isone of the saddest features of our modern civilization that there is this tendency to remain single; and an increase in the number of those who 'cannot afford' to get married will be a serious thing for our modern civilization. 
"There is, of course, a limit to the chances a man should take of being able to support a wife. He should be as sure as it is possible to be that his position will be permanent so long as he is satisfactory to his employers; and his salary should be such that it has en abled him to lay aside a little, so that, in case of an emergency, there will be something ahead to encourage him. The girl who has promised to share his lot will, if she has in her the make-up of a truewife,helprather thanhinderhiminmakinghislittleparadise. 
It may, perhaps, be humble at first, — perhaps always so, if Fortune does not beam on them with a golden smile; but that will not make them unhappy. Naturally the lover (who ought never to be lost in the husband,) will have manya pangofregretthathe cannot support his wife as other men are able to do; but, through it all, through the days of joy and sorrow, — for both will come, —there will be still the same sacred happiness that came to these two, atfirst,intheir little home." 
"The most subtle and deceitful hope which ever existed, and one which wrecks the happiness of many a young girl's life," wrote Evangelist Dwight 
L. Moody, "is the common delusion that a woman can best reform a man by marrying him. It is a mystery to me how people can be so blinded to the hundreds of cases in every community where tottering homes have fallen and innocent lives have been wrecked, because some young girl has persisted in marrying a scoundrel in the hope of saving him. I have never known such a union, and I have seen hundreds of them, result in anything but sadness and disaster. Let no young girl think that she may be able to accomplish what a loving mother or sympathetic sisters have been unable to do. Before there is any contract of marriage, there should be convincing proof that there has beenreal andthoroughregeneration." 
To a certain degree, a young man should look upon marriage from a utilitarianstand point. A good wife is so much capital. She makes him to be, by a kind of grace, a great deal more than he is by nature. She contributes the qualities needed in order to convert his vigor into a safe as well as productive efficiency. She introduces, for instance, into his intellectual nature that ingredient of sentiment which intellect requires in order to be able to do its best work. 
Heartandbrain need to conspire in order to the attainment of the true, and without caring to assert that man is naturally heartless, any more than I should wish to assume that woman is by nature brainless, yet heart in its way is just as precious as brain in its way, and woman, so long as she is untainted by the passion of wanting to be a man, will be that member of the connubial corporation that will in particular contribute to the capital stock its affectional element. 
Some women may resent this, but I would like to caution young men against cherishing matrimonial designs upon any woman who is likely to resent it. If what you want is a wife, and not merely a housekeeper, you must keep your eye well open for a warm bundle of femininity that will be to you ina personal way what the fire on the hearth is to you in a physical way — a fund of tropical comfort that will keep the stiffness out of your thinking, the frost out of your feeling, and the general machinery of yourlifeina condition ofpleasurable activity. 
At an address before a girl's school in Boston, ex-President John Quincy Adams, then an old man, said with much feeling: "As a child, I enjoyed perhaps the greatest of blessings that can be bestowed upon man — that of a mother who was anxious and capable to form the characters of her children rightly. From her I derived whatever instruction (religious especially and moral,) has pervaded a long life — I will not say perfectly, or as it ought to be; but I will say, because it is only justice to the memory of her I revere, that in the course of that life, whatever imperfection there has been, or deviation from whatshetaught me,the faultismine, andnot hers." 
"I would be glad," says a wise man, "to see more parents understand that when they spend money judiciously to improve and adorn the house, and the grounds around it, they are in effect paying their children a premium to stay at home as much as possible, and enjoy it; but when they spend money unnecessarily in fine clothing and jewelry for their children, they are paying them a premium to spend their time away from home, — that is, in those placeswheretheycanattractthemostattention,and make themostdisplay." 
She is not made to be the admiration of everybody, but the happiness of one.— Burke. 
Let us glorify the vocation of motherhood above all others, for the only queen that shall survive is the mother on her rocking-chair throne, with a curly-headed subject kneeling by her side, a soft hand on its pure forehead, and itssweet voice saying, "NowIlayme downto sleep." 
But that mother must be regnant over all earthly powers, even the di vine one that dares invoke another life; she must be God's and her own, a free woman,to whom shall never come the annunciation of her highest office and ministry save from the deepest intuitions of her nature responding to the voice of a love so pure that it is patient, and abides its time until the handmaidofthe Lord shall say: "Be it unto me even as thou wilt." — Frances 
E. Willard. A child is a flower plucked from the gardens of God, transplanted' into the soil of humanity, and left to be watered and cared for by man. It flourishes best in the sunshine of love, and has need to be watered with the tears of tenderestsympathy, andcultivatedbyakind solicitude thatweariesnot. Those who have these God-flowers to care for have great honor, because 
of the nobleness of the work their hands have been given to do. When the gardenerplucks,may theflower beready. —EverettMcNeil. 
Home-keepingheartsarehappiest. —Longfellow. 
Vas marriage a failure? Veil, now, dot depends altogedder on how you look at id, mine friends. Like dhose double-horse teams dot you see at der races. Id depends pooty mooch on der pair in der traces; Eef dhey don'd pull togeddher righdt off at der start, Ten dimes oudt of nine dhey vas beddher apart. Vas marriage a failure? I ask mine Katrine, Und she look off me so dot Ifeelspootymean. Dhenshesay: 
"Mr. Strauss, shustcome here,eef you bleaze." 
Und she dakeme vhereYawcobundleedleLoweeze 
By dher shnug trundle-bed vast shust saying dheir brayer, Und she say, mitasmile: 
"Vas dersomefailures dheref" 
Yawcob Strauss,inthe "BostonPilot." 
THEEND. 



TITLES AND AUTHORS 
TIMELESS WISDOM COLLECTION 
THE GREATEST SELF HELP, NEW THOUGHT, ECONOMY, PHILOSOPHY AND CLASSIC LITERATURE COLLECTION EVER AVAILABLE IN AMAZON AND SOON IN APPLE IBOOKS. 
Isn’t technology amazing? Now, with one click from your phone, tablet or computer, you can purchase any of the following books for just $.99 cents, and start reading right now. They are all from best-selling and influential authors;and wehave carefullychoseninterestingbooks. 
Clickinthenameoftheauthortogothelistof worksin thisbook. 
Clickinanybookname,andyouwillbe takento Amazon.com. 
Most titles are available worldwide, although, some are not available in certaincountriesduetolocal restrictions. 
If your title is not available for your country at Amazon.com, try Amazon.ca (Canada). 
Just change .com for .ca in the hyperlinks. 


SELF HELP AND PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT 
OrisonSweetMarden,William 
Walker 
Atkinson. 
Wallace 
Wattles, 
Napoleon 
Hill, 

Charles 
F. 
Haanel, 
Robert 
Collier, Prentice 
Mulford, Elizabeth 
Towne, William 
E. 
Towne,RussellH. 
Conwell. 
Frank 
Channing 
Haddock, 
Edmund 
Shatesbury, 
Brown 
Landone, 
Max 
FreedomLong, 
DavidBush, 


PSYCHOLOGY 
C. HarryBrooks,EmileCoue, 
AlfredAdler,Isador 
Coriat, 
Carl 
Jung 


CHRISTIAN MOTIVATIONAL/SELF HELP 
Ralph 
Waldo 
Trine, Christian 
D. 
Larson, Ernest 
Holmes, Fenwicke 
Holmes, Henry 
Wood, 
CharlesFillmore, HoratioW. 
Dresser,Henry 
ThomasHambling, 
Charles 
Brodie 
Patterson, 
Bruce 
Maclelland, 
Genevieve 
Behrend, 
Thomas 
ParkerBoyd 


THEOSOPHY 
William 
Q. 
Judge, 
Annie 
Besant, 
Charles 
Leadbeater, 
A.P.Sinnett, 
Ernest 
Wood 


CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY 
Henry 
Ford,CharlesSchwab,AndrewCarnegie 


ECONOMY, PHILOSOPHY AND OTHERS 
FrancisM. Cornford,GeorgesPolti,John MaynardKeynes,BertrandRussell, J.W.Dunne 

NOVELS 
C.S.Lewis, H.G.Wells, 
Ernest 
Hemingway, George 
Orwell, Aldous 
Huxley, 
HughLofting,Malcolm 
Lowry, 
MauricioChaves 


ORISON SWETT MARDEN ORISON’S BEST SELLERS: 
Hecan whothinkshecan, 1909 
Character:thegrandestthingintheworld,1899 
ProsperityHowtoAttractIt.1922 Prosperidad:ComoAtraerla. 
(Español,2014) 

MasterfulPersonality 1923 
Howto GetWhatYou Want. 1917. 
TheSecretofAchievement. 1898. 
PushingtotheFront,1896 
AnIronWill,1901 

OTHER GREAT MOTIVATIONAL BOOKS (IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER) 
AmbitionandSuccess. 1919. AfterFailure,What? 1905-1921 BeGoodtoYourself. 1910. DoIt toa Finish. 1909 Economy. The self-denying depositor and prudent paymaster at the bank of 
thrift. 1901 
Everybody Ahead,Orgetting themostout oflife 1916 
Every Mana KingorMightoverMind. 1906 
GettingOn,1910 
Love'sWay 1918 
MakingLifeamasterpiece,1917. 
Peace,Power, andPlenty.1909 Rising in the World or Architects of Fate or, Steps to Success and Power. 
1895 Self-Investment 1911 Success. ideas, helps and examples for all desiring to make the most of life 
1897 Successnuggets, 1906 TheHour ofOpportunity TheMiracleof RightThought 1910 TheOptimisticLifeor inThe CheeringUpBusiness 1907 Thevictoriousattitude, 1916 Thrift 1918 

HEALTH 
Keeping Fit 1914 WhyGrowOld? 1909 

BUSINESS AND EFFICIENCY 
YoungManEnteringBusiness,1907 HintsforYoungWriters,1914 SellingThings, 1916 

BIOGRAPHY AND INTERVIEWS 
Howthey succeeded, 1901 TalkswithgreatWorkers,1901 

WOMAN AND FAMILY 
ThecrimeofSilence, 1915 Womanand Home, 1915 

COMING SOON 
ProgressiveBusinessMan,1913 ExceptionalEmployee,1913 TrainingforEfficiency,1913 Little visits withgreatAmericans, 1904 

WILLIAM WALKER ATKINSON THOUGHTS AND LAW OF ATTRACTION 
TheSecretofSuccessandthe LawofAttraction TheLaw ofAttractionintheThoughtWorldor ThoughtVibration The Law of New Thought: Form the Law of Attraction to the Soul’s 
Awakening DynamicThoughtortheLawofVibrant Energy. ThoughtsareThings(asEdwardWalker) ThoughtForceinBusinessandEverydayLife The MasterMind. TheKeyToMentalPowerDevelopmentAndEfficiency The Inner Secret, or That Something Within. A story of enlightenment and 
initiation. 

NEW THOUGHT AND MODERN THOUGHT 
Nuggets ofNewThought: Several Thingsthathave helpedPeople NewThought,HistoryandPrinciples:TheMessageofNewThought TheCrucibleofModernThought 

PERSONAL MAGNETISM 
TheArtandScience ofPersonal Magnetism AdvancedCoursein PersonalMagnetism Personal Magnetism, Psychic Influence, Thought Force, Concentration, Will 
PowerAndPractical MentalScience. ASeriesOfLessons MentalFascination Mind-Power: The Law of Dynamic Mentation (The Secret of 
Mental Magic) 

SELF HEALING 
Self-Healing By ThoughtForce Mind 
andBodyor 
MentalStatesandPhysicalConditions 
Howto HealOneself andOthers. MentalTherapeutics. TheScienceof PsychicHealing TheYogi Philosophyof PhysicalWellBeing(HathaYoga) 

THE ARCANE 
TheArcaneTeaching 
TheArcaneFormulas 
TheArcaneIII. 
Vril. 
VitalMagnetism. 

TheArcaneIV. TheMystery ofSex orSex Polarity 
TheSecretDoctrineof theRosicrucians TheKybalion 

HINDU AND ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 
FourteenLessonsIn YogiPhilosophyAndOrientalOccultism AdvancedCourseInYogi PhilosophyAndOrientalOccultism TheInnerTeachingsOfThe Philosophies AndReligionsOfIndia TheSpiritOfTheUpanishads. TheAphorisms Of TheWise TheBhagavadGita The Life Beyond Death. The Journey of Transformation From “Death” To 
TheAstral PlanesToRebirthAndBeyond 

NEW PSYCHOLOGY 
TheNewPsychology:ItsMessage,PrinciplesandPractice 
TheArtofLogicalThinking 
TheArtofExpression 
orPrinciplesofDiscourse 
Memory Culture:TheScienceofObserving,Rememberingand Recalling YourMindandHowtoUseIt TheWill,ItsNature, PowerandDevelopment. 
The 
Mastery 
of 
Being. 
A 
Study 
of 
the 
Ultimate 
Principle 
of 
Reality,andThePractical 
Application 
Thereof. 
TheSubconsciousAnd TheSuperconscious PlanesOfMind. Telepathy,ItsTheory, FactsandProof 

PERSONAL POWER SERIES (12 VOLUMES) 
VolumeI. PERSONALPOWERORYOURMASTERSELF VolumeII. CREATIVEPOWER OR YOURCONSTRUCTIVEFORCES VolumeIII. DESIREPOWER OR YOURENERGIZINGFORCES VolumeIV. FAITHPOWER OR YOURINSPIRATIONALFORCES VolumeV. WILLPOWER OR YOUR DYNAMICFORCES VolumeVI. SUBCONSCIOUS POWER OR YOURSECRETFORCES 
VolumeVII. SPIRITUALPOWEROR THE INFINITEFOUNT VolumeVIII. THOUGHT POWER OR RADIO-MENTALISM VolumeIX. PERCEPTIVEPOWER OR THEARTOFOBSERVATION VolumeX. REASONINGPOWER OR PRACTICALLOGIC VolumeXI. CHARACTERPOWER OR POSITIVE INDIVIDUALITY VolumeXII. REGENERATIVEPOWER OR VITALREJUVENATION 

WALLACE WATTLES SUCCESS 
The Science of Getting Rich (also published as Financial Success Through CreativeThought) LaCienciadeHacerseRico(Spanish) 
TheScienceof BeingGreat LaCienciadeSerExtraordinario(Español) 
Makingthemanwhocan(publishedlateras HowtoPromoteYourself) 

SELF-HEALING 
TheScienceof BeingWell 
The New Science of Living And Healing (also published as Health Through New ThoughtandFasting) 

CHRISTIANITY 
ANew ChristandJesus& TheManandHisWork,sold asone book UnNuevo 
Cristo(Español) 
Hellfire Harrison(his onlynovel). 

NAPOLEON HILL 
TheLaw ofSuccess. The Complete 16Lessonsbased onthe1928Edition. 
Think and Grow Rich. 75 anniversary edition based on the original 1938 version. 
Piense y Hágase Rico. Español. Nueva Traducción 2013, completa y basada en laversiónoriginalde1938 

CHARLES F. HAANEL 
ABook aboutYou MentalChemistry TheAmazing Secrets oftheYogi 

DALE CARNEGIE 
Howto StopWorryingandStartLiving 

FRANK CHANNING HADDOCK 
POWER BOOKS LIBRARY: 
Power of Will: a Practical Companion-Book for Unfoldment of Selfhood ThroughDirectPersonalCulture(1907) PowerforSuccessThroughCultureofVibrantMagnetism PracticalPsychology TheCultureofCourage:Unfoldinga FearlessPersonality. ThePersonalAtmosphere. Ten StudiesinPoiseandPower. HowBrain-PowerWinsBusinessSuccess(TheWill inSalesmanship) 
CreativePersonality Business Power 
ROBERT COLLIER 
TheSecretoftheAges 

PRENTICE MULFORD 
YourForcesandHowtoUseThem(completesixvolumes) 

ELIZABETH TOWNE 
FfteenLessonsin NewThought orLessonsinLife JustHowtoWaketheSolarPlexus Howto GrowSuccess TheLifePowerandHowto UseIt 

WILLIAM TOWNE 
TheWay To Perfect Health 

EDMUND SHATESBURY 
InstantaneousPersonalMagnetism 

MAX FREEDOM LONG 
Self-Suggestion&TheNewHunaTheory 
ofMesmerismandHypnosis 
TheSecretScience 
BehindMiracles 

BROWN LANDONE 
HowToTurnYourDesiresAndIdealsIntoRealities 

DAVID BUSH 
TheSilence. 
What 
ItIs 
AndHowToUseIt 

RUSSELL H. CONWELL 
TheKeytoSuccess 


PSYCHOLOGY 
C.HARRY BROOKS 
ThePracticeOfAutosuggestionByTheMethodOfEmileCoue 


EMILE COUE 
Autosuggestion:MyMethod 
SelfMasteryThroughConscious 
Autosuggestion 


ALFRED ADLER 
WhatLifeCouldMean 
To 
You 
ThePattern 
Of 
Life 
TheScienceof 
Living 


ISADOR CORIAT 
TheMeaningofDreams 


CARL JUNG 
Analytical Psychology 

CHRISTIAN INSPIRATIONAL AND MOTIVATIONAL RALPH WALDO TRINE 
TheHigher PowersofMindandSpirit 
What The World Is A’Seeking: The Vital Law Of True Life, True Greatness, 
Power,And Happiness 
InTuneWithTheInfinite:FullnessOfPeace,Power AndPlenty 
TheWinningOfThe Best 
Every LivingCreature. Why toLoveandRespect Animals. 
NewAlinementOfLife. AChristianitybasedonJesus,notPaul. 
MyPhilosophy AndMyReligion 
InTheHollowOfHisHand 
ThisMysticalLifeOfOurs 
GreatestThingEverKnown 
OnTheOpenRoad 
IntheFire oftheHeart:ACallforSocial JusticeintheXXthCentury 
Through The Sunlit Year. 365 Inspirational Thoughts For Each Day Of The 
Year 
CHRISTIAN D. LARSON 

SUCCESS AND MOTIVATIONAL 
The Ideal Made Real. Change your Fate and Obtain Health, Happiness and Prosperity. HowtheMindWorks. Using the GreatestHumanPower. Mastery ofFaith. AttainingtheSupreme SelfthroughSuperior Thought. TheGreatWithin. Discovering andUsingthePower ofyourSubconscious. ThinkingforResults Business Psychology. How To BecomePowerfulAndSuccessful InBusiness BrainsandHowtoGetThem JustBe Glad Concentration Mastery ofSelf MyidealofMarriage 

SELF HEALING: 
HowToStay Young. TheMind Cure. Howto OvercomeNervousnessandFear Howto StayWell HealingYourself 

CHRISTIANITY: 
WhatisTruth StepsinHumanProgress OnTheHeights TheGoodSideofChristianScience ThePathwayofRoses TheScientificTrainingofChildren PoiseAndPower IntheLightoftheSpirit 

HENRY WOOD 
TheLawsof MentalHealing:IdealSuggestionThroughMental Photography Studiesin theThoughtWorld NaturalLawintheBusinessWorld TheNew OldHealing The Symphony of Life: A Series Of Constructive Sketches And 
Interpretations LifeMoreAbundant:ScripturalTruth inModernApplication God’s Imagein Man TheNew ThoughtSimplified ThePoliticalEconomyofHumanism 
VictorSerenus:AStoryof the Pauline Era EdwardBurton(Anovel) 

ERNEST HOLMES 
CreativeMind CreativeMindandSuccess TheScienceof Mind 

FENWICKE HOLMES 
TheLaw ofMindin Action Being andBecoming 

HENRY THOMAS HAMBLING 
DivineAdjustment DynamicThought ThePowerofThought MySearchForTruth WithinYou IsThe Power 

CHARLES BRODIE PATTERSON 
Thought Studies Of The Fourth Dimension. A New Heaven And A New Earth. TheScienceOfLife AndLiving. Dominion AndPower. TheMeasureOfA Man TheWilltoBeWell. New ThoughtandHealing. TheRhythmof Life 

CHARLES FILLMORE 
AtomSmashingPowerofMind ChristianHealing MysteriesofGenesis The12 PowersofMan 
Prosperity 

BRUCE MACLELLAND 
ProsperityThroughThoughtForce Into TheLight 

HORATIO W. DRESSER 
APhysician To TheSoul AHistory oftheNewThought Movement 

GENEVIEVE BEHREND 
YourInvisible Powers Howto LiveLifeandLoveIt 

THOMAS PARKER BOYD 
TheFingerOfGod 
ABook 
Of 
DailyMeditation 
TheEvolution 
Of 
Human 
Thought 
Prospectus 
OfLifeInTheUniversity 
Of 
Hard 
Knocks 
TheArmourOfLight 
TheChristScienceOfBeing 
TheVoiceEternal 
TheMental 
Highway 



THEOSOPHY 
WILLIAM Q. JUDGE 
TheOceanofTheosophy&TheEpitomeof Theosophy Notes ontheBhagavadGita EchoesfromtheOrient. ABroadOutlineofTheosophical Doctrines (1921) TheYogaAphorismsofPatanjali. Aninterpretation. TheBhagavadGita. Anoriginaltranslation. 

ANNIE BESANT 
Reincarnation 
TheAncientWisdom 


CHARLES LEADBEATER 
TheMastersandthePath 
TheStoryofAtlantis 
&TheLostLemuria(withW. 
Scott-Elliot) 


A.P. SINNETT 
TheOccultWorld 
Esoteric 
Buddhism 
TheGrowthofthe 
Soul,asequel 
toEsotericBuddhism. CollectedFruits 
OfOccultTeaching 


ERNEST WOOD 
TheSevenRays 
IsthisTheosophy? 



CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY 
CHARLES M. SCHWAB. Succeedingwithwhatyouhave 

HENRY 
FORD. 
My 
life 
and 
Work. 
Edison 
As 
I 
Know 
It. 
Ford 
Ideals. 
My 
Philosophy 
OfIndustry 

ANDREW 
CARNEGIE. 
The 
Empire 
of 
Business. 
The 
Gospel 
of 
Wealth 
and 
Other 
Timely 
Essays 

VARIOUS ECONOMY & PHILOSOPHY FRANCIS M. CORNFORD. Microcosmografia 
Academica, 
GEORGES POLTI. TheArtOfInventingCharacters, 
JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES. The 
Economic 
Consequences 
of 
Peace 
& 
A 
ReviewoftheTreaty. 

BERTRAND RUSSELL. TheProblemsofPhilosophy; MysticismandLogic. J.W.DUNNE. AnExperimentwithTime. TheSerialUniverse. 

MAURICIO CHAVES-MESEN 
THE KNIGHTS OF NOSTRADAMUS 
COMING SOON, A REVOLUTIONARY SERIES OF FOUR NOVELS 
Based on prophecies, mysteries, and ancient secrets, each book is aboutonepieceofabigcosmicpuzzle. Oncethefourpiecesaretogether,somethingisgoingtohappen… 
I. FOUR PROPHECIES. 
An ancient group of Europeans Nobles are about to retake the power of the 
world… Their power comes from four prophecies of Nostradamus, and the secrets of theMonaLisa,DaVinci’smasterpiece. 
Howfarwouldthe Circle of Power goto bring those propheciesto life? To be released November 30, 2013 (theauthor’s44thbirthday). A weird date for the author, as it sums 56: a number that has always followed 
him. 
5+6=11, the magical number of the dimensions (according to ancient theories;andthetheory ofthestrings) 44,his agethatday. 4 times11… 


II. THE PYRAMID OF APOCALYPSE 
Whatreallyhappened attheGreat Flood? Whowasthis Noah? Did hebringsomeancientsecretsto the “NewWorld”? Istherealapocalypse, therevelation,aboutto begin? 
To be released February 28, 2014. 


III. THE CHALICE 
All the great prophets had a chalice. From the Holy Grail to Da Vinci; from Nostradamus to Jules Verne and William Atkinson, there was always a chalice. 
Wasitthesame?Hasitthepowertocommunicate with Something? Whereisthatchalicenow,if indeedit exists?Whohasit, andWhy? 
To be released July 12, 2014 (7-12-7) 


IV. THE THIRTEEN PROPHECY: THE GATES OF EDEN 
Noinformationwill beofferedonthis book,untilthevery dayofitsrelease. TobereleasedonDecember 21,2014, at11:11a.m. 


NOVELS 
If your title is not available at Amazon.com, try Amazon.ca (Canada). Just change .com for .ca in the hyperlinks. 
WILLIAM 
FAULKNER. 
The 
sound 
and 
the 
Fury. 
Absalon, 
Absalon! 
As 
I 
Lay 
Dying,IntruderintheDust,TheHamlet,TheMansion, 
TheTown,Sartoris, 
TheSanctuary. 
C.S.LEWIS. 
CHRONICLES 
OF 
NARNIA. 
(1) 
The 
Magician’s 
Nephew; 
(2) 
The 
Lion, 
the 
Witch 
and 
the 
Wardrobe; 
(3) 
The 
Horse 
and 
His 
Boy; 
(4) 
Prince 
Caspian; 
(5) 
The 
Voyage 
of 
the 
Dawn 
Treader; 
(6) 
The 
Silver 
Chair; 
(7) 
The 
LastBattle. 

H.G.WELLS. The 
Time 
Machine. 
The 
War 
of 
the 
Worlds. The Island of DoctorMoreau. TheInvisibleMan. 
ALDOUS HUXLEY. BraveNewWorld. 
PointCounterPoint. 
ERNEST 
HEMINGWAY. 
The 
Sun 
Also 
Rises. 
The 
Old 
Man 
and 
the 
Sea. 
A 
Farewell 
to 
Arms. 
For 
Whom 
the 
Bell 
Tolls. 
Men 
Without 
Women. 
AcrosstheRiverand 
IntotheWoods. 
THEODORE DREISER. AnAmericanTragedy. 

MALCOLM LOWRY. Underthe 
Volcano. 

HUGH 
LOFTING. 
The 
Voyages 
of 
Doctor 
Dolittle, 
The 
Story 
of 
Doctor 
Dolittle. 

GEORGE ORWELL. NineteenEightyFour; AnimalFarm. 



