  This book made available by the Internet Archive. 










































  










































  










































  










































     PREFACE

  An old proverb says that every parent loves the ugly duckling most. My

book, The Depths of the Soul, was, from its beginning, my favourite. It was

written in the beautiful years in which the first rays of analytic psychognosis

penetrated the darkness of the human soul. The reader may find between the

lines the exuberant joy of a discoverer. First impressions are the strongest. It

is  an  unfortunate  fact  that  subsequent  impressions  lack  the  vividness,  the

intensity, the warmth, and the colours of the first emotions.

  The great success of this book in many foreign languages has given me

incalculable pleasure, because it has served to confirm my own bHnd love.

No other book has brought me so many friends from far and near.

  I am happy that my friend Dr. Tannenbaum has devoted his knowledge of

the art of translation to my favourite child, and I hope that this translation will

bring me many new English friends.

  THE AUTHOR.

    Digitized by tine Internet Arciiive

  in 2007 witii funding from

    IVIicrosoft Corporation 










































   THE SECOND WORLD

  To poets it is a familiar world. The ordinary mortal wanders about in its

wonderful gardens as if he were blind ; he lives in it without knowing it. He

does  not  know  where  the  real  world  stops  and  where  the  fantasy  world

begins. In the treadmill of grey day the invisible boundaries between these

two worlds escape him.

  The second world! What would our life be without it ? What a vale of

tears would this globe be were it not for this heaven on earth !

  The reader probably guesses what I mean. All of us, the poorest and the

richest, the smallest and biggest, rarely or never find contentment in our daily

routine. We need a second sphere, a richer life, in which we may dream of

everything that is denied us in the first sphere. Ibsen called this "The Great

Life-Lie."  But  is  it  always  a  lie  ?  Did  not  Ibsen  go  too  far  with  this

characterization ? Who could doubt that this lie is not one of those eternal

truths that is so incorporeal that we cannot grasp it, so colourless that we

cannot see it, so formless that we cannot describe it.

  The child finds its second world in play. The little duties of everyday life

are for it only

  (I)

    unnecessary interruptions in its play in the second world. Here the child's

fantasy has ample room. It is a soldier, king, and robber, cook, and princess ;

it  rides  through  a  wide  world  on  steaming  express  trains,  it  battles

courageously with dragons and giants, it snatches the treasures of the earth

from their guardian dwarfs, and even the stars in the heavens are not beyond

its reach in its play. Then comes the powerful dictum called education and

snatches the child out of its beloved second world and compels it to give heed

to the first world and to learn things necessary to it in its actual life. The child

learns of obligations and submits unwillingly to the dictates of its teachers.

The first world is made up of duties. The second world knows no duties ; it

knows only freedom and unrestrained freedom of thought. This is the root of

the subsequent great conflict between feehngs and duties. In our childhood

we find duties a troublemaker who interferes with our playing ; this childish

hostility continues with us all through life. Our vocation, the sphere of our

duties, can never wholly satisfy us. It is our first world ; and even though we

seem to accept it wholly, a little remnant of this hostility remains and this

constitutes a part of our second world.

    Primitive people find their second world in religion. From their primitivefears for the preservation of their lives they flee to their gods, whom they

love and fear, punish and

  reward. The same thing is true of all those simple souls whom culture has

not robbed of their religious belief. To them religion is the second world

which gives them rich consolation and solace for the pains of the first world.

In his book " Seelenkunde," Benedict attributes anarchism to an absence of

consolatory life-lies. He says : " Our free-thinking times have stopped up this

source and it is the duty of society to create a consoHng Hfe-truth, otherwise

that psychic inner life which hoards up bitter hatred will not cease."

  The more highly developed a person's mind is, the more complicated is

his  second  world.  People  often  express  surprise  at  the  fact  that  so  many

physicians devote themselves passionately to music or the other fine arts. To

me it seems very simple. All day long they see life in its most disagreeable

aspects. They see the innocent sufferings, the frightful tortures which they

cannot relieve. They look behind the curtain of the " happy family " ; they

wade through all the repellant and disgusting filthiness of this petty world,

and they would have to become dull and non-partisan animals did they not

have their second world.

  There is first of all music, which is so dear to all of us because it is an all-

embracing  mother  which  absorbs  all  the  emotions  of  hatred,  anger,  love,

envy, fear, and despair, and fuses them all into one great rhythm, into one

great vibrating emotion of pleasure. On its trembling waves

  the  thoughts  of  the  poor  tortured  human  soul  are  borne  out  into  the

darkness of uncomprehend-ed eternity and the eternally incomprehensible.

  Then there is literature. We open a book and at once we are transported

into  the  second  world  of  another  ego,  a  world  which  in  a  few  minutes

becomes our own. Happy poets, who have been endowed with the gift of

saying  what  they  see,  of  giving  form  to  what  they  dream,  of  freeing

themselves from their energies, of abreacting their secret sufferings and of

making others happy by opening up to them a second world!

  Then there are the thousand and one forms of play ; sports and in fact

everything that tears us away from our daily grind. What is the lottery ticket

to the poor wage-earner but an instalment on the pleasures of the second

world, or the purchased right of joyous hope ?

  There is the devotion to clubs and fraternal associations. The henpecked

husband  flees  wrathfuUy  to  his  club  where  he  can  freely  and  fearlessly

launch all those fine argumentative speeches which he has to suppress athome. Here he can rule, here he can play the role of the independent master.

For many thousands the club is nothing more than an opportunity to work off

their energies, to get rid of unused emotions and to play that role which life in

the first sphere has denied them.

  And thus everyone has his second world. One who does not have it stands

on the level of

    animals,  or  is  the  happiest  of  the  happy.  By  happiness  I  mean  the

employment  of  one's  energies  in  the  first  sphere.  There  is  a  wide  gulf

between happiness and the consciousness of happiness. The consciousness of

happiness is such a fugitive moment that the poorest wage-slave in his second

world  can  be  happier  than  the  truly  happy  who  does  not  happen  to  be

thinking  of  his  happiness.  Happiness  is  like  the  possession  of  a  beautiful

wife. If we are in danger of losing her we tremble. Before we have obtained

her and in moments of jealousy we guard her possession as fortune's greatest

gift. But in the consciousness of undisturbed possession can we be saying to

ourselves every second : I possess her, I am happy ? No ! no ! Happiness is

the  greatest  of  all  life's  lies  and  one  who  has  had  least  of  it  may  be  the

happiest in his second world.

    Rose-coloured  hope  !  Queen  of  all  pleasurable  emotions,  our  all-

preserving and all-animating goddess ! You are the sovereign of the second

world and beckon graciously the unhappy weeping mortal who in the first

world sees the last traces of you disappear.

    Marital happiness depends very largely upon whether the two spheres of

the couple partly overlap or touch each other at a few points. In the first

world  they  must  live  together.  But  woe  if  the  second  world  keeps  them

asunder ! If the two spheres touch each other even only in^pne^point^and

have only one feeling tangent

  between them, that will bring them closer together than all the cares and

the  iron  constraint  of  the  first  world.  Women  know  this  instinctively,

especially during the period of courtship. They enthuse about everything over

which the lover enthuses ; they love and hate with him and want to share

everything  with  him.  Beware,  you  married  women,  of  destroying  your

husband's second world ! If after the day's toil he soothes his tired nerves in

the fateful harmonies of Beethoven, do not disturb his pious mood ; enthuse

with him, do not carry the petty cares and the vulgar commonplaces of life

into the lofty second world. Do you understand me, or must I speak more

plainly ? Do not let him go alone on his excursions into the second world ! Abook  that  he  reads  alone,  understands  alone,  enjoys  alone,  may  be  more

dangerous to you than the most ardent glances of a wanton rival. Art must

never become the man's second world. No ! It must become the child of both

the lovers if the beats of their souls are to be harmonious.

  True friendship is so lofty, so exalting, because it is dependent upon a

congruence of the second spheres. Love is a linking of the first worlds and if

it is to be permanent it must journey forth into the second world. Genuine

friendship  is  born  in  the  second  world  and  affects  the  first  world  only

retroactively.

  The second world need not necessarily always be the better world even

though to its possessor

  it may appear to be the more beautiful and the more desirable. Rarely

enough it is the supplement to the first world but frequently the contrast and

the  complement  to  it.  Pious  chaste  natures  may  often  give  their  coarser

instincts  undisturbed  expression  in  the  second  world.  Day-dreams  are

frequently the expression of life in the second world. But on careful analysis

even the dreams of the night prove to be an unrestricted wallowing in the

waters of the second world. Dreams are usually wish fulfillments, but in their

lowest levels we find the wishes of the second world which are only rarely

altered by unconscious thought processes.

  One who dreams during the day flies from the first world into the second.

If he fails to find his way back again into the first world his dreams become

delusions and we say that he is insane. How delicate are the transitions from

sanity to insanity ! Inasmuch as aU of us live in a second world, all of us are

insane  at  least  a  few  seconds  every  day.  What  distinguishes  us  from  the

insane is the fact that we hold in our hands the Ariadne thread which leads us

out of the labyrinth of thoughts back into the world of duties.

  It is incredible how happy an insane person can be. Proudly the paranoid

hack writer marches up and down in his pitiful cell. Clothed in rags, he is

king and commands empires. His cot is a heavenly couch of eiderdown;

  ■« THE SECOND WORLD

  his old dilapidated stool is a jewel-bedecked throne. The attendants and

the physicians are his servants. And thus in his delusion he is what he would

like to be.

  The world is only what we think it; the " thing itself" is only a convention

of the majority. A cured maniac assured me that the period of his insanity had

been the happiest in his life. He saw everything through rose-coloured glassesand the awful succession of wild thoughts was only a succession of intensely

pleasurable emotions. Obviously those, on the other hand, who suffer from

melancholia and delusions of inferiority are the unhappiest creatures. The

invalid who thinks himself made of glass trembles apprehensively for his life

with every step. The unhappy experiences of the first world have become so

fixed in his brain that they follow him into the second world and transform

even this into their own image.

  Every impression in our life affects our soul as if it were made of wax and

not one such impression can be lost. That we forget so many impressions is

due  to  the  fact  that  we  have  repressed  them  out  of  our  consciousness.

Repression  is  a  protective  device  but  at  the  same  time  a  cause  for  many

serious nervous disorders. A painful impression, an unpleasant experience in

the  first  or  the  second  world,  is  so  altered  as  to  be  unrecognizable  in

consciousness. As a reaction to this serious nervous disturbances, especially

hysterical alterations of the psyche,

  may occur,—conditions which can be cured only by tracing out the dark

pathways  of  the  repressed  emotions  and  reintroducing  them  into

consciousness. They are conjured out of the dark realm of the unconscious

into the glaring light of day and, lo ! the ghosts vanish for all time and with

them all those unpleasant symptoms which have so exercised the physician's

skill.

  If the psychotherapeutist is to fulfill his difficult task he must acquaint

himself with the patient's second world even more thoroughly than with the

first. And so, too, a judge ought never to pronounce sentence without first

having thoroughly penetrated the second world of the condemned. In that

world  are  the  roots  of  good  and  evil  in  human  life.  In  his  "  Crime  and

Punishment" Dostoyevsky's genius shows in a masterly way the relationship

between  the  two  worlds  of  a  criminal.  And  so,  too,  Tolstoy,  in  his  "

Resurrection,"  in  an  endeavour  to  enlist  our  sympathies  in  her  behalf,

describes the second world of a courtesan. It is her life-lie that she makes all

the men in her embrace blessed. And in sooth, a spark of truth seems to

slumber in this life-lie.

  Physicians, judges, lawyers, and ministers ought all to have a thorough

training in psychology. Not psychology in the sense of that school philosophy

which flourishes in theoretical phraseology and in theoretical facts remote

from the green tree of life. Life can learn only from life. One who knows the

secrets of the  second world will not be surprised by any happenings that the day may

bring forth. He will understand the weaknesses of the great and the strength

of the small.

  He will see virtue and vice coalesce in one great stream whose murky

waters will flow on into unknown regions.

    GRATITUDE AND INGRATITUDE

  Very  few  people  perceive  the  ridiculous  element  in  the  frequent

complaints  about  the  wickedness  of  human  nature.  "  Human  beings  are

ungrateful, false, untrustworthy," and so forth. Yes, but we are all human. We

ought,  therefore,  logically  speaking,  complain  :  "  We  human  beings  are

ungrateful, we are false, we are untrustworthy." But naturally this requires a

measure of self-knowledge that is seldom to be found in those bearing the

vesture of humanity. Let us make a modest beginning ; let us try to look truth

in the face. Let us not put ourselves on a pinnacle above the others till we

know how high or low we ourselves stand.

  We like to deceive ourselves, and, above all, not to see our faults. That is

the most prevalent of all weaknesses. We look upon ourselves not only as

cleverer but also as better than all others. We forget our faults so easily and

divide them by a hundred, whereas our virtues are ever present to our mind

and multiplied by a thousand. To himself everybody is not only the first but

also the wisest and the best of mortals. That is why we complain about the

ingratitude of our fellow-men, because we have forgotten all the occasions on

which we proved

  12 GRATITUDE AND INGRATITUDE

    ungrateful,—in exactly the same manner in which we manage wholly to

forget everything calculated to awaken painful emotions in ourselves.

  The complaint about man's ingratitude is as old as the history of man

himself. The Bible, ancient legends, the folk-songs, and the proverbs of all

nations, ancient and modern, bewail man's ingratitude. It is " the touch of

nature that makes the whole world kin." A trait that is so widely distributed,

investing the egoist with the glory of supreme worldy wisdom and branding

the altruist as half a fool, must be founded deep in the souls of men. It must

be an integral part of the circumstances conditioning the life of the individual.

It must send its roots down into the unconscious where the brutal instincts of

primal man consort with humanity's ripened instincts.

  But if ingratitude is a genuinely (psychologically) established fact then

we must be able to determine the dark forces that have it in them to suppressthe elementary feeling of gratitude. For even to the most casual observation it

is apparent that the first emotion with which we re-act to a kindness is a

warm feeling of recognition, gratitude. So thoroughly are we permeated by it

that it seems impossible ever to withhold this gratitude from our benefactor,

let alone repay him with ingratitude. The first reaction with which the human

soul requites a kind deed is a firm purpose " ever " to be

    GRATITUDE AND INGRATITUDE 13

  grateful therefor. But purpose, " the slave to memory," is only the puffed

sail that drives the boat until the force of the storm and the weakness of the

rudder  compel  a  different  course.  So,  too,  the  intent  to  prove  grateful  is

driven about fitfully by the winds of life. Of course, not at once. It requires

the lapse of a certain latency period ere gratitude is converted to ingratitude.

In the beginning the feeling of gratitude reigns supreme. Slowly it grows

fainter and fainter, is inaudible for a time, then on suitable occasions is heard

again but ever more faintly. After a while, quite unawares, ingratitude has

taken  its  place.  All  those  pleasurable  emotions  that  have  accompanied

gratitude  have  been  transformed  into  their  opposites:  love  into  hatred,

attraction into aversion, interest into indifference, praise into censure, and

friendship into hostility.

  How  does  this  come  about  ?  Where  lie  the  sources  of  these  hidden

streams that drive the wheels of our emotions ?

  . We pointed out at the very beginning that everybody regards himself as

the  wisest,  the  best,  and  the  most  capable  of  men.  Our  weaknesses  we

acknowledge very reluctantly. A losing chess-player is sure to say in ninety-

nine  out  of  a  hundred  instances  :  "I  did  not  play  this  game  well."  The

opponent's superiority is always denied; defeat is attributed to a momentary

relaxation of the psychic tension, to carelessness, to some accident, etc. And

if

  14 GRATITUDE AND INGRATITUDE

  an individual is compelled to admit another's superiority, he will do so

only with reference to some one point. He will always make reservations

leaving himself some sphere of activity in which he is king. That constitutes a

man's secret pride: the sphere in which he thinks he excels all others. This

self-consciousness, this exaggerated apperception of the ego is a natural basis

of  life,  a  protective  device  of  the  soul  which  makes  life  bearable,  which

makes it easier to bear our fardels and endure the pricks of destiny, and which

compensates  us  for  the  world's  inadequate  recognition  of  us  and  for  thefailure of our efforts which must inevitably come short of our intentions. "

The  paranoid  delusion  of  the  normal  human  being,"  as  Philip  Frey  aptly

named it, is really the individual's " fixed idea " which proves him to be in a

certain sense pathologic and justifies the opinion that the whole world is a

great madhouse.

  This  exaggerated  self-consciousness  manifests  itself  with  pathological

intensity especially in these times. The smaller the individual's share in the

real  affairs  of  the  world  is,  the  more  must  his  fantasy  achieve  so  as  to

magnify this function and have it appear as something of vital importance. In

those cases in which individuality is crushed, a hypertrophied delusion of

greatness  is  developed.  Everyone  thinks  himself  important,  everyone  is

indispensable, everyone thinks himself an important power in the play and

interplay of forces. Our era has created

    GRATITUDE AND INGRATITUDE 15

  the type of the " self-made man." Everyone is willing to be indebted only

to  himself,  his  qualifications,  his  power  of  endurance,  his  energy,  his

individual efforts for his achievements. " By his own efforts "—so runs the

much-abused phrase,—does each one want to get to the top.

  All want it—but how few really make it come true ! Who can know to-

day what is his own and what another's ? Who knows how much he had to

take before he was able to give anything ? But no one wants to stop for an

accounting. Each one wants to owe everything to himself.

  Something of this is in everyone of us. And this brings us to the deepest

root of ingratitude. The feeling of being indebted to another clashes with our

self-confidence  ;  the  unpleasant  truth  contrasts  sharply  with  the  normal's

deep-rooted delusions of greatness. In this conflict of emotions there is only

an  either  ...  or.  Either  once  for  all  to  renounce  this  exaggerated  self-

consciousness, or to forget the occasion for gratitude, to repress this painful

memory, to let the ulcerous wound on the proud body of the " ego" heal to a

scar. (The exceptions that prove the rule in this matter, too, we shall consider

later.)

  The first road that assures us eternal gratitude is chosen only by those

who by the " bludgeon-ings of fate " have been wholly stunned, who are life-

weary,—feel  themselves  goaded  to  death,—  the  wholly  crushed.  These

unfortunates no

  i6 GRATITUDE AND INGRATITUDE

  longer need the play of their hidden psychic forces. The need of the bodyhas strangled the cry of the soul. These are grateful, grateful from conviction,

grateful from necessity. Their dreams are veritable orgies of benefactions. For

them the benefactor is the deUverer from bodily torment. They see " dead

souls" whom everyone who so desires may purchase. But one who has not for

ever renounced the fulfillment of his inmost longings will rarely be capable

of gratitude. His ego resents being indebted to anyone but himself. But this

ego will never permit itself to face the naked brutal fact of its ingratitude. It

seeks for causes and motives, for justification. In this case the proverb again

proves true : " seek and you shall find," the kindness is scrutinised from every

side till a little point is found which reveals a bit of calculating egoism from

which the kindness takes on a business aspect. And what human action does

not  permit  of  many  interpretations  ?  Our  self-preservation  impulse  then

chooses the interpretation that suits us best, the interpretation that relieves us

of  the  oppressive  feeling  of  gratitude.  Such  is  the  first  step  in  the

transformation of gratitude into ingratitude. Rarely does the matter rest there.

Usually it requires also a transformation of the emotion into its opposite ere

the galling feeling of gratitude can be eradicated. What execrable wretches

would we not appear even to ourselves if we could not work out reasons for

the changes

  in our feelings ? And so we convert the good deed into a bad one; if

possible,  we  discover  stains  and  blots  in  our  benefactor's  present  life  or

pursuits that can blacken the spotless-ness of his past. Not until we have done

this  are  we  free  from  the  oppressive  feeling  of  gratitude.  Thus,  with  no

further reason for being grateful left, our personal pride survives unshaken,

the bowed ego again stands proudly erect. This explanation of the psychology

of ingratitude draws the veil from a series of remarkable phenomena which

we pass by in our daily life without regard or understanding. We shall cite

only  a  few  instances  from  the  many  at  our  disposal:  the  ingratitude  of

servants and all subordinates,—a species of ingratitude that is so obvious that

if  an  exception  occurs  the  whole  world  proclaims  it  as  an  exception;  the

ingratitude of pupils to the teacher to whom they owe all (this explains the

common  phenomenon  that  pupils  belittle  the  scientific  attainments  of  the

teacher,—a phenomenon that may almost be designated " the pupil's neurosis

") ; the deep hatred with which artists regard those of their predecessors to

whom they are most indebted ;, the tragedy of the distinguished sons whose

fathers paved the way for them ; the great injustice of invalids towards the

physicians to whom they owe their lives ; the historic ingratitude of nations totheir great leaders and benefactors ; the stubborn ignoring of the living great

ones and the measureless overvaluation

  i8 GRATITUDE AND INGRATITUDE

  of the dead ; the perpetual opposition to whatever administration may be

in power, whence is derived a fragment of the psychology of discontent; the

quite frequent transformation of a friendship into its opposite.

  Verily,  one  who  counts  upon  gratitude  is  singularly  deficient  in

knowledge both of human nature and of his own nature. In this connection,

we must consider also the fact that owing to an excessive overvaluation of the

performance of our most obvious duties, we demand gratitude even when

there is no reason for expecting it. I refer to only one example: Is there not an

obvious obligation on parents to provide to the best of their ability for the

child that they have brought into the world ? Notwithstanding this we daily

preach to our children : " You must be grateful to us for all that we do for

you, for your food, your clothes, your education." And is it not a fact that this

insistence  upon  the  duty  of  children  to  be  grateful  begets  the  opposite:

ingratitude ? Should we not rather strive to hold our children with only one

bond, love P

  Let us be just and also admit that really grateful human beings are to be

found ; persons whom life has not wearied and who lose none of their dignity

though they are grateful. These are the spiritually pre-eminent individuals

who have forced themselves to the recognition of the fact that no one is an

independent unit, that our valuation of ourselves is false, individuals who

have succeeded, by the aid of

    GRATITUDE AND INGRATITUDE 19

    psychoanalytic self-knowledge, to reduce the normal person's delusional

greatness to the moderation warranted by reality.

  Such persons are grateful because their valuation of themselves is fed by

other  springs.  The  knowledge  of  the  frailties  of  humanity  in  general

compensates them for the failing of the human in the individual. The greatest

number  of  grateful  persons  will  be  found  in  the  ranks  of  the  geniuses,

whereas talented persons are generally addicted to ingratitude. Genius can

easily be grateful inasmuch as the frank recognition of one's weaknesses and

the secret knowledge of one's achievements do not permit the suppression of

the greatness of others. One who has so much to give need not be ashamed to

have accepted something. And more especially as he knows with certainty

that in life everyone must accept. . . .  Truly great men are notably modest. Modesty is the knowledge of one's

own shortcomings. Vanity, the overvaluation of one's endowments. Gratitude

is the modesty of the great ; ingratitude the vanity of the small. Only those

are grateful who really have no occasion for being so. A genuine benefactor

finds his thanks in good works. In dealing with this theme one must think of

Vischer's verses :—

  " If poison and gall make the world bitter,

  And your heart you would preserve ;

  Do deeds of kindness ! and you will learn

  That doing good rejoices."

    UNPACKING ONE'S HEART

  The  average  human  being  finds  it  helpful  to  free  himself  from  his

impressions by " pouring out his heart" to someone. Like a sponge, the soul

saturates itself ; like a sponge, it must be squeezed dry before it can fill itself

up again. But now and then it happens that the soul cannot rid itself of its

impressions. Such persons, we say, are soul-sick and we recognise those who

suffer  from  soul-sickness  by  the  fact  that  they  sedulously  shun  new

impressions. Every disease of the soul rests ultimately upon a secret.

  Children exhibit in clear and unmistakable ways the reactions of their

elders. In the presence of a secret they behave exactly as the normal person

ought to behave. They cannot keep it to themselves. I recall very distinctly

that as a child I was unable to sit a quarter of an hour without speaking.

Repeatedly my parents promised me large rewards if I would sit a quarter of

an  hour  without  asking  them  a  question  or  making  some  remark.  The

promised reward was increased from day to day because I never was quiet for

more than half of the allotted period. But the obligation to keep a " secret "

was even more discomforting to me.

  (30)

    UNPACKING ONE^S HEART 21

  On  one  occasion  my  brother  was  to  be  given  a  silver  watch  for  his

birthday. For three days I went about oppressed and restive as if something

was  seriously  amiss.  I  prowled  around  him,  watching  him  intently  with

suppressed excitement, so that he finally noticed my strange behaviour and

demanded to know what I wanted. On the day before his birthday I could

contain myself no longer and while we were at dinner I burst out with, " Oh,

you don't know that you are going to get a silver watch to-morrow ! "

  All children are, doubtless, like that. A secret is to them an unbearableburden. When the time comes that they must keep some matters secret from

their parents because an inexplicable shyness makes them ashamed to talk

everything over with them freely, they change their attitude towards their

parents and seek out a companion of their own age, some friend with whom

they can discuss their secret.

  Adults are really as little capable of going about with a secret as children

are. It tortures and oppresses them Hke a heavy burden ; and they are happy

to rid themselves of it one way or another. If they cannot speak of it openly

and frankly then they do so in some hidden, secret, or symbolic way. I could

cite numerous illustrations of this but shall content myself with only one. A

woman who had committed the unpardonable sin became troubled with a

remarkable compulsive action. She was continually washing her hands. Why

? Be.

  22 UNPACKING ONE'S HEART

  cause she was dominated by the feeling that she was dirty, that she had

become unclean. She could not tell any one in the world what she had done ;

she would have loved to say to her husband and to the whole household: " Do

not touch me ! I am impure, unclean, an outcast ! " She had found a means of

making this confession, but she did so in a form which only the expert can

understand. At every appropriate and inappropriate occasion she washed her

hands. If she was asked why she washed her hands she answered, " Because

they  are  not  clean."  Such  symbolic  actions  are  extremely  common  and

constitute a kind of " speech without words" (to use Kleinpaul's apt words).

But a symbolic action is nothing but a substitution, a compromise between

antagonistic  psychic  currents.  It  bears,  however,  no  comparison  with  the

freeing effect of pouring one's heart out in words to a person, a confidant one

can trust.

  We know from the statements of convicts that nothing is so hard to bear

in prison as the impossibility of " getting things off their chest." And why is it

that  when  touring  foreign  countries  we  so  readily  make  friends  with  our

townspeople  whom  we  happen  to  meet,  though  at  home  we  are  quite

indifferent to them ? Because they furnish the opportunity for a good talk,

because to a certain extent they become receptacles into which we may empty

our soul's accumulations. The profound yearning that we all

    UNPACKING ONE'S HEART 23

  harbour  for  friendship,  for  a  sympathetic  soul,  emanates  from  the

imperative need for pouring our hearts out. By means of a good talk of thissort, we " abreact," or throw off a part of our pent-up excitement. Children

are much more fortunate than we in this regard. How easily they find a friend

! The first-best playfellow becomes a friend and confidant within half an

hour. But for us grown-ups the matter is much more difficult. Before we can

take any one into our confidence, take him to our bosom, he must satisfy

certain social and ethical requirements. But in reality we disclose only the

surface and retain our most oppressive secrets deep down at the bottom of the

soul unless a sudden storm of passion overcomes us; then the sluice-gates

burst open and the dammed up waters pour out in turgid torrents, carrying

everything before them.

  The tremendous power of the Roman Catholic Church is even to-day due

to the fact that it enables its members to confess their most secret sufferings

from time to time and to be absolved. Dr. Muthmann calls attention to the

fact that suicides are most frequent in Protestant countries, and least frequent

among Roman-Catholic peoples, and he thinks that this is to be attributed to

the influence of the confessional, one of the greatest blessings for numberless

people.

  The  psycho-analytic  method  of  treating  nervous  diseases  has  not  only

made the incal-

  24 UNPACKING ONE'S HEART

  culable  benefit  of  confession  its  own  but  has  united  with  it  the

individual's  spiritual  education  inasmuch  as  it  teaches  him  how  to  know

himself and to turn his eyes into the darkest depths of his soul. But there is

also a kind of speaking out that is almost equivalent to confession— self-

communion. That is, one's communings with oneself. For, as Grillparzer says,

every heart has its secrets that it anxiously hides even from itself. Not all of

us  know  how  to  detect  such  secrets.  The  poet  has  this  gift.  As  Ibsen

beautifully says : " To live is to master the dark forces within us ; to write is

to sit in judgment on ourselves." But only a poet is able to sit in judgment on

his own soul. Not every person has the capacity for self-communion. Most of

the diseases of the soul depend upon the peculiar mechanism that Freud has

called " repression." This " repression " is a semi-forgetting of displeasing

impressions and ideas. But only a half-forgetting. For a part of the repressed

idea establishes itself in some disguised form as a symptom or as some form

of nervous disease. In these cases the psychotherapeutist must apply his art

and teach the invalid to know himself.

  Goethe knew the value of confession. He reports that he once cured aLady Herder by confession. On September 25th, 1811, he wrote to Mrs. Stein

: " Last night I wrought a truly remarkable miracle. Lady Herder was still in a

hypochondriacal mood in consequence

    UNPACKING ONE'S HEART 25

  of the unpleasantnesses she had experienced in Carlsbad, especially at the

hands  of  her  family.  I  had  her  confess  and  tell  me  everything,  her  own

shortcomings as well as that of the others, in all their minutest details and

consequences, and at last I absolved her and jestingly made her understand

that by this ritual these things had now been disposed of and cast into the

deeps of the sea. Thereupon she became merry and is really cured." Here we

have the basic principles of modern psychotherapy. Unconsciously, by virtue

of  the  hidden  power  of  his  genius,  the  poet  accomplished  what  modern

therapeutists also attempt.

    Nietzsche,  too,  fully  understood  the  value  of  confession.  We  are

accustomed at once to associate with Nietzsche the concept of the Antichrist.

That he has accurately conceived the essence of the true priest he shows in

his description of the priestly temper in his book, " The Joyful Wisdom." He

says, " the people honour a wholly different kind of man, . . They are the

mild, earnest, simple, and modest priestly natures .... before whom one may

pour out one's heart with impunity, upon whom one may unload one's secrets,

one's worries, and what's even worse." (The man who shares himself with

another frees himself from himself; and one who has acknowledged, forgets.)

  It would be impossible to state the value of confession more beautifully

and more clearly. It will not be long ere this view which knocks

  26 UNPACKING ONE'S HEART

    commandingly  at  the  door  of  science  and  which  has  already  been

productive of good will be generally accepted. It will not be long ere it will

furnish  us  a  deep  insight  into  the  genesis  of  the  "  endogenetic  mental

diseases,"  excepting,  of  course,  those  "  exogenetic"  maladies  that  follow

some  of  the  infectious  diseases.  We  shall  look  upon  the  "  endogenetic"

diseases, even delusions, as a disturbance of the psychic circulation, and it

will be our task to ascertain the causes that bring these maladies about. There

are numbers of substitutes which are equivalent to a kind of confessing to

oneself. These are art, reading of newspapers, music, literature, and, least but

not last, the theatre. The ultimate effect of a dramatic presentation depends, in

reality, upon the liberation in us of affects that have been a long time pent up

within us. It is not without good reason that humanity throngs to witnesstragic plays during the performance of which it can cry to its heart's content.

When the spectators are apparently shedding tears over the unhappy fate of a

character on the stage they are really crying over their own pain. And the

woman who laughs so heartily at the awkward clumsiness of a clown, that the

tears run down her cheeks, is perhaps laughing at her husband, who, though

she will not acknowledge it, appears to her just as stupid and clumsy; she is

thereby excusing to herself her own sins which she has possibly committed

only in fantasy. The theatre serves

    UNPACKING ONE'S HEART 27

  as  a  kind  of  confessional;  it  liberates  inhibitions  ;  awakens  many

memories, consoles, and perhaps renews in us hopes of secret possibilities as

to whose fulfillment we have long since despaired.

  We  have  become  accustomed  of  late  to  suspect  sex-motives  behind

friendship. Even if we accept the theory that these motives are present, but

hidden  in  the  unconscious,  it  is  a  far  from  adequate  explanation  for  the

longing  for  friendship.  The  unconscious  sex-motive  unquestionably  co-

operates in a significant measure in the choice of a friend. It may be the

determining factor in what we call sympathy and antipathy, although it would

have to be proved with regard to the latter, and the theme is deserving of

separate consideration, for it is quite possible that our antipathies are only

reactions to an excessive attraction and therefore are evidence of repression.

Looked at from this point of view, sympathy and antipathy are one feeling,

one  affect,  having  in  the  former  case  a  positive  sign  and  in  the  latter  a

negative sign. This secret tendency may be the deciding factor in the choice

of a friend. But the need for a friend surely is in direct relation to the need for

confession.

  It is customary to ridicule the Germans' passion for forming clubs, and

societies of all kinds. But do these founders of fraternal associations seek for

anything but an opportunity to fraternise, to have a good talk, something from

which they are barred at home ? The

  28 UNPACKING ONE'S HEART

  innumerable speeches that are deKvered during the course of a year, and

which are being poured out every second in an endless stream in some house

at  some  meeting  are  apparently  being  spoken  only  for  the  benefit  of  the

auditors. But every speech is a kind of relief to the speaker's " I," and people

who have the craving to speak before the whole world are very often the

keepers of a great secret which they must conceal from the world and whichthey are imparting in this indirect way in homoeopathic doses. Just as a dye

that is dissolved in a large quantity of fluid is so completely lost that the

naked eye can detect no trace of it, so do occasional particles of the great

secret which must forever remain hidden find their way into the elocutionary

torrent.

    LAZINESS

  There  are  commonplace  maxims  which  people  go  on  repeating

thoughtlessly, and in the light of which they determine their conduct without

once stopping to consider whether the assumed truth, looked at in the light of

reason, may not turn out to be a lie. We know, of course, that there are many

" truths " which may under certain circumstances prove to be falsehoods.

Everything is in a state of flux ! Truth and falsehood are wave crests and

wave troughs, an endless stream driving the mills of humanity.

  Such notorious maxims as the following are trumpeted into our ears from

the days of our youth : " Work makes life sweet " ; " Satan finds some

mischief still for idle hands to do " ; " the life of man is three-score-and-ten,

and if it has been a happy one it is due to work and striving." These truisms

are beaten into us, drummed into us, and hammered into us from all sides ;

we  hear  them  wherever  we  go,  till  finally  we  accept  them,  completely

convinced.

  And it is well that it is so. What would the world look like if everybody

pressed his claim to laziness ? Think of the hideous chaos that would ensue if

the wheels of industry came to a stop !

  (a9)

  The  admonition  to  work  has  its  origin  in  humanity's  instinct  of  self-

preservation. It does not spring from one's own needs but only from the needs

of others. Apparently we all work for ourselves, but in reality we are always

working for others. How very small is the number of those who do their work

gladly and cheerfully! How very many give vent to their aversion to work by

means of apparent dissatisfaction with their calling ! And where can we find

a man nowadays who is contented with his calling ?

  Let us begin our study of man with that period of his life in which he was

not ashamed to show his impulses to the light of day, in which repression and

education had not yet exerted their restraining influences,—in other words,

let us begin with the observation of childhood. With astonishment we note,

first, that the child's impulse to idleness is stronger than the impulse to work.

Play is for a long time the child's idleness as well as its work. A gymnast whoproudly  swings  the  heaviest  dumb-bells  before  his  colleagues  would  vent

himself in curses, deep if not loud, if he had to do this as work ; the heavy-

laden tourist who pants his way up steep mountain paths would curse his very

existence if he had to travel these difficult trails in the service of mankind in

the capacity of—let us say—letter-carrier; the card player who works in the

sweat of his brow for hours in the stuffy caf6 to make his thousand or ten

    LAZINESS ji

    thousand points would complain bitterly at his hard lot and at the cruelty

of his employers if he had to do an equivalent amount of work in the office.

Anything that does not bear the stamp of work becomes in the play-form

recreation and a release from almost unbearable tyranny.

  The child's world is play. Unwillingly and only on compulsion does it

perform imposed tasks. (It would have even its education made a kind of

play.) Many parents worry about this and complain that their children take no

pleasure in work, seem to have no sense of duty, forget to do their school

work, and have to be forced to do their exercises. Stupid parents ! If they only

stopped to think they would realise that this frank display of an impulse to

laziness is a sign of their children's sanity. For we often enough observe the

opposite  phenomenon.  Children  who  take  their  duties  too  seriously,  who

wake too early in the morning lest they should be late for school, who are

always  poring  over  their  books,  scorning  every  opportunity  to  play,  are

usually  "  nervous"  children.  Exaggerated  diligence  is  one  of  the  first

symptoms of neurosis.

  One who can look back upon his own childhood must admit that the

impulse to indolence is stronger than any other childhood impulse. I recall

how unwillingly I went to high-school. Once I read in a newspaper that a

high-school had burned to the ground and that the pupils

  would not be able to go to school for several weeks. For days I and my

friends were disappointed as we looked at our own grey school building that

stood there safe and sound. Had it not burned down yet ? ! Were we not to

have any luck at all ? !

  Who is not acquainted with the little sadistic traits that almost all children

openly manifest ? Such a sadistic motive was our secret hope that this or that

teacher would get sick and we would be excused from attendance at school.

What a joy once possessed the whole class when we discovered that the Latin

teacher was sick just on the day when we should have had to recite in his

subject ! That was a grand prize !  And how the child detests always being driven to work! Always the same

disagreeable questions: " Have you no lessons to do to-day ? " " Have you

done all your lessons ? " The profoundest wish of all who do not yet have to

provide for themselves is once to get a chance to be as lazy as their hearts

might desire.

  But  we  adults,  too,  who  know  the  pleasure  of  work  and  of  fulfilled

obligations, long for idleness. For us, too, the vice of laziness is an exquisite

pleasure.  We  find  it  necessary  continually  to  overcome  the  tendency  to

laziness by new little resolutions. In the morning laziness whispers : stay a

little longer in your warm bed ; it's so comfortable. Another few seconds and

the sense of duty prevails over the

  desire for idleness. In the afternoon we would love to spend an hour in

pleasant day-dreams. Work conquers this wish too. And with what difficulty

we  get  out  of  the  performance  of  some  task  in  the  evening  !  It  is  an

everlasting conflict even though it is in most cases a subconscious conflict

with the sweet seducer of mankind: laziness.

  That  is  why  the  lawgivers  have  ordained  days  on  which  the  urge  for

laziness may be gratified. These are called hoHdays. Religion has made of

this right to laziness a duty to God. The more holidays a religion has, the

more welcome must it appear to labouring humanity. That is why the various

religious systems so readily take over one another's hoHdays. The Catholic

Church appropriated ancient heathenish feasts, and Jews bow to the Sunday's

authority just as the Christian does.

  Persons who suppress the inclination to laziness get sick. Their nerves fail

soon and their capacity for work suffers serious diminution. And then we say

that they had overworked. Not at all infrequently illness is only a refuge in

idleness,  a  defence  against  a  hypertrophied  impulse  to  work.  This  is

frequently observable in persons afflicted with nervousness. They are unfit

for work, waste themselves away in endless gloomy broodings, in bitter self-

reproaches,  and  in  hypochondriacal  fears.  They  do  not  tire  of  repeatedly

protesting how happy they would be if they could get back to work again.

  But  if  their  unconscious  mental  life  is  analyzed  one  discovers  with

astonishment that the greatest resistance to a cure is offered by their laziness,

the fear of work. This is one of the greatest dangers for the nervous patient. If

a neurotic has once tasted of the sweets of laziness it is a very difficult matter

to get him to work again. All the varieties of fatigue " cramps " known to

neurologists,  e.g,^  writer's  cramp,  pianist's  cramp,  violinist's  cramp,typewriter's cramp, etc., are rebellions on the part of the tendency to laziness.

A  return  to  work  is  possible  only  if,  in  the  absence  of  an  actual  organic

malady, the psychic element we have called " refuge in disease " (q.v.) is

taken into consideration and given due weight.

  This reluctance to work is most frequently noticeable in the puzzling "

traumatic neuroses," the so-called " accident or compulsion hysterias " in

which the so-called " hunger for damages " plays the most important role.

Since labourers have acquired the right to recover damages for accidental

injuries, the number of traumatic neuroses has increased so tremendously that

insurance companies can scarcely meet the claims. This is also true of the

neuroses  following  railway  and  street  car  accidents.  Only  seldom  can

objective injuries be demonstrated in these cases. But notwithstanding this,

the injured person becomes depressed, moody, sleepless, and utterly unfit for

any work. Yet it would be very unjust to consider them simulators.

    LAZINESS SI

  They are really sick. Their psychic make-up has suffered a bad shaking-

up.  The  pleasure  in  work  has  suffered  a  rude  shock  because  of  the

unconscious  prospect  of  pecuniary  "  damages,"  i,e,  of  an  opportunity  for

laziness. Repressed desires from childhood are re-animated. Why should you

work, says the alluring voice of the unconscious, when you can lounge about

and live on an income ? Don't be a fool! Get sick like the others who loll

about idly and need not work ! And consciousness, in its weakness, takes no

note  of  the  conflict  in  the  unconscious,  is  frightened  by  the  unknown

restlessness and sleeplessness and gets sick . . . It is an obstinate conflict

between laziness and industry from which only too often the former emerges

triumphant . . .

  Finally, the need for laziness becomes overpowering in all of us from

time to time. We long for a vacation. We want to recuperate from work. Well,

there are a few sensible people. These go off into a corner somewhere and are

as lazy as they can be. They lie in the grass and gaze at the heavens for hours

; or they go fishing in some clear stream,—one of the best ways of wasting

time  ;  they  sit  in  a  rowboat,  letting  someone  else  do  the  rowing  or  just

keeping the boat in motion with an occasional stroke. In this way day after

day is spent in dolce far niente until one wearies of laziness and an intense

longing for work fills one's whole being. Variety is the spice of life. Without

  idleness work loses its charm and value.

  Others  employ  their  vacation  for  new  work.  These  are  the  eternallyrestless, industrious, indefatigable ones for whom idleness does not exist. The

impulse to laziness which was once so strong, is suppressed and converted

into its opposite. These are usually persons who had their fill of laziness in

childhood and who thoroughly enjoyed their youth. (We may refer briefly to

a few well-known instances of this : there was Charles Darwin who began to

work only after he left college; Bismarck, whose student days were a period

of riot and idleness ; John Hunter was another striking example.)

  These continue with their work even while they are on their vacation.

They make work even of their visits to art galleries, museums, show-places,

and of their breathless flying trips hither and thither. This is really not the

kind of idleness that means a relaxation of tension. It's only a variation in the

kind of impressions. A sea-voyage would be a compromise between the two

antagonistic tendencies. That is why Englishmen prefer a sea-voyage to other

forms of rest. On board ship a person must be lazy. He sits on deck and stares

at the waves. The vastness of the sea stands between him and his work. He

must be idle. Impressions fly by him ; he does not have to go in search of

them.

  The right to laziness is one of the rights that

  sensible humanity will learn to consider as something self-evident. For

the time being we are still in conflict with ourselves. We shun the truth. We

look upon laziness as something degrading. We still stand in too much awe of

ourselves to be able to find the right measure. Our mothers' voices still ring in

our ears : " Have you done your lessons ? "

  THOSE WHO STAND OUTSIDE

  I am at the Circus with my children. They are laughing and clapping their

hands  in  glee.  They  are  delighted  with  the  grotesque  antics  of  the  stupid

clown. In vain I try to kindle my own enthusiasm at theirs as a means of

banishing  the  unpleasant  feeling  of  being  bored.  The  peculiar  odour  of  a

menagerie pervades the great building and brings back to me, by way of the

obscure paths that connect our thoughts, memories of days long since dead. I

am myself a child again, my cheeks hot and flushed, sitting in the topmost

gallery at the Circus, as excited as if I were beholding the greatest of all

earthly wonders.

  It is just when one of the star attractions is being given. A skilled athlete

is vaulting over very great obstacles. He leaps over ten men in a row, five

horses, a little garden. His faultless dress-suit shows scarcely a wrinkle after

this feat. This too must be counted among the advances made by modern art.In my boyhood days athletes still wore a gay uniform and " worked " in

costume. To-day every j uggler and prestidigitator is a pattern of a drawing-

room  gentleman.  Some  may  be  making  a  virtue  of  necessity  and  gladly

escape the exhibiting of

  (38)

  THOSE WHO STAND OUTSIDE 39

  their none too handsome bodies.

  These  reflections  are  suddenly  interrupted  by  a  blare  of  noisy  music.

Everybody  is  excited,  for  this  seems  to  indicate  that  the  athlete's  most

wonderful trick is coming. True ; something out of the ordinary is happening.

Through a wide gate an old-fashioned comfortable, drawn by a weary nag, is

brought  into  the  arena  and  our  valiant  athlete  leaps  over  horse  and  rider

amidst the thunderous applause of the enthusiastic youngsters and of those of

their elders who have remained children in spirit.

  The easy-going driver turns his vehicle towards the exit. Again the portals

open  wide.  Bands  of  bright  daylight  pour  into  the  half-darkened

amphitheatre. In the glare one catches sight, for a moment, of a little $ection

of the life that swarms round about the fringe of the Circus. There is the soda-

water vendor with his gay-coloured cart, a labourer, a few servant girls, and

some twenty little children staring with big eyes eagerly into the darkness of

the arena in the hope of catching a glimpse of all this magnificence.

  I  shall  never  forget  the  sight.  Those  children's  eyes,  opened  so

tremendously wide, longing to catch a bit of happiness I How they envy the

fortunate ones sitting in here and beholding real fairy-tale wonders !

  I lapse into a day-dream again. I too am one of those little ones standing

out there ; I count the richly-caparisoned horses that are being led

  40 THOSE WHO STAND OUTSIDE

  in; for the twentieth time I read the large placard announcing an " elite

performance " ; I am so happy as the beautiful equestrienne passes right by

me  ;  the  muffled  sounds  of  the  music  penetrate  to  my  ears  ;  I  hear  the

animated applause and the bravos. One thought possesses me : I must get in !

Cost what it may, I must go in !

  Oh, I could have committed a theft to enable myself to get in there and

share in the applause ! And I thought to myself, if I am ever a rich man I shall

go to the Circus every day. How excitedly I go home then, talking about all

the wonderful things I have seen, and how in my dreams all my wishes are

realized—all these things take on a tangible shape before my mind's eye.  I note that it was the most beautiful period of my life, the time when I

used to stand outside. In those days I still had a sense of the wonderful. There

was  a  touch  of  secret  magic  about  everything.  Even  dead  things  had  a

message for me. Before me was an endless wealth of possibilities ; and there

stretched before me kingdoms of the future over which my childish wishes

flew like migratory birds.

    Verily—happiness  is  only  anticipating  possibilities,  denying

impossibilities. Life is filled up with dreams of the future. What we know

seems trivial when measured by the knowledge we would like to acquire.

Possession  kills  desire  ;  realization  slays  fantasy  and  transforms  the

wonderful into the commonplace.

  THOSE WHO STAND OUTSIDE 41

  All the beauty of this world lies only in the fantasies which reality can

never approximate. The marvels of the present are seen only by those who

stand outside.

  Every time that one of the portals that had been locked from our youthful

eyes opened, every time longing became fulfilment, we became one pleasure

poorer and one disappointment richer. Only with the aid of the stilts supplied

us  by  philosophy  can  we  rise  above  the  depressing  disillusionment  of

experience. Or, in playing our part in the great drama of life, we cling to the

one role we have studied and keep on repeating it to ourselves until we, too,

almost  believe  it.  Then  we  succeed  again  in  seizing  a  fringe  of  the

magnificent purple mantle with which we aspired to adorn our life.

  Those outside see everything on a much larger scale, finer, and grander.

That is why we envy others their possessions, their realities, their calling.

Because we proj ect the inevitable disappointments of Hfe upon the thing that

is  readiest  at  hand—and  that  is  unquestionably  our  vocation.  Our  wishes

circle around others' possibilities.

    Involuntarily an experience from my youth occurs to me. I had for the

first time in my life made the acquaintance of a poet. He was a well-known

lyrist of that day and his delightful verses had charmed me for years. He did

not in any way come up to the ideal that I had conceived of what a poet ought

to be. The edges of his eyelids were red, his face was commonplace,

  42 THOSE WHO STAND OUTSIDE

  and lie had a large paunch. The manner in which he drank his coffee

disgusted me. A little coffee dripped down on his dirty grey beard and with

the movements of his big upper jaw some cake crumbs danced up and downon his moustache.

  And  that  was  the  poet  who  wrote  those  passionate  little  lyrics!

Overcoming my disappointment, I entered into conversation with him and let

him  perceive  something  of  my  admiration.  He  was  to  be  envied  for

possessing the gift of transforming his moods and experiences into works of

art!

  To my astonishment the poet began to describe with palpable resentment

the shortcomings of his calling. If he had only become an honest craftsman

ere he had devoted himself to writing ! He was sick of the hard struggle. To

be ever at loggerheads with the public, the critics, the publishers, and editors

—those were the compensations of his calling. He envied me for being a

phsyician.  That's  a  great,  a  noble,  an  ideal  calling.  A  physician  can  do

something for humanity ! If he were not too old he would at once take up the

study of medicine. To mitigate the pains of an invalid is worth more than

writing a hundred good lyrics !

  In those days I was not a little proud of the profession I had chosen. The

poet was only saying openly what I thought in secret. " The physician is

mankind's minister." How often later on have I heard these and similar words

  THOSE WHO STAND OUTSIDE 43

  which were calculated to add fuel to the flame of idealism.

  Ye gods ! In real life how sad is the physician's lot! Those outside cannot

conceive it. The first thing to realize is the rarity of the instances in which the

physician really snatches the victim from the clutches of Death ; how rarely

he eliminates suffering; how frequently, discouraged and bewildered, he fails

to halt the ravages of disease. How his idealism makes him suffer! He is

painfully aware that the craftsman comes nearer to his ideals than the artist.

He becomes familiar with man's limitless ingratitude and realizes that unless

he is to go into bankruptcy he must adopt the " practical " methods of the

business man. He is the slave of his patients, has no holidays, not a free

minute  in  which  he  is  not  reminded  of  his  dependance.  He  sees  former

colleagues and friends who have accumulated fortunes in business or in the

practice of the law, whereas he has to worry about his future and, with but

few exceptions, live from hand to mouth. But he must continue to play the

role of the " idealistic benefactor " unless he is to lose the esteem of those

who—stand outside.

  Not long ago I read a fascinating description of a " sanatorium." How

within its walls fear blanches the cheeks of the inmates, how Death lurksbehind the doors, how even the physicians avoid speaking above a whisper

and glide with solemn and noiseless steps through the house of

  44 THOSE WHO STAND OUTSIDE

  pain!  Very  pretty  and  sentimental;  but  utterly  false,—as  false  as  the

observations of a litterateur who stands outside can make it. From within the

thing looks quite different! While the surgeon is scrubbing and sterilising his

hands someone is telling the latest joke, the assistants converse lightly and

merrily, not at all as if a matter of life and death were going to be decided in a

few minutes. And it is well for the patient that it is so. The surgeon and the

assistants need their poise ; they must not be moved by timidity, fear, or

sympathy—emotions which cloud the judgment. Where one needs all one's

senses, there the heart must be silent. The public feels this instinctively. I

have found that those physicians who practised their profession in a plain

matter of fact way, as a business, were the most popular and the busiest. And,

on  the  other  hand,  I  know  learned  physicians  who  are  all  soul,  whom

everybody praises, esteems, heeds, but whom no one calls. The more highly

the physician values his services, from a material point of view, the more

highly he is regarded as an idealist, and vice versa.

  That is how the idealism of the medical profession looks in real life. For

many  physicians  their  ideals  are  superfluous  ballast.  It  often  takes  years

before they find the golden mean between theory and practice, between ethics

and hard facts.

  And how is it with other vocations ? In

  THOSE WHO STAND OUTSIDE 45

  every case in which it is possible to look behind the curtains it will appear

that the envious natures of those who stand outside magnify the advantages

and overlook the unpleasant aspects.

  All  life  is  a  continual  game  between  hope  and  fulfilment,  between

expectation and disappointment. And therein lies our good fortune—that we

can still be deceived. Were we in possession of all truth and all knowledge,

life would lose its value and its charm. Only because, in a certain sense, we

all stand outside, because the fullness of life and " the thing itself " will

continue to be a riddle, are we capable of continuing on our journey and

approaching erectly the valley of death in which the shades dwell.

  " Father, the show is over! " A child's sweet voice wakes me from my

revery. Outside I again look at the children still standing there and staring

with large, hungry eyes into the Circus . . .  WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO

  Who can say when the first wish opens its pious eyes in the child's soul ?

The child probably sleeps away the first few weeks of its existence without a

single  wish,  all  its  behaviour  being  probably  only  manifestations  of  its

inherited instincts. Suddenly the first wish awakens and the humanization of

the little animal has begun. And with it begins the wild succession of desires,

mounting ever higher and higher and finally aspiring even to the stars. How

few of the things we have been dreaming of does life fulfil! Wish after wish,

stripped of its purple mantle, sinks to the ground in a state of " looped and

windowed raggedness," till the last wish of all—the longing for peace, eternal

peace—puts an end to the play.

  Our  childhood  wishes  determine  our  destiny.  They  die  only  with  our

bodies.  They  go  whirling  through  our  dreams,  are  the  masters  of  our

unconscious  emotions,  and  determine  the  resonance  of  the  most  delicate

oscillations of our souls. It certainly seems worth while taking a closer look

at these wishes. Unfortunately we are deprived of the best source of such

knowledge: the observation of ourselves. For we forget so easily, and our

earliest desires

  (46)

  WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO 47

  lie far behind us, hidden in thick mist. Only the dream pierces the thick

veil and brings us greetings from a long forgotten era.

  From the study of our children we can learn of only one kind of desire. A

desire that can be easily observed, that the child betrays most easily in the

games it plays.

  " And what are you going to be ? " That is the question one most often

puts to children and which they very seldom allow to go unanswered.

  Right here we must draw a distinction between boys and girls. The girl's

first wish almost invariably betrays the influence of the sexual instinct. All

little girls want to be " mothers " ; some would be content with being "

nurses." The phylogenetic law of the biologist applies also to desires. The

desires of individual human beings reproduce the evolution of mankind in

this regard. Just as, according to recent researches (Ament), the first speech

attempts of children depict the primitive speech of man, so the first wishes of

human  beings  depict  the  primitive  wishes  of  humanity.  Children's  wishes

may therefore be said to be the childhood wishes of humanity and to manifest

unmistake-ably the primitive instincts of the sexes.  The little girls want to become " mothers." They play with dolls, rocking,

fondling, and petting them as if they were children. In this way they betray

their most elemental qualification. My little daughter once said:

  48 WHAT CHII,DREN ASPIRE TO

  " Mother ! I want to be a mother, too, some day and have babies." " I

would be so unhappy if I could not have any babies ! " Being asked whether

she would not like to be a doctor, she replied: " Yes ! I would love to be a

doctor* ! But only like mamma." That is, only the wife of a doctor.

  In marked contrast with this is the fact that boys never wish to be fathers.

That is : their fathers are often enough their ideals and they would like to be

like them, to follow the same profession or vocation. But it's only a matter of

vocation, not of family. I have never yet heard a boy express a wish for

children. There is no doubt however, that there are boys who like to play with

dolls and whose whole being has something of the feminine about it. They

have feminine instincts. They love to cook and prefer to play with little girls.

In the same way one also encounters girls who are described as " tomboys."

These  girls  are  wild,  unruly,  disobedient,  boisterous,  and  hke  to  play  at

soldiers  and  robbers.  One  cannot  go  wrong  in  concluding  that  a  strong,

perhaps  even  an  excessive  homosexual  element  enters  into  their  psychic

make-up.  At  any  rate  the  biographies  of  homosexuals  invariably  make

mention of these remarkable infantile traits. They are boys with female souls

and girls with a masculine soul. Such boys may even manifest

  *To understand what follows, the English reader should know that the

German word for a female physician (" Dok-torin ") is also the titlt whereby a

physician's wife is addressed.

  WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO 49

    various disguised indications of the instinct for race preservation.

  The first stage of girlish wishes does not last long. Usually the process of

repression begins rather early. The little girls notice that their desires are a

source of mirth to their elders, and that their remarks evoke a kind of amused

though embarrassed smirking in the people about them. So they begin to

conceal and to repress the nature of their desires and to disclose only what is

perfectly  innocent.  And  they  tell  us  they  want  to  become  "  maids  of  all

work," housewives. That does not sound as bad as wanting to be " mother."

One can be a housewife without having children. As such they go marketing,

manage the home, cook, order the servants about, etc. Then they are attracted

by the splendours of being a cook. A cook is the goddess of sweets anddelicacies and can cook anything she likes. On the same egoistic principle

they  then  want  to  be  store-keepers,  proprietresses  of  candy  stores,  pastry

shops, and ice cream parlours. As such they would have at their sole disposal

all the sweets and delicious things a child's palate craves for. To possess a

store in which one can sell these wonderful delicatessens and weigh them out

to customers is one of the most ardent wishes of little girls.

  Of  course  as  soon  as  they  go  to  school  a  new  ideal  begins  to  take

possession  of  the  childish  soul.  Up  there  in  her  tribunal  sits  the  teacher,

omniscient and omnipotent, invested with such

  so WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO

    authority  that  the  parental  authority  pales  into  insignificance  in

comparison with it. Parental authority extends only to their children. But the

teacher's  !  She  has  command  over  so  many  children  !  With  sovereign

munificence she distributes her gracious favours. She designates one child to

act as " monitor " (oh, what exalted pre-eminence !) ; another may carry her

books  home  ;  the  third  is  permitted  to  restore  the  stuffed  owl  into  the

teacher's cabinet, or to clean the blackboard ; the fourth has the rare privilege

of being sent out to purchase the teacher's ham sandwich ! And then there are

the various punishments the teacher can inflict upon the children entrusted to

her. Oh, it's just grand to be a teacher !

  But, above all, the desire is to rule over many. Have I omitted to mention

the " princess " ? Incredible ! Only few children are so naive as to betray this

wish. But all would love to become " queens,"—ay, with all their hearts. The

fairy tales are full of them. How the proud prince came and helped the poor

girl mount his steed, saying : " Now you'll sit by me and be my Queen ! "

Innumerable Cinderellas in the north and in the south, in the east and in the

west, sit at their compulsory tasks and dream of the prince who is to free

them.

  All have one secret dread : To be lost in the vast multitude. They want to

accomplish something, want to stand out over the others. Vanity causes more

suffering than ambition.

  WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO 51

  Soon,  too  soon,  they  learn  that,  these  sober  days  princes  do  not  go

roaming about promiscuously as in the golden days of fairydom. But hope

finds a way and soars on the wings of fantasy into the realm of the possible

and yet wonderful. Are there not queens in the world of arts ? Do they not

rule  like  real  queens  their  willingly  humble  subjects  ?  Haven't  theyeverything that a queen has: Gold, fame, honour, recognition, admiration,

envy ? Almost every girl goes through this stage. She wants to become a

great  artist.  A  prima  donna  such  as  the  world  has  never  yet  known  ;  a

danseuse, who shall have the tumultuous applause of houses filled to the last

seat; a celebrated actress whose finger-tips princes shall be permitted to kiss ;

a violinist whose bow shall sway the hearts of men more than the golden

sceptre of a queen ever could.

  This dream runs through the souls of all girls. It yearly furnishes the art

dragon with thousands and thousands of victims. The happy parents believe it

is the voice of talent crying imperatively to be heard. In reality it is only the

beginning of a harassing struggle to get into the lime-light, a struggle that all

women wage with in exhaustible patience as long as they live. And thus

numberless amateur female dilettanti vainly contend for the laurel because

they  are  so  presumptuous  as  to  try  to  transform  a  childish  dream  into  a

waking reahty.

  52 WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO

  It is even more interesting to make a survey of what girls just past puberty

do not wish to become. Not one wants to marry. (Reasons can always be

found.) Not one wants to be an ordinary merchant's wife. And life then takes

delight in bringing that to pass which seemingly they did not wish . . .

  In boys the matter is more complicated. The sex-urge is not manifested so

clearly  in  them  as  in  girls.  It  requires  great  skill  in  the  understanding  of

human  conduct  to  discover  in  the  games  that  boys  play  the  symbolic

connection  with  the  natural  impulses.  It  is  remarkable  that  boys'  earliest

ideals are employments that are in some way or other related to locomotion.

All little boys first want to be drivers, conductors, chauffeurs, and the like.

Motion  seems  to  fascinate  the  boy  and  to  give  him  more  pleasure  than

anything else. A ride in a street car or a bus which seems to us elders so

obviously wearisome is such a wonderful thing for a child. Just look at the

solemn faces of the little boys as they sit astride the brave wooden steed in

the  carousal!  "  Sonny,  don't  you  like  it  ?  Why  aren't  you  laughing  ?  "

exclaims the astonished mother.

  A  child  is  still  at  that  stage  of  development  when  motion  seems

something wonderful. Is it possible that in this a secret (unconscious) sex-

motive,  such  as  is  often  felt  by  one  when  being  rocked  or  swung  in  a

swinging boat, does not play a part ? Many adults admit this

  WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO 53    well-known effect of riding. This is in all probability one of the most

potent and most hidden roots of the passion for travelling. Freud very frankly

asserts in his " Contributions to a sexual theory " that rhythmical motion

gives rise to pleasurable sensations in children. " The jolting in a travelling

wagon and subsequently in a railway train has such a fascination for older

children that all children, at least all boys, sometimes in their Hfe want to be

conductors and drivers. They show a curious interest in everything connected

with  trains  and  make  these  the  nucleus  of  an  exquisite  system  of  sexual

symbolism."

  Be this as it may. The fact is that all the little ones want to become drivers

of some vehicle, that they can play driver, rider, chauffeur, car, train, etc., for

hours at a time, that in the first years of their lives their fantasies are fixed

only on objects possessing the power of motion, beginning with the baby-

carriage and ending with the aeroplane.

  This stage lasts a variable period in different children. In some cases up to

puberty and some even beyond this. I know boys who have almost attained to

manhood who are still inordinately interested in automobiles and railways. In

these cases we are deaHng with a fixation of an infantile wish which will

exercise a decisive influence on the individual's whole life. In most cases the

first ideal loses its glamour before the magic of a uniform. The

  54 WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO

  first uniform that a child sees daily is that of the " letter-carrier." In his

favour, too, is the fact that he is always on the go, going from house to house.

The " policeman " too, promenading up and down in his uniform, engages the

child's fantasy. So too the dashing " fireman." Needless to say all these are

very soon displaced and wholly forgotten in favour of the " soldier."

  The love to be a soldier has its origin in many sources. Almost all boys

pass through a period when they want to be soldiers. The wish to be a soldier

is a compromise for various suppressed wishes. A soldier has been known to

become  a  general  and  even  a  king.  That  fact  is  narrated  in  fairy  tales,

chronicled  in  sagas  and  recorded  in  history.  One  can  manifest  one's

patriotism. Then there is the beautiful coloured uniform that the girls so love

—and one is always going somewhere. For one is never just an ordinary

soldier  but  a  bold,  dashing  trooper,  and—this  above  all!—one  has  a  big

powerful sword. Under the influence of these childish desires children plead

to go to the military schools and the parents give their consent in the belief

that it is the children's natural bent that speaks. Why, I tried to take this stepwhen  I  was  fifteen  years  old  but—heaven  be  praised  for  it—was  found

physically unfit. My more fortunate friends who were accepted have for the

most part subsequently discovered that they had erred in their youth.

  The same thing happens with respect to the

  WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO 55

  other  wishes  of  children,  whether  they  become  engineers,  teachers,

physicians, or ministers. The voice of the heart is deceptive and rarely betrays

the individual's true gift. The biographies of great men may now and then

give indications of talent manifested in childhood. But the contrary is also

easily to be found. Very often hidden desires are concealed or masked behind

one's choice of a calling. I know a man who became a physician because he

longed to go far away, to go to the metropolis. In youth he had to be driven to

practice his music—and yet music was his great talent and he should have

become a musician.

  What our children want to become . . . seldom denotes that they have a

natural  aptitude  for  a  particular  calling.  They  are  to  be  regarded  only  as

distorted symbols behind which the almost utterly insoluble puzzles of the

childhood soul are concealed. When we are mature enough to know what we

really want to become it is usually too late. Then we are children no longer.

But then we would love to be children again and shed a furtive tear for the

beautiful childhood that's dead . . . If we could be children again we'd know

what we would like to be. No illusory wish would then tempt us from the

right path, luring us like a will o' the wisp into the morass of destruction.

  And this wish too is fulfilled. We become children again if we live long

enough. But then, alas ! our wishes have ceased to bloom.

  56 WHAT CHILDREN ASPIRE TO

  Over  the  stubble-field  of  withered  hopes  we  totter  to  our  inevitable

destiny.  Everything  seems  futile,  for  all  paths  lead  to  one  goal.  Then  we

know what children would Hke to become, what they must become.

    INDEPENDENCE

  A pale, dark-complexioned young man, elegantly attired, sits before me.

His hair is neatly parted on the side and boldly thrown back over his forehead

; he is clearly half snob and half artist; in short, one of that remarkable type of

young man that is so common in a modern metropoHs. His complaints are

the  customary  complaints  of  the  modern  neurotic.  He  is  tired  and  weak,

incapable of prolonged mental application. He is a clerk in an office, and has

already lost one position because of his inability to use his brains any longer.With some difficulty his father had secured a position for him in a bank

where a bright future seems to await him but where a dull present bears him

down. All day it's nothing but figures, figures, figures. He cannot endure that.

His patience is almost exhausted ; the figures swim before his eyes, and he

makes more mistakes than is tolerable in an official of a bank. He begs me

for a certificate that will officially vouch for his unendurable condition and

make  it  possible  for  him  to  resign  from  his  office  in  an  honourable  way

before he is discharged for incompetence.

  " Yes, and what will you do then ? Have you another position in prospect

? "

  (57)

  S8 INDEPENDENCE

  "  Certainly,"  he  replied,  with  a  certain  alacrity  which  was  in  striking

contrast with his careless melancholy. " I want to make myself independent. I

am  not  fitted  for  office  work,  and  I  can't  bear  to  be  bossed  around  and

instructed by every Tom, Dick, or Harry who happens to have been on the

job a few years longer than I."

  " Ah! now I understand your inability to figure. You are living in a state

of  permanent  psychic  conflict.  Because  you  have  no  desire  to  work  you

cannot work. But what kind of business do you wish to go into ? What have

you learned ? "

  " Learned ? To tell the truth, only what one learns in a trade school. I

don't want to go into business. I only want the certificate to show my father

that my health will not permit me to work in an office. Do you think it's good

for anybody to work from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m., with only one hour for luncheon ?

"

  " That would be only eight hours work a day ! I assure you that there are

thousands who woiild be happy to work only so little. Shall you work less

when you are independent ? "

  " Certainly. Then I won't have to work at aU."

  " So ! " I replied in amazement. " I am curious to know what sort of

business that is where one doesn't have to work. What do you intend to do

when your father gives you money ? "

  A blissful smile passed over the interesting

  youth's face like a beam of celestial light. ** I know all about sports. Pm

going to play the races ! "

  I must admit I was considerably taken aback. I know how reluctant towork many a modern man is whose whole energy is expended in dreams. But

that a sensible man should think of such a thing was new to me. Such a

peculiar motivation for the purpose of becoming independent. The matter

kept running through my head a long time. I soon noticed that this youth was

only an extreme type of a very common species —a species that expresses

itself in a passion for independence. When we investigate the deeper causes

of this passion we invariably find the desire to secure for oneself the utmost

amount of pleasure from a very small investment. But independence is only

apparently the coveted ideal; behind it lies not only the desire for freedom,

not only the proud feeling of self-reliance. No, in many cases the kernel of

the matter is—laziness.

    Independence ! Proud, brazen word ! How many sacrifices hast thou not

demanded and dost still demand daily ! Who is ignorant of these little daily

tragedies of which no newspaper makes mention ! The salesman who, after

he had for years enjoyed a care-free and assured position, has fallen a victim

to the craving for independence, and has to contend with cares and worries so

long that at last, broken down and battered, he renounces his beautiful dream

and

    willingly submits his once proud neck to the yoke ; the writer who starts

his own newspaper and sees his hard-saved gold flow away in beautifully

printed sheets ; the actor who becomes the director of his own company ; the

merchant who builds his own factory,—an endless procession of men who

wished to make themselves independent.

  It would be one-sided not to admit that in addition to the aforementioned

element of wanting to make one's work easier there is also a certain ambition

to get ahead of one's neighbours. Modern man is linked to life by a thousand

bonds. He is only a little screw in a vast machine —a screw that has little or

no influence on the working efficacy of the compHcated apparatus, that can

be lightly thrown aside or replaced. We all feel the burden of modern life, and

instinctively we all fret under it and work against it. We long to sever the link

that  ties  us  to  commonplace  day  and  to  become  the  lever  that  sets  the

machinery in motion.

  Stupid beginning ! Hopeless and thankless ! Who can be independent and

absolute nowadays? Is there any calling that can boast of standing outside life

? It is a delusive dream which beckons and betrays us. We change masters

only. That's very simple. But we are far from becoming independent thereby.

We have a hundred masters instead of one. The employee who has madeliimself  "  independent  "  has  lost  his  master  but  becomes  the  slave  of

innumerable

  new  tyrants  to  whose  wills  he  must  bow  :  his  customers.  Therein  he

resembles the so-called free professions which are in reality not free. The

physician is dependent upon the whims of his patients ; the lawyer woos the

favour of his clients ; the writer groans under the knout of the cruelest of all

tyrants : the public. And, strange to say, it is this last calling that appeals to

most persons as the ideal of independence. It is almost a weekly occurrence

to  see  some  discontented  youngster  or  an  unhappy  girl  with  a  thick

manuscript  in  his  or  her  portfolio,  begging  to  be  recommended  to  some

publisher and thus open a writer's career to them. They want to become self

reliant, independent. It is vain to point out to them that an author's bread is

not  sweetened  with  the  raisins  of  independence.  Others  who  have  never

written  a  line  suddenly  make  up  their  minds  to  become  journalists.  They

think  that  the  will  to  become  a  journalist  is  all  that  is  needed  to  be  so.

Evidences  of  adequate  preparation  and  qualification  they  find  in  the

excellence  of  their  school  compositions.  They  do  not  suspect  that  the

journalist's independence is a myth that is credited only by those who have

never smelled to journalism. That the journalist is the slave not only of the

public but also of the hour. That not a minute of the day is his, and that he

would gladly exchange his pen for any other, more massy tool, if such a thing

were possible. Dissatisfaction with one's calling is also one

  of the factors that sets the feeling for independence in motion. Who is

nowadays satisfied with his calling, or with himself ? ! This may be easily

proved by referring to a striking phenomenon. In doing so we need not sing

the  praises  of  the  "  good  old  days."  But  happiness  in  one's  work  and

contentment with one's calling were certainly much more common than they

are now. Otherwise it could never have come to pass that the father's calling

should be transmitted to the sons generation after generation. How is it with

us to-day ? The physician cries : My son may be anything but a physician.

The  public  official:  My  son  shall  be  more  fortunate  than  I;  under  no

circumstances shall he be a public official. The actor : Be what you will, my

son, but not an artist; art is the bitterest bread. The merchant wants to make a

lawyer of his son, the lawyer a merchant, etc.

  We  envy  others  because  we  are  all  dissatisfied  with  ourselves  and

unhappy. The great ideal that floats before our eyes is to become a clipper of

coupons. Money alone guarantees the road to independence. But if we wereto ask the rich about this we would hear some surprising things. I know a

lady  who  possesses  a  vast  fortune  and  who  is  the  absolute  slave  of  her

money. I recommended her to take a trip for her health's sake. She repHed : "

Do you think that I can go away for a week ? You have no idea of all the

work I have to do. Now

  it's  something  with  the  bureau  of  taxes,  now  it's  engaging  a  new

superintendent! Then there are the receptions ! I am busy from morning till

night." When I advised her to hire a manager she laughed merrily : " Pd be in

a fine fix if I did that! Then I would lose the only recompense I have : my

independence ! "

  Wherever we look, the higher we go, the less of true independence do we

find. What does the psychology of modern social feelings teach us ? It shows

us everywhere the same cry for independence which in the single individual

we have described as the basic feeling of his social attitude. Norway wanted

its independence and got it. Hungary stormily clamoured for independence.

Ireland, Poland, Persia, India, Egypt, and numerous colonies are struggling

for  independence.  In  the  structure  of  the  State  the  urge  for  independence

begets continual turmoil. Austria can sing a plaintive song as to this. The

demand of certain states for autonomy is the outcome of the same motive.

    Political  tune—scurvy  tune.  However—  wholly  unintentionally  our

analysis  brings  us  from  the  consideration  of  the  individual  to  that  of  the

group.  That  a  modern  state  can  never  again  attain  that  measure  of

independence that it once enjoyed is as clear to the political economist as to

the sociologist. What we have said of the individual applies also to peoples.

  Must we then conclude that there is no independence ? Isn't it possible

then for man to

  elevate himself above his environment and take a loftier point of view ?

  There certainly is such a thing as independence. But we must draw a

sharp line of distinction between two different kinds of independence. There

is an inner and an outer independence. But it is only the inner independence

that  one  can  hope  to  attain  wholly.  It  alone  is  capable  of  giving  us  that

modicum of outward independence which may be laboriously wrested from

life. A healthy philosophy of life that frees the spirit, makes renunciation

easier and wishing harder, and a certain spiritual and bodily freedom from

wanting for things,—these alone can give us that independence that the world

affords. That is why the poorest of the poor is more independent than the

richest of the rich.  We all know the beautiful story of the king whose physicians promised

him health if he could wear the shirt of a happy man. Mesengers searched

every corner of the world but, alas ! could not find a happy man, till finally

they came upon a merry hermit in the thickest part of a dark forest who

seemed to be perfectly happy. But he, the only happy man in the wide world,

had no shirt!

  We would have to divest ourselves of many shirts to become independent

within. We wear and lug about with us numberless suits, wrappings, which

cover up our true selves and apparently safeguard us, whereas in reality they

drag us down to the base earth. ^

    JEALOUSY

  Has any one counted the victims of jealousy ? Daily a revolver cracks

somewhere or other because of jealousy ; daily a knife finds entrance into a

warm body ; daily some unhappy ones, racked by jealousy and life-weary,

sink  into  fathomless  depths.  What  are  all  the  hideous  battles  narrated  by

history when compared with the endless slaughters caused by this frightful

passion ! It enslaves man as no other passion does ; degrades him, humiliates

him, and makes him taste the hell of many other passions, such as envy,

mistrust, revengefulness, fear, hate, anger, and poisons the meagre pleasure-

cup that imparts a touch of sweetness to bitter life.

  What is jealousy ? Whence flow its tributaries ? Is this the Danaidean gift

to humanity ? Is it the twin sister of love ? Do we acquire it or is it born with

us ? It is surely worth while to consider every one of these questions and to

attempt to determine the nature of this unholy passion.

  To understand jealousy we must go far, very far back into the history of

man's origin. Yes, far beyond man, as far as the animal world ! For certain

animals, intelligent animals, show

  (65)

  (6 JEALOUSY

  clearly  evidences  of  jealousy.  Pet  dogs  resent  it  if  their  masters  pet

another  dog.  They  are  even  jealous  if  the  master  caresses  human  beings.

There are dogs who begin to whine if their master plays with or fondles his

children. Very much the same thing is told of cats. Who of us on reading

Freiligrath's gruesome ballad, " The Lion's Bride," has not felt the terror of

the beast's furious jealousy ?

  Our  observation  of  animals  has  taught  us  one  of  the  fundamental

characteristics of jealousy. Animals know very definitely what is theirs. Theyhave  a  fine  perception  for  what  is  theirs.  Most  dogs  snarl  even  at  their

masters if they attempt to take their food from them. Their jealousy is the

mood in which they express their possession, the egoism of their share. They

defend as their possession even the affection to which they think themselves

solely entitled.

  The emotional life of the young shows the same phenomenon. They too

do not know the distinction between thine and mine. What they happen to

have in their hands is theirs and will defend it with their weak powers and

loud  howls.  Many  psychologists,  including  Percy,  Compayn6,  Sully,

Anfosse, Schion, Ziegler, consider the child an unmitigated egoist. Even in its

love  it  is  out  and  out  egoistic  and  therefore  extremely  jealous.  Young

children's jealousy may attain an incredible degree of intensity. A little two-

year-old girl cried incessantly if her mother took the baby brother in her

arms.

    JEALOUSY e^

  A little boy was so jealous of his younger sister that he used to pinch her

leg  at  every  opportunity  ;  having  been  smartly  punished  for  it  on  one

occasion  he  spared  the  little  girl  thereafter,  but  became  afflicted  with  a

peculiar  compulsion  neurosis  :  he  pinched  the  legs  of  adults.  Such

experiences  are  of  profound  significance.  They  give  us  a  glimpse  of  the

primitive times when man had no idea yet of altruism. The whole world was

his as far as his power, his strength, went. Man's jealousy developed out of

this primary ego-feeling, out of his right to sole possession. Before man could

be civilised this tremendous barrier had to be overcome. The first community,

the first social beings, were the first stages of altruism and civilization.

  From this period emanate the subterranean sources from which jealousy

is fed. We have probably all become more or less altruistic. But always in

conflict with ourselves, in conflict with the beast, in conflict with the savage

within us. Even to this day the whole world belongs to each one of us. Our

desires extend our property to infinity. What would we not own ? What do

we not desire ? The wealth of the rich, the honour of the distinguished, the

triumphs of the artist, to say nothing of his sexual triumphs. The less we can

fulfil these desires the more do we cling to what we have, or, somewhat more

accurately, could have had. For jealousy does not concern only what one

actually possesses. Women may be jealous

  of men they do not love and do not even possess. They simply begrudge

the other woman her conquest. Don Juans know this very well. The best wayof conquering a woman is still the old, old way : to make love to her friend.

In this case wounded vanity plays a part, of course. But what is vanity but the

over-estimation of the Me, the striking emphasis laid on one's own value ?

And thus we again come back to the root of all jealousy: the pleasure in one's

own possession, in one's embellished egoism.

  Jealousy need not always have a sexual motive. A woman may be jealous

of  her  husband's  friend  because  he  has  been  more  successful  than  her

husband. Her husband is her possession. He ought to be the foremost, he

ought to have achieved the others' successes, so that his fame should revert to

her too. Pupils are jealous of one another even though not a trace of a sexual

motive may be demonstrable. We may be jealous of another's horses, dogs,

furniture, virtues, honours, friendships, responsibilities, etc. Behind it there

always is our brutal egoism, the desire for another's possessions, or at least

the fear of losing one's own possession.

  Jealousy  is  generally  regarded  as  a  preeminently  feminine  quality.

Erroneously so. It would be more nearly correct to say that the heroic side of

jealousy is to be found only in men. It is not a matter merely of chance

  that we have no feminine counterpart to Othello, Herod and the Count in

Hauptmann's " Griselda." Jealousy in women has received a social valuation

from  men;  it  always  has  a  smack  of  the  ridiculous,  pathological,  or

unjustified. It is a subject for satire, and is more often a comedy motive than a

tragic reproach. This is due to the fact that woman's love is mono-poHsed by

men, whereas a man's loyalty is demanded by most women but attained only

by very few. A man's infidelity is not a dramatic reproach because it is a daily

occurrence and wholly in accord with the lax conception of the majority. A

woman's infidelity is an offence against the sacred mandates imposed by—

men. And therefore the jealousy of a man—be the subject of the passion a

fool, a fop, an old man, or some other laughable type destined for cuckoldry

—is a struggle for just possession," a conflict which always has an heroic

effect, whereas a woman's jealousy is always a dispute for the sole possession

of a man, a right which is disputed by a great majority (namely, the men, and

even some women).

  But there are men and women who are not jealous even though they love

intensely. And with this we hit upon a second and important root of jealousy.

Only one who contemplates an act of disloyalty against the object of his

jealousy, or who, as a result of doubts about his own erotic powers, thinks he

cannot gratify that object can be jealous. Of course I am not  now  speaking  of  justified  jealousy  based  on  facts,  but  of  baseless,

unjustified jealousy. Whence comes the suspicion that attributes infidelity to

the beloved being ? What is the driving power in these cases ? Only the

knowledge of one's true nature. Only they can be jealous, jealous without

cause, who cannot guarantee for themselves. In other words : jealousy is the

projection of one's own shortcomings upon the beloved.

  If we find a woman who is all her life torturing her husband with her

jealousy, complaining now that he has been looking at some woman too long,

now that he stayed out too long, now that he was too friendly with one of her

friends, etc., then it is the woman who has seen the weakness of her own

character and who, in thought, is guilty of every infidelity which she will not

admit even to herself. And in the same way faithless husbands who love their

wives make the most jealous husbands. That is the vermuth potion which

leaves  with  them  a  bitter  after-taste  as  soon  as  they  have  made  another

conquest. Their own experiences entitle them to be jealous. Bachelors who

had been philanderers and can boast of many conquests usually marry plain

or unattractive women—alleging, by way of explanation, that they want to

have the woman for themselves and not for others, meanwhile forgetting how

often they themselves had been caught in the nets of homely women. For

almost any woman who will permit herself to do so

  can find admirers, and ugliness is no protection against dramatic or comic

marital  infidelities.  The  absence  of  jealousy  in  cases  of  intense  affection

usually, but not always, indicates a nature immune against all assaults. But

those who are free from this passion need not therefore be puffed up. We are

poor sinners all, and the time may come sooner or later for any of us in which

we shall transfer our weaknesses upon others and become jealous. But it also

happens that freedom from jealousy is a sign not of security but of stupidity,

unlimited vanity. The woman is regarded as a paragon of all the virtues,

without  a  touch  of  frailty.  The  husband  may  be  an  ideal  specimen  of  an

otherwise frivolous species. In these cases one's inadequacy is so covered up

by  our  over-estimation  of  our  endowments  that  comparisons  are  never

instituted and projection is impossible. , Consequently baseless jealousy and

baseless confidence will always be. And therefore we shall not follow Bleuler

in his estimation of jealousy as one of the " unconscious commonplaces "

which makes love valueless as " the plant-louse does the rose-bud." We shall

recognise in it, when it is baseless, a disease of the soul occurring in persons

whose cravings and realities do not coincide and who have with a heavy heartbeen forced to the recognition after cruel inner conflicts that their virtue is

only an over-emphatic opposition to their weakness. Their jealousy has taken

on a patho-

  logical (neurotic) character because of this repression and this relegating

of their own desires into the unconscious. That is why all the logic of realities

is effectless when opposed to the logic of the unconscious. One might almost

say that jealousy is a cultural disease which results from the restrictions on

our  love-life  imposed  by  law  and  morality.  If  so-called  "  free  love"  ever

becomes a fact there will be far fewer cases of jealousy than we have to-day.

That sounds plausible. But will life be more worth living when there will be

no  more  jealousy  ?  We  gladly  put  up  with  jealous-y  if  only  our  costly

treasure of love continues secure. Would a life free from all jealousy and

pain,  a'  life  without  passions,  be  worth  while  f  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  our

possessions are most highly valued by us at the moment when we fear to lose

them ? . . . The sweetest harmonies are to be found only in contrasts. The

wagon of life rolls with greater tempo over the endless lonely roads when it is

harnessed to the passions.

    CHILDHOOD FRIENDSHIP

  An indescribably sweet breeze blows over the friendships of childhood.

They are tender, delicate, pale blue petals that tremble with each stir of the

childish soul and whose roots even then already penetrate down to the deep

layers in which inherited instincts and tempting desires fertilise the soil of the

passions. Its first friendship is a revelation for the child. Till then it loved its

parents, its surroundings, its teacher. But behind this love the educational

tendency was always in evidence. " You must love your parents because they

are so good to you. You must respect your teacher because from him you get

the knowledge that is indispensable to you in your life." Thus we make that

love a duty for the child which ought, on the contrary, to make it conscious of

its duties.

  How different it all is in the case of friendship. Here the child can follow

its natural inclinations. Here it can choose according to its own standards

without having to listen to the dictates of its educators. And indeed one has

thousands of opportunities to observe that a child is much more cautious than

adults in the selection of its friends, that it will not accept a friend assigned it

by its parents unless he meets with its approval,

  (73)

  unless an unconscious urge pleads in his behalf.  How peculiar children are in their choice of a friend ! Either he is the

nicest or the finest, the quietest or the noisiest, the best or the worst, the

strongest or the weakest. They prefer one whose traits are clearly and sharply

defined, rather than one who is neither one thing nor the other. There must be

something about the friend that they can admire ; he must excel them in

something.  But  it  is  not  a  bar  to  friendship  that  they  excel  the  other  in

something.

  Let no one say that it is an easy matter to read the souls of children ! That

their emotions are simple, that their soul's an open book! We can discover all

the  puzzling  roots  of  love,  even  in  the  friendships  of  children,  e.g.^

sympathy, cruelty, desire, humility, and subjection.

  It is my belief that we adults cannot love with the love we were capable

of in childhood. We cannot hate so, cannot be so resentful, and cannot be so

self-sacrificing. Alas ! even our emotions become palHd with the years and

can make a show of colour only with the aid of memory.

  Let us watch a child that has entered into a close friendship. Is it not

playing the same game that we adults later on designate as love ? Have we

forgotten  the  feverish  impatience  with  which  we  awaited  the  hour  of  the

friend's coming and how jealous we were if he stopped to converse with

another ? How we hated him then and how terribly unhappy we were ? How

we would have loved to cry aloud, if we

  had not been ashamed to betray such weakness. Have we forgotten how

the hours flew when we were playing together, how we whispered dreadful

and  mysterious  things  to  each  other  in  the  twilight,  how  passionately  we

embraced each other, and kissed, and how ready we were to give up our little

treasures to our friends ? There is but one time that resembles this friendship :

—the time when a happy love makes a wooer a sweet child again.

  Even in a child's soul the hunger for love cries aloud and will not be

stilled.  For  a  love  that  is  more  than  a  love  of  parents,  for  a  love  that  is

touched with that dark power which at a later period shapes the life of man to

its will.

  Oh ! blessed time, in which our yearning for a second human being is so

easily gratified ! Blessed time, in which we do not yet feel the hot breath of

burning desires when the arm of a beloved being entwines us, in which the

threatening fist of Destiny does not pin us to the ground at the moment when

we think we are plucking down the sky! The mirror of our soul still reflects

pure innocence ; we do not yet suspect that the passions that set the waters inmotion must also stir up the muddy ooze that lies at the bottom.

    Childhood friendship is the school of love. Without such friendship the

child  is  impoverished  and  forever  loses  the  power  to  love.  Look  at  the

mothers' darlings whose mothers took the place of friends ! See how they are

bound to

  ^e CHILDHOOD FRIENDSHIP

  their  mothers  by  all  their  emotions,  by  all  the  bonds  of  their  souls,

incapable  of  breaking  loose  from  the  love  for  the  mother  and  founding

another  generation.  The  stupidest  dream  of  parents  is  the  wish  to  be  the

friends of their children. But are we not deceiving ourselves \ Is such a thing

possible  ?  Is  there  not  between  ourselves  and  our  children  a  world  of

disappointments and buried hopes ? Are there not here yawning chasms in

whose  depths  wild  torrents  carry  away  the  residue  of  past  years,  chasms

which cannot be bridged ? Say what we will, only a child can be a child's

friend !

  And there is much food for reflection in this. The child is surrounded by

so much authority, so much school, so much dignity, so much law, that it

would have to break down under the weight of all these restraints if it were

not saved from such a fate by. meeting with a friend. In secret conferences, at

first in whispers and only in hints, but subsequently more and more clearly

and distinctly, the road to life is outlined. The gods are dethroned, or, at any

rate, are not feared so much ; little jokes about the teacher are the beginning,

and gradually the excess of parental authority goes tumbling till it assumes

just proportions. The way to freedom of thought, the way to independence,

the  way  to  individuality  is  opened.  What  the  child  could  not  have

accomplished  alone  was  a  mere  toy  with  the  help  of  another.  And  the

friendship grows ever prouder and more intimate the

  more the child loses the feelings enforced upon it. One great mystery, the

child's  eternal  question,  occupies  its  mind  more  than  most  parents,  most

persons, will believe : the question about the origin of man, the question

which is customarily answered with a childish tale about a stork (or a big tree

in heaven, a large cabbage, or a department store), a tale with which the

clever little ones make fools of their elders who go on repeating for many

years  a  story  they  had  long  ago  ceased  to  believe.  Behind  all  the  child's

curiosity there lurks the one great question : " Where do children come from

? " One will never go wrong in concluding that a child who is plaguing his

elders with a thousand stupid and clever questions is suffering from a kind ofobsession,  an  obsessive  questioning,  behind  which  lies  the  one  great  and

important question that troubles all children. On this subject the child cannot

speak with its parents. Instinctively it feels that here is a great mystery that is

being withheld from it and whose solution the parents have put off fox a

future  time.  It  is  during  childhood  friendship  and  in  connection  with  this

question that sexuality plays its first trump. It is a pity that human beings so

easily forget their own childhood, else parents would not be so blind in this

regard. In the northern psychologist's, Arne Gaborg's, best work " By Mama "

there is a wonderful scene copied direct from nature : Two little girls are

sitting on the basement

  stairs whispering to each other their latest bit of information about the

great  mystery;  gradually  it  grows  dark  and  an  inexpHcable  dread  of

something great, threatening, mysterious, fills their trembling souls ; it is that

fear which faithfully accompanies love throughout life and whose dark wing

has just barely brushed their innocent childhood.

  The child gets older and friendship changes its nature. Life and its claims

interpose their authority. Into the quiet and unselfish friendship of childhood,

into the pure and simple childish harmonies there penetrate various over- and

under-tones whose inharmonious character is not discovered until long after.

Envy, egoism, covetousness, cunning, distrust,— all these feelings steal their

way into the childhood friendship, and finally friendship degenerates into

what  Moebius  has  so  aptly  named  Phantom-practice.  Young  obstetricians

train their unskilled hands on " phantoms" (or mannikins) to fit them for the

serious requirements of their art. Something exactly like this is the conduct of

young adolescents, especially girls, who are still half-child and already half-

woman. To a girl the admiration of a girl friend takes the place of a lover's

wooing ; to be kissed by her results in a dream of being kissed by a man.

Recently  biology  has  developed  the  idea,  erroneously  attributed  to  Otto

Weininger, that every human being is a mixture of both sexes. Before puberty

the two ele-

  ments M, and F., male and female, must balance. The child is bisexually

constituted, and therefore every friendship is in a certain sense a love affair.

About  the  time  of  sexual  maturity  the  sexuaHty  of  every  individual

triumphantly  asserts  itself.  This  is  the  great  moment  when  childhood

friendship has fulfilled its mission. It is as if the child were now freeing itself

from the yoke of its own sex and entering the arena equipped for the battle of

love.  This also explains why childhood friendships so seldom are preserved

and carried over into adult life. The friendships of adults are based upon

different foundations. Now it is the thinking, reflecting, conscious being who

seeks a fellow combatant who he hopes will fully understand (and sympathise

with) him. Higher interests determine their friendships. But it is no longer so

deeply rooted as childhood friendship. It no longer requires the cooperation

of the instinctive emotions.

  Now and then one comes across persons who are always children, whom

not even the bitterest experiences can strip of the pollen linked with their

emotions. They are the only ones capable of true friendship even in their old

age. They spread friendship with the sweet smile of the child ; they do not

love for the sake of the advantages to be derived ; they do not even ask

whether they are their friends' friend. Ah! If we could be such a child again !

Or if we could but find it!

    EATING

  I was once invited to the house of a certain writer who had made a name

for himself by several very clever novels and had acquired a fortune by the

publication of a successful journal. He was now living on an estate in the

country, retired from active life, spending his days in luxurious peace. Much

too soon, as I very quickly found out. For he was in no sense old. A man

about fifty whose eyes still looked challengingly at the world. His look had in

it nothing of the asceticism of one who is tired of life. No ; here the fire of

secret passions still blazed; here one could still detect power, ambition, and

desires.

  Much in his conduct seemed puzzling to me. A stony calm, a certain

lassitude  in  his  movements,—an  enforced  pose  calculated  to  conceal  the

internal restlessness which his eyes could not help betraying.

  Only when the time to eat came he became all life. Then he stretched his

neck aloft, that he might see clearly the dish that was being brought in. His

nostrils dilated as if the sooner to inhale the delightful aroma. His mouth

made remarkable twitching movements and his tongue moved over his thin

lips with that peculiar

  (80)

  rapid movement that one may observe in a woman when she is engaged

in animated conversation with a man. He became restless, fidgetted nervously

in his chair, and followed tensely the distribution of the food by his wife, a

corpulent, energetic and almost masculine woman, who, very naturally and tohis secret distress, helped her guests first. Finally—much too late to suit him

— he received his portion. First he regarded his food with the eye of an

expert, turning it from side to side with his knife and fork. Then he cut off a

small  piece  and  rolled  it  about  in  his  mouth  with  audible  clucking  and

smacking of his tongue, let it rest on his tongue awhile, his face the meantime

assuming an expression of visionary ecstasy. It was easy to see that for him

eating had become the day's most important task. During the meal he never

stopped  talking  of  the  excellence  of  the  food,  all  the  while  smacking  his

tongue and lips, and literally expounding a system of culinary criticism.

  When  finally,  to  my  great  relief,  the  grace  after  dinner  had  been

pronounced, I hoped at last to be done with the wearying, unpleasant chatter

about eating. But this time I had really reckoned without my host.

  " What shall we serve our guests to-morrow, my dear ? " the gourmand

inquired of his sterner half.

  " To-morrow f The big white goose with the black patch.".

  " The big white goose with the black patch ! Ah ! She'll taste wonderful!

You don't know how childishly happy it makes me. Come, let me show you

the white goose with the black patch ! "

    Resistance was useless. I had to go into the poultry-yard, where my host

stopped in front of a well-fed goose. " She'll make a fine roast! I am greatly

pleased with this goose."

  No matter what subject was discussed, political, literary, or economic, the

main motif kept recurring : " I love to think of the big white goose with the

black patch ! "

  The  meaning  of  gourmandism  then  suddenly  flashed  on  me.  What

passions must this man have suppressed, how much must he have renounced,

before his craving for pleasure had found new delights in this roundabout

way! Behind this monomaniac delight in eating, thought I, there must lurk a

great secret.

  And such was indeed the case. My amiable host was really his wife's

prisoner. While he was residing in the capital he had begun to indulge in a

perversion.  His  vice  grew  on  him  to  such  an  extent  that  it  threatened  to

destroy  everything,  health,  fortune,  mind,  ambition,  personality,  spirit,

everything. There was nothing left for him to do but to tell his wife all and

implore her assistance in saving him. The virile woman soon hit on the only

remedy. He became her prisoner. They broke off all relationships that bound

them to their social group. Most of the year they spent in the  country and lived in the city only two or three winter months. The time

was spent in eating and card playing, to which fully half of the day was

devoted. He was never alone. At most he was permitted to take a short walk

in the country. His wife had charge of the family treasury, with which he had

nothing to do. Of course, this did not cure his pathological craving, but it

made gratification impossible. And gradually there began to develop in him

the pleasure for delicate dishes. In this indirect way he satisfied a part of his

sensuous craving. Thus he transformed his passion. His meals took the place

of the hours spent in the embraces of a lover. For him eating was a re-coinage

of his sexuaUty.

  Is this an exceptional case, or is this phenomenon the rule ? This is the

first question that forces itself on our attention. An answer to it would take us

into the deeps of the whole sexual problem. But let us limit ourselves for the

present only to what is essential for an answer to our immediate question.

Between hunger and love there is an endless number of associations. The

most important is this: both are opposed by one counter-impulse, namely,

disgust. Both love and hunger are desires to touch, (to incorporate or to be

incorporated with the desired object) ; disgust is the fear of doing so. Love is

accompanied with a counter-impulse, a restraining influence, which we call

shame. But this very feeling,

  shame,  is  manifested  by  certain  primitive  peoples  in  connection  with

eating. In Tahiti, says Cook, not even the members of the family eat together,

but eat seated several metres apart and with their backs to one another. The

Warua,  an  African  tribe,  conceal  their  faces  with  a  cloth  while  they  are

drinking. The Bakairi are innocent of any sense of shame in connection with

nakedness, but never eat together.

  The Viennese psychiatrist Freud, the Englishman Havelock Ellis (" The

Sexual Impulse "), and the Spanish Sociologist Solila, regard the sucking of

the  breast  by  an  infant  as  a  kind  of  sexual  act  which  creates  permanent

associations between hunger and love. And the language we speak has coined

certain turns of expression which bring these connections out unmistakably

and which have great interest for us as fossilisa-tions of primitive thought

processes and as rudiments of cannibalism. Note, for example, the following

expressions : "I could bite her " ; or, " I love the child so I could eat it up ! "

But we express even disgust, aversion and hatred in terms of eating, e.g,, " I

can't stomach the fellow," or, " he turns my stomach," " she is not to my

taste," etc.  On the other hand the names of certain dishes reveal connections with

other  emotional  complexes  than  the  pure  pleasure  of  eating.  There  is  an

everyday symbolism which we all pass by blindly. Let him who has any

interest

  in this subject read Rudolph Kleinpaul's book, " Sprache ohne Worte"

(Language without Words). This symbolism plays a much more important

role than we are wont to admit. For it alone is capable of interpreting the

puzzling names of the various delicacies on the bill of fare. We are cannibals,

for  we  eat  "  Moors  in  their  '  Jackets  '  "  (a  fine  revenge  on  the  tawny

cannibals!) " poor knights," " master of the chase," " apprentice-locksmith,"

and many more of the same kind. " Bridal roast " holds an important place in

the  menus  of  the  whole  world.  Social  inferiority  is  compensated  for  by

numerous royal dishes . . . e.g.^ steak-a-la-king, cutlet-a-la-king, chicken-a-

la-king, royal pudding, etc., etc. One who will take the trouble, as Kleinpaul

did in his '' Gastronomic Fairy-tale," to follow up these things, will discover

many remarkable links with unconscious ideas. We are really hemmed in on

every side by fairy tales. Every word we speak, every name we utter, has its

story. And the many fairy tales in which children are devoured by wolves,

witches, man-eaters, and sea-monsters, together with the tales in which so

much is said about man-eating cannibals, reveal to us a fragment of our pre-

historic past in which love and hate actually resulted in persons being eaten.

In their naivete our children betray this very clearly. When the little ones eat

maccaroni, noodles, or similar dishes, they often make believe they are eating

up somebody.

  But, " something too much of this." Let us turn our attention again to the

epicures, the little progeny of a great race. It is not difficult to divide them

into five classes according to which one of the five senses is being chiefly

gratified during the eating process. First, there are the ** Voyeurs," to use the

term so aptly coined by the French with reference to a phenomenon in the

sexual  sphere.  They  must  "  see  "  before  they  can  enjoy.  To  see  is  the

important thing with them. The dishes must be served neatly and must look

inviting.  They  are  the  admirers  of  the  many-coloured  adornments  on

patisserie, of torts, cakes, and puddings built in the shape of houses, churches,

towers,  animals,  wedding-bells,  etc.  They  reckon  their  pleasures  by  the

colour  nuances  of  their  foods.  Their  chief  delight  is  in  the  fore-pleasure

derived through the eyes. (This is clearly implied in the popular phrase " a

feast for the eyes.")  Not  quite  as  common  are  the  listeners  "  who  are  thrown  into  a  mild

ecstasy by the sizzling of a roast, the cracking of dry crumbs, and the fiz of

certain liquids." Numberless are the " smellers " whose sensitive noses drink

in the aroma of the foods as their chief delight, whereas the eating, as such, is

performed mechanically, as an unavoidable adjunct. Such persons can revel

in the memories of a luscious dish, and many of their associations are linked

with the olfactory organ. The pleasure in offensive

  odours, such as arise from certain cheeses, garlic, rarebits, and wild game

is  to  some  extent  a  perversion  nutritional  instinct  and  betrays  innate

relationships to sexual aberrations, as are unequivocally indicated by certain

popular ditties and college songs. The folk-lore of all nations teems with hints

at such things.

  An important group, the fourth, is that of the " toucher." As we know the

tongue of man is the most important of the gustatory organs, even though it

has not that primacy and importance which it has in many animals. Such "

touchers" derive their greatest pleasure from the mere touching of the food

with the tongue. They prefer smooth and slippery foods, e.g., oysters which

they can suck down, and they love to roll the food around in their mouths. It

goes  without  saying  that  these  persons  are  also  "  tasters,"  as  indeed  the

majority of eaters are. But for all that, these have their own peculiar traits;

whereas  the  feeling  of  fullness  or  satiety  is  to  many  persons  a  kind  of

discomfort, and a full stomach gives rise to a disagreeably painful sensation,

to these " touchers " a full stomach means the most delightful sensation the

day has to offer.

  Of the " gourmands " (literally " the relishers") we need not say much.

The whole world knows them ; to describe them many words and phrases

have been coined, e.g. sweet-toothed, cat-toothed, epicures, etc.

  As might have been expected, these various

  forms are often combined in one person, and your genuine gourmand eats

with  all  his  senses.  We  need  only  keep  our  eyes  open  at  a  restaurant  to

observe that most persons show some trace of epicurism. Very few resist the

temptation to follow the platter the waiter is carrying to some table. (Almost

every one likes to see what his neighbour is eating.) We may be discussing

art, politics, love, or what not, yet watch carefully how much the person

serving is taking for himself or dishing out for the others, and how little he is

leaving for us. Most of the time in these cases we are the victims of an optical

deception. Our neighbour's portion always seems bigger than ours. Hungerand envy magnify the other person's portion and minimise ours. And is it not

an  every-day  experience  that  we  order  what  our  neighbour  is  eating  ?  "

Waiter, what is that you served the man over there ? Bring me the same ! "

  How a person eats always reveals something of his hidden personaHty. In

the case of most human beings at meals the same thing happens that one may

observe at the menagerie during feeding-time: the peacefully reposing lion

becomes a beast of prey. That is why beautiful women become ugly when

they eat and lose their charm, cease to become interesting when they are seen

eating. It is not a meaningless custom that we honour distinguished persons

by  dining  them.  By  so  doing  we  create  a  situation  in  which  there  is  no

superiority and

  in which we feel ourselves at one with the great man and on a level with

him.

  Much more complicated than the psychology of the ordinary eater is that

of the gourmand, who always seems even to himself to be an exceptional

kind  of  person  and  who  has  in  unsuspected  ways  enlarged  the  sphere  of

possible pleasures. In most of these cases we shall find that they are persons

of whom life has demanded many renunciations. Just as the habitual drinker

rarely  stupifies  himself  because  of  the  pleasure  he  takes  in  drinking  but

mostly out of a desire to drown in unconsciousness a great pain, to draw the

veil over some humiliation, disillusionment, failure, or disappointment, so the

gourmand likewise compensates himself for his lost world. He has the same

right to the pleasures of life that others have. Well for him that he is capable

of securing his portion in this way !

    Inexperienced  humanitarians  long  for  the  time  when  eating  will  be

superfluous, when a few pills of concentrated albumin combined with a few

drops of some essential ferment will supply the necessary energy for ouf

mental and physical labours. What a stupid dream! If such a time ever came,

how unhappy humanity would be ! The most of mankind, truth compels me

to say, live only to eat. For them " eating " is synonymous with " life." With

the discovery of such pills the wine of life would be drawn. No ! No ! No ! If

there were no such thing

  as eating we should have to invent it to save man from despairing. Eating

enables one who has suffered shipwreck on Life's voyage to withdraw into a

sphere which once meant the greatest happiness to all human beings and still

means it to all animals. One takes refuge in the primal instincts where one is

safe and comfortable, until Mother Earth again devours and assimilates himbefore she awakes him to new life. We are all eternal links in an unending

chain of links.

  And that is the whole meaning of eating: life and death. Every bite we eat

means a quick death for myriads of living things. They must die that we may

live. And so we live by death until our death gives life to others.

  It's no mere accident that Don Juan is summoned from the feast to his

death.

  ARE WE ALL MEGALOMANIACS ?

  There is no sharp dividing line between health and disease. One shades

off into the other by imperceptible gradations. Disease grows out of health

organically. There are a thousand transitions from the one to the other ; a

thousand  fine  threads  link  them  together,  and  often  not  even  the  best

physicians  can  determine  where  health  ceases  and  disease  begins.  As

Feuchtersleben says, there is no lyric leap in the epic of life. Nor do delusions

make  their  entry  unheralded  into  a  well  ordered  mental  life.  Delusions

slumber in all of us and wait for their prey. The quiet normal being is just as

subject to them as the raving maniac with rolling congested eyes. We need

only open our eyes understandingly upon the bustle and tumult of life to be

able to exclaim with Hans Sachs : " Madness ! Everywhere madness ! "

  Every  form  of  insanity,  one  may  say,  has  a  physiological  prototype.

Melancholia takes for its model the little depressive attacks of everyday life ;

mania has its prototype in the unrestrained enthusiasm of the baseball " fan " ;

and even the various forms of paranoia, the true insanity, have their typical

representatives

  (91)

  92 ARE WE ALL MEGALOMANIACS ?

  among  normal  persons.  To  bring  out  this  kinship  we  need  no  better

example than that offered by the delusion of greatness. This delusion is so

bound up with the requirements of the human psyche, so organically knit

together  with  the  ego,  that  it  constitutes  an  indispensable  element  of  our

ethical consciousness. Every one of us thinks himself the wisest, best, most

conscientious, and so forth. Each one thinks himself indispensable. It is this

delusional greatness of the normal person which makes life tolerable under

even  the  hardest  conditions.  It  gives  us  the  strength  to  bear  all  our

humiliations, disappointments, failures, and the " whips and scorns of time."

  Of course we are very careful to conceal this delusional greatness from

the rest of the world. We all have our secret chapels in which we offer dailyprayers and into which no one, not even our nearest, is permitted even to

glance. In this chapel our idol sits enthroned, the prototype of majesty, " our

ego," before whom we bend our knees in humble supplication. But out there

— in the world without—it is different. There we play the role of the humble,

respectful, subservient fellow. We swear allegiance to alien gods and mock

our ego and its powers.

  But  sometimes  the  delusional  greatness  breaks  out  with  pathological

elementary force. We ought to keep our light under a bushel, trudge along

with the multitude, day in, day out. Then all would be well. But destiny must

not

  ARE WE ALL MEGALOMANIACS.? 93

  lift  us  to  heights  where  our  behaviour  cannot  escape  observation  and

every one of our thoughts will be deduced from our actions. Success must not

narcotise us to the extent of depriving us of that vestige of self-criticism

which  we  so  imperatively  need  in  whatever  situation  life  may  place  us.

Success does not pacify the roaring of our megalomania. Success goads it

with a thousand lashes of the whip so that it becomes restive and escapes

from  the  security  of  the  preserves  of  the  soul.  Is  this  still  a  healthy

manifestation ? Or are we already in the realm of the pathological ? Is it the

first delusion or the ultimate wisdom ?

  The delusion of greatness penetrates whole classes of humanity, infecting

them like a subtle poison against which there is almost no immunity. We

have only to refer to the " affairs " of all kinds of artists of the first, second,

and third rank. The delusional greatness of the artist usually appears along

with  the  belittling  mania  displayed  by  his  confreres,  his  immediate

competitors. The higher we esteem ourselves, the more we depreciate our

fellow climbers. That is the reason why the artist, drunk with his own ego,

loses the power to be just, to measure the work of others by any but an

egocentric standard. Should any one venture to show this megalomania its

true  image  in  the  calm  mirror  of  justice,  he  would  be  characterized  a

malicious  enemy.  In  the  struggle  to  maintain  the  hypertrophied  ego-

consciousness the delusion

  94 ARE WE ALL MEGALOMANIACS ?

  of greatness is assisted by a willing servant: the delusion of persecution.

  Along with the artist class there are many other vocations which to a

certain extent gratify the delusion of greatness. In some callings this is a kind

of ideaHstic compensation for the poor material returns. The megalomania ofthe Prussian officer, or the American professor (w^ho are the butts of even

the so-called harmless comic-journals) is an example. A close second to this

is  the  megalomania  of  certain  exclusive  student  organizations,  patriotic

megalomania, etc.

  We  can  no  longer  escape  a  generalization.  We  note  that  delusional

greatness is a compensation for some privation or hardship. This is especially

illuminating with reference to that patriotic delusional greatness which has

nothing whatever to do with a wholly justifiable self-consciousness. The self-

consciousness  of  the  Briton  emanates  from  his  proud  history  and  the

imposing power of his nation. But we note that it is especially small nations,

who ought in reason to be very modest, who are guilty of a tremendous self-

overestimation. And they do not scruple to invent an illustrious past which is

calculated  to  lend  some  show  of  ^historic*  justification  for  the  national

delusion. Exempla sunt odiosa.

  This mechanism teaches us how to estimate folk-psychology. A people

behaves like an individual. So that our findings with reference

  ARE WE ALL MEGALOMANIACS ? 95

  to the psychology of individuals may be applied to whole races, and vice

versa.

  And here we note that the individual's delusional greatness invariably has

one  and  the  same  root:  it  is  an  over-compensation  for  an  oppressive

diminution  of  the  ego-consciousness.  The  daily  life  about  us  offers

innumerable proofs of this assertion. Persons particularly prone to delusional

greatness are those who suffer from certain defects and who in youth had

been  subjected  to  painful,  derisive,  scornful,  or  depreciative  criticism.

Amongst these we find especially the halt, the lame, the partly blind, the

stutterer, the humpbacked, the red-haired, the sick, etc.—in short, persons

with some stigma. By the mechanism of overcompensation such individuals

may manifest inordinately ambitious natures. Is it accidental that so many

celebrated generals—Caesar, Napoleon, Prince Eugene, Radetzky—were of

small stature ? Was it not precisely this small-ness of stature which furnished

the  driving  power  that  made  them  "  great  "  ?  Instead  of  looking  for  the

essence of genius in peculiar bodily proportions (which Popper finds to be in

a long trunk and short legs !) it would prove a more gratifying task to ferret

out those primary factors that have brought about an unusual expenditure of

psychic energy in one particular direction.

  A  very  brilliant  and  suggestive  hypothesis  (advanced  by  Dr.  AlfredAdler) attempts to

  96 ARE WE ALL MEGALOMANIACS ?

  account for all superior human gifts as an overcompensation for some

original " inferiority." Even if this principle may not prove true in every case,

it can be demonstrated to have played a part in the development of many a

case of superior merit in some field of mental endeavour. We are all familiar

with largely authentic anecdotes about distinguished scholars, who have just

managed to squeeze through in their final professional examinations. In their

case,  too,  by  over-compensation  a  conviction  of  their  inferiority  brought

about  a  heightened  interest  in  their  work  and  this  interest  then  became

permanently fixed.

  Unawares  we  have  wandered  from  the  delusional  greatness  to  true

greatness. But who will presume to decide what is true greatness and what

delusion  ?  How  many  discoverers  and  inventors  were  ridiculed  and  their

imposing  greatness  stigmatized  as  delusion,  and  how  many  intellectual

ciphers rejoiced in the applause and the worship of their contemporaries! It is

this fact which encourages a megalomaniac to permit the criticism of his

contemporaries to " fly by him as the idle wind which he respects not." If it is

not true that all greatness is ignored, the opposite is true : every ignored

person  is  one  of  the  great  ones.  At  least  he  is  so  to  himself.  Delusional

greatness unites both criticism and recognition in a single tremendous ego-

complex.

  The roots of this delusion, as of all purely

  ARE WE ALL MEGALOMANIACS ? 97

  psychic maladies, are infantile. There was a time in the lives of all of us

when we were the victims of a genuinely pathological delusion of greatness.

In the days of our childhood we were consumed by a longing to be " big." At

first it was only the desire to be a " big man," to be grown up. A little later

and our desires fluttered across the sea of our thoughts Hke seagulls or flew

like  falcons  into  the  unknown  vast.  We  were  kings,  ministers  of  state,

princes, ambassadors, generals, trapeze artists, conductors, firemen, or even

butlers.

  And yet we are aU surprised when a butler plants himself squarely before

the  door  and  assumes  the  easy  port  of  a  person  of  some  standing  and

identifies himself with the master of the house and graciously dispenses his

domestic favours. Are we then, much better, more sensible, or freer from

prejudice ? We too stand before the doors of our desires and act as if webelieved that they are realities which we are obliged to guard.

    RUNNING AWAY FROM THE HOME

  Once  more  the  physician  felt  the  young  woman's  pulse.  *'  But  it's

impossible  :  you  must  not  go  out  to-day  ;  you  are  running  the  risk  of  a

relapse. You stay in your beautiful home that you have furnished so cosily, so

comfortably, and with such good taste. I have no objection, however, to your

inviting a few friends, having a little music, chatting, gossiping, but—stay

home ! "

  The  pretty  self-willed  woman  pursed  her  lips  at  this  and  though  her

grimace was very becoming to her it seemed a little to vex her old doctor who

had known her from her infancy. Somewhat irritated, he continued :—

  " I don't just know what you mean by the moue. Must I point out the

dangers of exposing yourself to a ' fresh cold ' ? Do you insist on making a

Sunday of every week-day ? First, it's a cafe, then, a restaurant! From a hot

room into the cold, moist, windy atmosphere of a winter night ! "

  "  But  staying  home  is  so  stale  and  unprofitable,"  wailed  the  young

woman. " Home ! I'm home all the live-long week ! Sunday, one wants a

change ! I want to see human beings ! You are very disagreeable to day,

Doctor ! "

  {98^

    RUNNING AWAY FROM HOME 99

  The old doctor gently patted the young woman's cheek. " Still the same

self-willed, obstinate child that will butt it's head against the wall. Ah, you

seem to have forgotten how nice and sociable your parents' home was. Those

never-to-be-forgotten Sundays! How we used to congregate there, a group of

intimates —the young ones chatting and singing while the older ones played

cards,—and every Sunday was a real holiday 1 And when things got a little

more lively, then young and old romped together. Do you remember ? Now

and then someone would read us a new poem or the latest novel. How we did

enjoy those Sundays ! And how unforced and unconventional it all was ! We

would get our cup of tea or coffee and were as happy as happy as could be.

But the things that are going on now seem to me, in my role as physician, to

be a kind of neurosis, a something that I should call * the flight from home ! '

"

  " But, my dear doctor, must it be a neurosis ? Is it necessary to brand

everything as a disease ? "

  " But it is a disease and its character as such is very clearly established bythis one element : its compulsive character. The flight from the home is a

compulsive idea, that is, an idea against which logic, persuasion, and appeals

are of no avail."

  " I think you are going too far," replied the young woman. " If I insist

upon going to the caf6 to-day, I do it not because I do not like my home;

  100 RUNNING AWAY FROM HOME

  no, I do it because at the caf6 I get a kind of stimulation which I do not

get at home. There I can look through various journals and papers that I

cannot afford to have at home. I get a chance to see friends and acquaintances

whom I could not receive at home so often. And the main thing, at any rate

for a young woman who still wishes to please—and that, I am sure you won't

resent, you dear old psychologist!— the main thing is that there I see new

people and—am seen by them. I know that in return I must put up with a few

unpleasantnesses.  Yes,  there  is  the  stuffy  and  smoky  atmosphere,  the

continual din and noise, and so forth. But I really do think that we moderns

need these things. We are not born to rest."

  The physician shook his head.

  " No! Never! You will pardon, I hope, my telling you that yours is a very

superficial psychology and does not go down to the heart of the problem. To

the  modern  civilized  human  being  his  home  seems  to  be  an  extremely

disagreeable  place.  All  his  life  he  is  fleeing  from  his  home,  from  his

environment,  and—yes  !—  even  from  himself.  An  inner  restlessness,  a

discontent that cannot be quenched, a nervous stress permeates the people of

our  time.  What  they  possess  seems  to  them  stale,  worthless.  What  they

pursued madly disappoints them when they have attained it. They crave for

change because they do not know how to make the best use of the present and

of their possessions.

    RUNNING AWAY FROM HOME loi

  How else can we understand the phenomenon that the whole world is

happy to get away from the home and those who are incapable of running

away long to do so ? For, I am sure if you will give it careful thought you will

confess that you call ' experience ' only what happens to you away from

home. The days at home don't count. Am I right ? "

  " Only partly so, my dear doctor. It does not tally with the facts—because

nothing  can  be  experienced  at  home.  And  I  would  be  only  too  happy  to

receive  my  friends  here  daily,  if  it  were  possible.  Don't  you  know  that

servants would rebel at it ? That they want to have their day off ? That I mustnot expect them to do such work as waiting on my guests every Sunday ?

Why even on week days the invitation of guests causes a little rebellion in the

ordinary household ! "

  " And why must there be invitations ? Must your visitors always be guests

? Just look at Paris ! There you may drop in on any of your acquaintances

after 9 p.m. You may or you may not get a cup of tea. You chat a few hours

and then depart. With us that's impossible, because our so-called " Teas "

have assumed proportions which were formerly unknown. You invite one to

come and have tea with you but instead of that you serve a luncheon and

make a veritable banquet of it, going to a lot of trouble and expense, a course

which must have bad consequences."

  I02 RUNNING AWAY FROM HOME

  " Do you know, doctor, I think you are a magician! Its only conventional

politeness that makes us receive our guests cordially. But you must serve

your friends something when you invite them for a little chat, mustn't you ? "

  " There you are again! How beautifully you chatter away so superficially!

No, my dear ! Nowadays one no longer invites friends to spend a pleasant

time with them, but to show them a new gown or to impress them with the

new furnishings. The main thing is to poison the friend's peace of mind. If the

guest's face betrays all the colours of envy then the hostess has attained the

acme of delight. One might almost say that their dissatisfaction with their lot

in life drives human beings on to stir up discontent in the hearts of others.

This sowing of dragon's teeth bears evil fruit. For at the next ' tea' the friend

has  a  more  beautiful  dress,  perhaps  some  other  new  sensation,  and  her

husband's achievements and income mount to supernatural heights, if one is

to believe the hostess' eloquent speeches. Finally, there is no possibility of

out-trumping her and there is nothing left to do but, in a more moderate tone,

to fight out the rivalry on a neutral soil. The restaurant or the cafe is this

neutral soil."

  " And what are your objections to this neutral soil ? " , ,

  " My objections ? The people lose the greatest pleasure that they could

derive from one another.

    RUNNING AWAY FROM HOME 103

  At home it must happen now and then that the walls which separate the

inmates from one another fall, the wrappings that encase our inmost being

burst, and soul speaks to soul. At home it is possible to devote the time to the

nobler delights that life has to offer. At one time there can be—as there wasin  your  own  parents'  home—  a  reading,  on  another  occasion  singing  or

music. And would it be such a terrible misfortune to spend one's holiday with

one's family, to be one with them, reviewing the week that is past or playing

with the children and being a child again ? Don't you see that you are giving

up the gold of home-life and pursuing the fool's-gold of pleasure outside the

home ? You do see it, you know I am right, and a little voice within you

implores and pleads : * Stay home ! Stay home ! here you are safe and

comfortable ! ' But another power, a power that is stronger than you, drives

you out, rushes you away from peace and quiet to restlessness, and whirls

you about. And this whirl, you call * life.' What have these empty pleasures

to offer us ? What inspiration for the work-a-day life do they leave behind ?

Is this anything less than just simply kilHng the hours ? I don't want to spin

out the old stuff about the dangers of pleasures, getting over-heated, catching

cold, overtaxing one's nervous energies, losing one's sleep, etc. As to these

things, I must admit, there is a great deal of exaggeration. One ought not to

fly from pleasures. But they ought to serve as inspiring  104 RUNNING AWAY FROM HOME

    exceptions to break, as it were, the day, just as a trip does."

  " But, my dear doctor, now you've caught yourself in your own springe. Is

not a trip a flight from the home ? "

  The young woman laughed hilariously. But the doctor—now that he had

assumed  the  role  of  preacher—did  not  permit  himself  to  be  put  off  or

confused.

  " Of course, the ordinary journey does belong to my theme. A trip may, in

fact, constitute the crisis in our neurosis. A crisis that we must all go through,

for we all—I am sorry to say, I too—suffer from this compulsive idea. As

after every other crisis the invalid is for a time restored to health, so is it also

after a trip. But only for a short time. A few weeks—and the compulsive idea

is again manifest and the flight from the home begins again."

  " Come, now, doctor ! " interrupted the convalescent, " travelling is a

necessity. As you so aptly said, we want to break the monotony of the day—

to get out of the customary environment."

  " That's just what I want to designate as the chief symptom of the neurosis

of our time. Everyone wants to get away from the customary environments.

Everybody  makes  attempts  at  flight.  Whether  they  succeed  depends  upon

other social factors. Why is the customary environment repugnant to you ? "

  " Because I crave a change. I do not know

    RUNNING AWAY FROM HOME 105

  why. But I have an instinctive longing for it." " There you have it, my

dear.  It's  just  as  I  said  :  It's  a  compulsive  idea.  The  flight  from  one's

environment, from one's home, from one's furniture, is the same as the flight

from one's house. To me every piece of furniture that I have used a long time

has become so dear and so much a part of myself that I do not like to give

them away and can only with difficulty part with them. And if I were to come

into  possession  of  a  vast  fortune  to-day  I  cQuld  not  renounce  these  dear

associates  to  whom  I  am  bound  by  so  many  memories.  With  all  their

shortcomings and modesty they are a thousand times dearer to me than the

most beautiful English or secessionist furnishings. I'll confess that in these

matters I am not at all modern. For the moderns are glad when they can

change  something,  and  so  they  change  their  furniture,  their  carpets,  their

pictures, etc. About every ten years there is a change in the fashions and your

housewife cannot bear not to be in style. One day you enter her house and

you find new rooms. And just as the furnishings in the house are changedfrom time to time, so the residence too must be changed frequently—in fact,

everything  that  can  be  changed  is  changed:  The  servants,  the  family

phsyician, the music teacher, and, where it is possible, the husband and even

the wife."

  The young woman reflected a little. " There is much truth in what you

say. It is in fact a

  io6 RUNNING AWAY FROM HOME

    tremendous flight that we see enacted everywhere about us, a flight from

oneself and from one's environment. If I were to judge by my own feelings I

should say that this fleeing has its origin in our life's needs. We woman all

have a large ' Nora' element in us and are waiting for the ' miracle.' Inasmuch

as we cannot find it at home we look for it elsewhere. Believe me, doctor,

most women do not fall because of sensual appetites. No! they fall because

they crave for some experience. We experience too little. The monotony of

the days asphyxiates us. And this great whirl of life, this senseless running

after a change—as you call it—is only because our hearts are discontented,

because our spirits are wrecked by the monotony and insipidity of our lives.

Do you think that it will ever be different ? "

  " Why not, pray ? Some day a great physician must arise, an apostle of

human love, whose voice will pierce the whirl and who will be capable of

opening man's stupid eyes : A new religion would do it, a religion that would

satisfy all of humanity's longings, a religion of work and the joy of life. Our

time is ripe for a Messiah. Whether he will come ."

  " Ah, he has come," said the charming young woman, her face beaming.

** For me you are the Messiah of domesticity ! You have cured me of my

flight neurosis. I shall stay home to-day, and as often as I can do so."

  The old doctor took his leave with animated

    RUNNING AWAY FROM HOME 107

  steps. With the power of his words he had once again reformed a human

being.

  But his joy was short-Hved. That afternoon, as he walked by a cafe on the

main thoroughfare his eyes fell on a vivacious group within. And there he

saw his recalcitrant patient who had evidently gone out only to get a chance

to  discuss  thoroughly  with  her  friends  the  theme:  "  The  flight  from  the

house."

    DEAD-HEADS

  "  Are  there  any  people  who  still  pay  for  tickets?"  I  was  asked  in  allseriousness by a man, who, as a result of his numerous connections, had been

able to develop the art of getting passes to its utmost possibilities.

  Ridiculous though the question may sound to some, there is, nevertheless,

something  very  profound  in  it.  The  pursuit  after  passes  is  in  our  day  a

favourite  "  sport  "  of  residents  of  large  cities.  To  most  such  people  a

journalist or a writer is not an artist who laboriously strives to give adequate

expression to his thoughts, who has to listen to the secret voices within his

breast and to translate them into the language of every day. No, in their mind

a writer is the Croesus of passes. He only sits in front of his desk, as there

accumulate before him green, blue, and red tickets, the magic keys that open

the doors to all the temples of art without having to go to the trouble of

digging into his money bag and experiencing the pleasure of paying out his

shining coins. And they take it ill of the Croesus that he is so niggardly as to

guard his treasures so greedily and not make everybody he comes in contact

with happy by distributing the little papers. For to them getting a pass is

considered

  {i»8)

  a great piece of good fortune, almost like drawing a grand small prize in a

lottery.  It  enables  one  to  temporarily  enjoy  the  greatest  sensation  in  life:

pleasure without cost. That is, it should so enable one.

  With a pass one gets everything,—the respect of the upper classes, the

right to be rude and the enforcement of courtesy. If it were possible to say of

certain young women that for a ride they would part with their honour, then

one might aptly vary the phrase and say : for a pass, with everything.

  There are human beings, persons with so-called " good connections," who

lead a wonderful life with the aid of passes. The physician who is at their

beck  and  call  throughout  the  year  is  compensated  for  his  efforts  by  the

presentation from time to time of a box or a pair of seats for the theatre. So,

too, the lawyer. The Cerberus rage of the most terrifying of all apartment-

house superintendents melts into the gentlest humility at the prospect of a

pass.  We  expect  a  thousand  little  favours  from  our  fellow-citizens  who

assume the obligation to render these favours by the acceptance of a pass.

  There are probably only very few persons who feel any shame on going

on a trip with a pass. These exceptional beings have not yet discovered that

nowadays it is only the person who pays who is looked down upon. Every

one takes his hat off to the possessor of a pass. The train conductor makes a

respectful bow  no DEAD-HEADS

  because he does not know whether the " deadhead " is an officer of the

company  or  some  other  "  big  gun."  The  ticket  collector  does  the  same

because experience has taught him that the dead-head usually overcomes by a

treat the social inferiority associated with " enjoyment without payment." In

short, a pass invests its possessor with the mysterious air of a great power and

weaves  about  his  head  a  halo  which  lifts  him  above  the  misers  plebs

contribuens.

  But you must not think that the possessor of passes constitutes that part of

the  public  that  is  particularly  grateful  for  and  appreciative  of  the  artistic

offerings. On the contrary! Artistic enjoyment in the theatre requires a certain

capacity for illusion, and the purchase of a ticket exercises a considerable

influence  on  this  capacity.  For  one  who  has  dearly  paid  for  his  seat  has

imposed the moral obligation upon himself to be entertained.

  Down in his subliminal self there dwell forces that may be said to have

been  lessoned  to  applaud.  The  higher  the  price,  the  more  painfully  the

pleasure was purchased, the greater is the willingness to be carried away by

the work of art and the artists. The poor student who has stood for hours in

front  of  the  opera  house  and  been  lucky  enough  to  secure  admission  to

standing room in the gallery will have a better time than his rich colleague

down in the orchestra, and a very much better time than the envied possessor

of a free seat. For his capacity for

  illusion  has  been  tremendously  heightened.  He  expects  a  reward

commensurate with the trouble he went to and the money he sacrificed. His

tension being much higher, the relaxation of that tension must yield him a

much greater quantity of pleasure. The greater the restraints that one has to

overcome the greater the pleasure in having succeeded in overcoming them.

  The necessity for illusion is absent in the possessor of a pass. There is

nothing to make it incumbent on him to be entertained ; he has not paid

anything. He can even leave the performance before it is concluded if it does

not please him. He is more sceptical, more critical, and less grateful.

  Any dramatist who at a premUre would fill the theatre with his good

friends by giving them passes would have little knowledge of human nature ;

certain  failure  would  await  him.  Not  only  because  these  so-called  good

friends,  in  obedience  to  their  unconscious  envy,  frankly  join  the  enemy's

ranks, but because the possessors of passes involuntarily get into the psychic

condition which is characteristic of " deadheads," viz : indifferent criticalsmugness and a diminished capacity for illusion.

  I know of a striking example of this that came under my own observation.

One of my friends, a young playwright, invited his tailor and his wife to go to

his premiere, and not to be backward in expressing their approval. He had

distributed a sufficiently large number of friends

  in  the  orchestra,  but  the  gallery  had  not  been  provided  for.  He  had,

naturally, also sent two tickets to one of his competitors. It so chanced that I

was in the thick of it, because I was interested in seeing how the simple

public would receive the piece. I sat right behind the doughty tailor couple,

who, of course, did not know me. Several times during the performance we

almost  came  to  blows.  The  married  couple  hissed  with  might  and  main,

whereas I applauded with all my power. We exchanged angry words and

otherwise acted in a manner characteristic of such a situation and of such a

youthful temper as mine then was. The play was a failure. Later we discussed

the reason for this failure. One said that the play was not deep enough for the

enlightened public. I challenged this contention, and referred to the simple

people who sat in front of me and whose names and station I had discovered

from some neighbours. My friend would not believe me at first until I had

convinced him by a detailed description of the couple that the tailor who had

for so many years made his clothes had felt it incumbent on him to repay the

author's gift of a pass by contributing to the failure of his play. To be under

obligations always oppresses us. We have the instinctive impulse to disregard

them. A pass is an obligation to acknowledge the excellence of the offered

entertainment, to confirm that it is worth the price of admission. In addition

to the absence of a need for illusion

  from  material  considerations  we  have  to  reckon  with  the  impulse  to

disregard this obligation. These two psychic factors serve to bring about in

the heart of the possessor of a pass the defence reaction that I have previously

described.

    Notwithstanding  this,  the  craving  for  passes,  which  formerly  was  the

privilege of the few exceptional personages, keeps growing more and more,

infecting other levels of society, and would easily become a serious menace

to the directorate of the theatres if these had not hit upon an adequate remedy

in distributing passes on the homoepathic principle. They fight the " pass with

the pass." They distribute passes and reduced rate tickets very lavishly for the

days on which they know the receipts will be poor and for plays which no

longer draw large audiences. The exaction of a small fee on the presentationof the coupon serves to cover part of the running expenses ; the house is filled

and the many's fire for passes is quenched. On the following days the people

are much more willing to buy their tickets because they think that they can

afford  to  be  so  extravagant,  inasmuch  as  they  had  seen  one  or  more

performances  free  or  practically  so,  and  are  swayed  by  the  unconscious

instinct that a purchased pleasure is sure to prove more delightful.

  One would have to be a second limping Mephisto to be able to follow the

invisible stream of passes in a large metropolis. The romance of a pass is still

to be written. It would

  yield us an insight into the psychology of modem man that would be

second to none. It would prove that one of the most important impulses of our

time is the desire not to have to work for one's pleasures. I say " not to work

for one's pleasures " rather than " not to pay for one's pleasures," because

money  always  means  an  equivalent  for  our  work.  The  most  industrious

persons are in reality those who are most averse to work. For behind their

zeal to accummulate money there is the burning desire to hoard up as much

as will ensure an income sufficient to purchase enjoyment without additional

work. In the language of every day this would be : a care-free old age. But, in

sooth, worry is the main source of our pleasures. Were there no cares the

variegated colours of the spectrum that constitute the light of life would be

replaced by dull monotonous grays that resemble each other as closely as the

two links that unite the two ends of a chain converting it into a whole. The

pursuit  after  passes  is  only  a  small  fragment  of  that  mad  pursuit  after  "

pleasure without work " that is being enacted all around us. I have gone into

the subject so minutely only because it is a typical example of mankind's

stupid beginning to free itself from the iron bonds of material dependence.

For the more free we think ourselves, the more enslaved we really are.

    IDENTIFICATION

  I know a man who suffered a great deal from his wife's moods. No matter

how much he tried he could never please her. If he was happy and contented

she called him " Mr. Frivolous " and would say what a fine figure he'd cut in

a Punch and Judy show ; if, on the contrary, cares troubled him and his face

betrayed his anxiety, she called him " Old Grouch " and railed at him for

making her Hfe bitter. If he wanted to go to the theatre, she thought they

ought to stay home ; if he longed for the peace of the home, she egged him on

to take part in all sorts of senseless pastimes. Is it any wonder that the poor

man became " nervous " ? that he lost his peace of mind and his hithertoimperturbable good humour ?

  In those painful days his comfort was his quiet daughter who seemed to

be in all respects the opposite of her moody mother. He sought sanctuary

with her, and over and over again she had to listen to his cries for peace.

  Finally  his  nervous  condition  got  so  bad  that  a  physician  had  to  be

consulted. The physician being fully aware of the patient's domestic relations

did not have to consider very long and ordered the sick man to take a trip.

More

  ("5)

  easily prescribed than done. For our patient had one very bad habit : he

could not be alone. It was a cruel punishment for him to have to look after his

small daily wants away from home. What was he to do ? His wife would

gladly have gone along with him. But there were numerous objections to that.

Besides,  the  wise  physician  would  not  hear  of  it.  In  this  quandary  the

distressed  man  thought  of  his  gentle,  affectionate,  young  daughter.

Everybody rejoiced at this happy solution ; the anxious physician, the jealous

wife, and, not least, the sensible daughter who had not yet seen anything of

the world and whose secret dreams of youth had been disturbed by the erratic

educational methods of her mother, in which exaggerated love and pitiless

sternness alternated.

  Great  excitement  marked  the  time  for  departure.  Mother  changed  her

plans ten times over. First she wanted to drop everything and accompany her

husband ; then she wanted to induce the unhappy husband to give up the trip,

and so on. Finally the time for departure arrived. They were on the platform

at the station and were saying the last good-byes. Mother had an unlimited

number of things to say and suggestions to make. Then the conductor gave

the last warning and there was no time to lose. Through the little window the

happy father and the still happier daughter looked out on the source of their

woes who had been suddenly converted into an inexhaustible

  fountain of tears. Was she so grieved because the objects upon whom she

was wont to project the discontent of her unresting heart were gone ? With a

sudden movement she wiped away her tears and called after her daughter in

stentorian  tones  :  "  Freda,  now  you'll  take  the  place  of  your  mother  !

Remember that! "—What else she said was lost in the din of the moving train

whose  shrill  whistle  drowned  the  asthmatic  woman's  commanding  tones.

During the next few seconds they waved their last greetings and then the

scene so painful to all was over.  Father and daughter looked at each other, their faces beaming. For a little

while, at any rate, they would be free and have nothing else to do but to enjoy

life. The mother's last words rang in their ears. Involuntarily the man smiled

and remarked tenderly to his daughter : " Well—I shall be curious to see how

my little sunshine will take her mother's place." The little one looked at her

father seriously and replied : " Papa, I shall try to do so to the best of my

power, surely." And deep within her she rejoiced at the thought that strangers

might think her really the young wife of this fine-looking man.

  After a few minutes Freda began to complain that it was getting very

cold. " There is a draught! It's terribly cold! " The anxious father at once

closed the window. After a little while she complained that the compartment

was unbearably stuffy. Why had not the

  conductor assigned them a more spacious one ? Had papa given him a tip

? She had been told by a friend who had just returned from a wedding trip in

Italy that conductors are respectful and accommodating only to those who

give liberal tips. She was not so inexperienced as a certain papa seemed to

think. If he gave the man the tip they would surely be transferred to a more

comfortable car. Somewhat irritated, the father complied with his daughter's

wish. After considerable trouble they were transferred from their small cosy

compartment in which they could sit alone, to a large one into which a stout

elderly  gentleman  entered  at  the  next  station  and  plumped  himself  down

beside them. Freda had an insurmountable repugnance to fat old gentlemen.

She reproached her father; he had not given the conductor a large enough tip.

  Why waste words ? After a few hours the poor man saw only too clearly

that his daughter was bent on taking her mother's place in the true sense of

the word. She pestered him with her moods and gave him not a minute's rest.

He tried to console himself with the thought that Freda was not herself owing

to the excitement of the last few days, and that she would soon be herself

again. Vain hope! The girl was as if transformed. From a quiet, amiable child,

she  had  become  a  moody,  fractious  torment.  The  trip  which  had  been

intended as a cure became an unmitigable torture. For at home

  he knew how to adapt himself quietly to his wife's tyranny. But here,

away  from  home,  he  was  constantly  getting  into  all  sorts  of  unpleasant

situations. Finally, he pretended to be too sick to continue the trip and after a

few days they returned home.

  I have narrated this tragic-comical history in such detail because it makes

the meaning of " Identification" clearer than any definition could. What hadhappened to the young girl to transform her so quickly ? Her mother had

enjoined her to take her place. She had to some extent taken upon herself her

mother's duties. She identified herself with her mother. She played the role of

mother exactly as she had for years seen it played at home, though, in secret,

she had disapproved of her mother's conduct. This identification nullified her

own personality and replaced it with another.

  This is a phenomenon that takes the most suprising forms among the

victims of hysteria. But it would be erroneous to think that it occurs only

among  hysterics.  Almost  all  persons,  especially  women,  succumb  to  the

seductive power of identification. I wonder if it is because of this that all of

us secretly bear a measure of neurosis with us throughout life ! At home,

Freda might have concealed her hysteria as a kind of reaction to her mother's

conduct. It was only when she had to play the mother's role that the neurosis,

in consequence of an unconscious affect, became manifest. It is

  thus  that  epidemics  of  hysteria  break  out.  If  a  neurosis  is  capable  of

transferring an affect, it can arouse another, slumbering neurosis. For to-day

we know, from Bleuler's studies, that suggestion is not the transference of an

idea but an affect.

  The  phenomenon  that  the  above  case  brings  out  so  clearly  and

unequivocally  may  be  seen  in  everyday  life  behind  various  motives,

catchwords, tendencies, and strivings. Notwithstanding these disguises the

eye of the investigator will not find it difficult to recognize the mechanism of

identification and the element of the neurosis in the normal person. But if this

is so everybody is neurotic. Let us not get excited about this conclusion.

There is no such thing as a normal human being. What we call disease and

abnormality  are  only  the  highest  peaks  of  a  mountain  chain  that  rises  to

various heights above the sea-level of the normal. Every person has his weak

spots, physical and psychical. We can reckon only relative heights, never the

absolute, inasmuch as a standard of the normal is really never at our disposal.

  There  is  no  difficulty  in  finding  illustrations  of  the  process  of

identification in the so-called normal. Take, for example, the valet of the

nobleman. How thoroughly imbued he is with his master's pride of ancestry!

With what imperturbable scorn he looks down upon the common rabble ! It

never enters his mind that he is one of the masses. He has no ghmmer of

    appreciation  of  the  absurdity  of  his  airs,  because  the  mechanism  of

identification has clouded his intellect and an emotion has strangled his logic.

He even gives verbal expression to his feeling of identification. He seems tohave  become  fused  into  a  unity  with  his  master,  for  he  submerges  his

individuality, his ego, and on every occasion speaks of " we" and " us."

  " We are starting south to-day," he announces to the neighbours. " We

shall stay home," he declares oracularly to visitors.

  We see the same thing in the school child. It takes a little time before he

can free himself from the influence of his teachers and of the school. Not

infrequently  he  cannot  do  so  owing  to  the  permanent  fixation  of  his

identification with them. Horace's " Jurare in verba magistri" (i.e., to echo the

sentiments  of  one's  master)  is  nothing  but  the  result  of  a  completely

successful identification. One who cannot free himself from this affect and

substitute  for  the  confident  "  we"  of  the  school  the  uncertain  "  I"  of

individuality can never hope to become an independent personality.

  Some feehngs, such as so-called party spirit, pride of ancestry, solidarity,

national pride, etc., are only identifications. The German identifies himself

with his great national heroes, e.g., Schiller, Goethe, Bismarck, etc., and is

then as proud of being a German as if that implied that he had himself been

responsible for their great achievements. The well-known and almost

    ridiculous  pride  of  the  Englishman  is  only  the  product  of  an  extreme

identification. But, as a matter of fact, the British Government also identifies

itself with the humblest of its subjects and protects him in whatever corner of

the  earth  he  may  happen  to  be.  The  officer  who  takes  great  pride  in  his

regiment, the pupil who is all enthusiasm for the colours of his school, and

the ordinary citizen who can see no element of goodness in any but his own

political party, all bear witness to the great power of identification. It is in this

way that socialism has become such a tremendous power. Not because it

furnishes the proletariat with a dream of a happier future, not because it has

supplied it with a religion. (The Church supplies this want better.) No! Only

because it has enabled the individual, the weak one, to. feel himself one with

a tremendous majority, to identify himself with an organization that is world-

wide.  Socialism  is  the  triumph  of  identification  and  the  death-knell  of

individualism. The most beautiful instance of identification is furnished by

love. One who is in love has completely identified himself with the beloved. "

Two souls with but a single thought; two hearts that beat as one." Has not

Riickert  designated  his  beloved  as  his  "  better  self  "  ?  (Or  Kletke's  very

popular song: " What is thine and what is mine ? ") A lover almost literally

transfers his whole ego into another's soul. He projects all his yearning upon

that  one object. He is oblivious of his mistakes until the identification is over.

Then the intoxicating dream, too, is over.

  With the aid of identification a lover can transfer his passion upon any

object that stands in some sort of relationship to his beloved. It is in this way

that fetichism sometimes results. That is why love for a woman so easily

leads to a love for her kindred. There is a Slavic proverb which says : " He

who loves his wife also cherishes his mother-in-law." And, on the other hand,

a discontent with one's wife is often concealed behind a stubborn hatred of

her relatives. In many instances the feeling against mothers-in-law cannot be

interpreted in any other way.

  Thus  there  runs  through  the  soul  of  mankind  an  endless  chain  of

identifications ranging from the normal to the pathological. The child that

puts its father's hat on its head identifies itself with him just as certainly as the

lunatic who thinks himself Napoleon. Both have realized their wishes. But

there is this difference between them : In the normal the identification is held

under control by the force of facts, whereas in the lunatic the identification

has suffered a fixation. A delusion is frequently only a wholly successful

identification in the interests of the desire to escape from painful realities.

Delusion  and  truth  are  plastic  conceptions.  Who  could  presume  to  define

where truth ceases and delusion begins ? From

    Schopenhauer's point of view our whole world-philosophy might be said

to  be  only  a  process  of  identification.  And  truth  is  nothing  but  the

transference of our own limited knowledge upon the outer world.

    REFUGE IN DISEASE

  The  psychological  study  of  disease  is  still,  alas!  a  very  young  and

immature science. We have been held so long in the thrall of the materialistic

delusion of having to look for bacilli and other micro-organisms behind all

diseases that we have almost wholly neglected the psychic factor in disease.

It now seems that these psychic factors play the chief role in the so-called "

nervous" diseases, whereas all the other " causes," namely, the predisposition,

heredity,  infection,  etc.,  it  now  turns  out,  do  play  a  certain  role,  not  an

unimportant  one,  it  is  true,  but  yet  a  secondary  one.  The  influence  of

emotional disturbance upon these diseases has only recently received careful

study.

  We  have  learned  that  psychic  causes  may  play  a  great  role  in  the

occurrence and the prevention of disease. We may confidently assert that

without  the  presence  of  a  psychic  component  which  invokes  the  diseasehardly a single case of nervous disease could occur. Paradoxical as this may

sound it is nearer the truth than the orthodox teachings of our day. For who

does not recollect times in his childhood when he longed to be sick that he

might not have to go to school, and that he might at the same time

  (123)

  be petted and indulged by his parents ? A little of this infantilism persists

with  us  throughout  Hfe.  Hysterics  especially  are  distinguished  by  the

infantiHsm of their thoughts, their feelings, and their ideas. This being so, we

must agree with Bleuler when he asserts that the most common cause of

hysteria is the desire to take refuge in disease. It will be of interest here to

reproduce Bleuler's report of one of his cases (from his book on " affectivity,

suggestibiHty, and paranoia," published by Karl Marhold in 1906).

  " A paterfamilias suffers an injury in a railway accident. How terrible it

would be if he were so disabled that he could no longer provide for his family

and if he had to go through life that way, suffering all the time, and half the

time unable to work ! How much better it would be if he were dead or wholly

disabled. His attorney informs him that his annual earnings equal the interest

on 80,000 francs, and that he could bring an action for that amount—a sum

which would insure his family against want for the rest of their lives. Are

there not indications enough that he will need this sum \ Isn't it a fact that he

is already suffering from insomnia ? Work fatigues him—his head aches—

railway journeys make him apprehensive and even cause attacks of anxiety;

how helpful it would be, nay, how absolutely necessary it would be, to prove

that he is very sick and to get that 80,000 francs ! And now the traumatic

neurosis or psychosis is

    established, and will in all probability not be curable until the lawsuit is

satisfactorily settled." Bleuler does not mince matters but roundly asserts that

in this case the wish caused the neurosis. Would it be proper to call these

people malingerers ? By no means! For, naturally, all these wishes are not

clearly  known  to  these  individuals  ;  they  suffer  in  good  faith.  The  wish

emanates  from  unconscious  levels.  Consciousness  vehemently  resents  any

imputation  of  the  thought  of  simulation.  Such  invalids  usually  protest

vehemently their desire to be well. '* How happy would I be if only I had my

health! Then I would gladly dispense with damages ! "

  Here I should like to report two cases from my own experience which

serve to illustrate the refuge in disease even better than the case described by

the distinguished Swiss psychiatrist. The first was a very sick woman whohad been bed-ridden for six years. No organic malady could be discovered.

The diagnosis was hysteria. The deeper cause of her malady was as follows :

Her  husband  was  a  coarse,  brutal  fellow,  continually  upbraiding  her  for

something or other and raising fearful rows ; but when she was sick his whole

nature  underwent  a  change.  Then  he  became  amiable,  affectionate  and

attentive. As soon as she was well he became the old, unendurable, domestic

tyrant. Finally, there was nothing for this delicate, weak woman to do but to

take refuge in disease.

  Her limbs used to tremble and refuse their function, so that she had to

stay  in  bed  or  be  rolled  about  in  an  invalid  chair.  All  the  skill  of  her

physicians—and  she  had  the  best  the  metropolis  had  to  offer—proved

unavailing. Naturally the cure of such a case is hardly possible unless one can

remove the cause for the refuge in disease. In this case this solution was out

of the question, and so the woman goes on enjoying the blessed fruits of her

invalidism, complainingly but not unhappily, exulting within, but miserable

without.

  Our everyday life furnishes numerous petty examples of refuge in disease

: the nervous wife who breaks out in a hysterical crying spell if her husband

reproaches her; the schoolboy who complains of headache when he cannot

get his lessons done ; the husband who gets pains in the stomach every time

his wife makes life unbearable;—they all take refuge in disease as a means of

escape from their persecutor. How often is this phenomenon observed among

soldiers, for whom a few days of illness means the most delightful change! In

these  cases  even  the  most  experienced  military  physicians  often  find  it

impossible to distinguish between wish and reality.

  A physician who does not know of the phenomenon we have designated

as " refuge in disease " will be helpless in the handling of most cases of

hysteria. A blooming young girl had for two years consulted specialists of the

highest

  repute about the raging headaches with which she was afflicted. All the

usual  remedies,  such  as  antipyrin,  phenacetin,  pyramidon,  and  even

morphine, failed to give her even sHght temporary relief. The experts thought

of a tumor in the brain and of other dangerous maladies as the possible cause

of these obstinate headaches. But it turned out that this headache, too, was

only a refuge in disease. A casual remark of the father's betrayed the true

nature of the trouble : " My daughter is about to be married ; she has been

engaged  for  two  years,  and  the  young  man  is  anxiously  waiting  for  thewedding ; but I can't let her marry while she is suffering from such a severe

disease."

  The  headache  was  obviously  the  means  of  getting  out  of  a  hateful

marriage. Of course one who would have been content with her first story

would  never  have  discovered  the  truth.  What  stories  she  told  about  her

wonderful love ! How ardently she loved her betrothed ! There was nothing

she longed for more than the wedding-day! How unhappy she would be if she

lost him ! But a careful psychanalysis brought forth ample and convincing

comfirma-tion of the above-mentioned suspicion. The girl had been engaged

once before ; in fact she had not yet completely broken off her relations with

her former lover. In addition thereto there were confessions about the death

of all erotic feelings during the second engagement, as to which we cannot go

into details. It was

  quite clear that her malady was a refuge in invalidism. I advised breaking

the engagement. The advice was not followed. On the contrary, the family

hoped  that  a  speedy  marriage  might  bring  about  a  cure  of  the  hysterical

condition.  But  the  young  woman  is  still  going  about,  complaining  and

whimpering, with her malady (from which her husband, notwithstanding his

inexhaustible patience, suffers more than she). Will she ever be well ? If she

ever learns to love her husband she may recover her health. But where such

powerful,  unconscious  counter-impulses,  such  powerful  instincts,  contend

against an inclination, it is scarcely possible that this inclination will develop

into full sovereignty of the soul.

  What we have just said of the neurosis is also true of the delusions of

insanity. A delusion also is a fleeing from this world into another one in

which  some  particular  over-valued  idea  represses  all  other  ideas  and

dominates  the  mind.  It  will  not  be  long  ere  this  conception  will  be  an

accepted doctrine of all psychiatrists. For the time being it is the common

property of creative literary artists, who, because of their intuitive insight into

human nature, have frequently given expression to this idea. It is perhaps

most  beautifully  expressed  by  Georges  Rodenbach,  the  Flemish  artist,

unfortunately too early deceased, who says in one of his fine posthumous

novels (" Die Erfiillung," Dresden, 190S) :—

  "  The  insane  have  nothing  to  complain  of.  Often  they  achieve  their

purposes only in this way. They become what they have longed for and what

they would otherwise nev-er have become. They obtain the coveted goal and

their plans are fulfilled. They live what once they dreamed. Their delusion is,to all intents and purposes, their inner fruition, inasmuch as it corresponds to

their most ardent desires and their most secret yearnings. Thus the ambitious

one  ascends  in  his  delusions  the  heights  that  have  beckoned  to  him  ;  he

possesses endless treasures, orders the destinies of great nations, and moves

only among the great rulers of the earth. Religious delusion brings its victim

to the throne of God and makes life in Paradise a tangible reality. So that

delusion always realises the goal that each has longed for. It gratifies our

desires to the utmost limit. Sympathetically it takes a hand in our affairs and

completes  the  altogether  too  pretentious  destiny  of  those  upon  whom

fulfillment never smiles."

  What a beautiful idea ! Delusion is a wish-fulfilment exactly as the dream

is. The madhouse is the paradise of thoughts, the heaven in which wishes

meet  with  unHmited  fulfilment.  And  human  beings  sicken  so  often,  and

madness  increases  with  such  uncanny  rapidity,  because  our  most  secret

wishes are never gratified, because in these dull times the miraculous has

died,  and  because  life  demands  so  much  renunciation  and  yields  so  little

happiness.

  Let us draw these lessons from the foregoing remarks : to keep one's

desires  within  bounds  means  to  assure  one's  spiritual  health.  Inordinate

ambition, which foolish parents kindle in their children's hearts, is often the

cause of an early breakdown. We must school ourselves and our children to

wish only for the attainable and to attain our desires. Our ideals must live in

our breasts, not in the outer world. Then we may find in ourselves what the

world denies us. They who can find refuge in their health will escape having

to take refuge in disease.

  WHY WE TRAVEL

  Why  do  we  not  know  why  we  travel  ?  Haven't  we  the  imperative

obHgation to recuperate ? Does not our malady enforce a trip to a health

resort ? Are we not thirsty for new countries, new people, a new environment

?

  Peace ! peace ! No, we do not know ! Or rather, we do not wish to know.

Naturally, we always have a few superficial motives at our disposal when it

suits us to mask our unconscious secrets from ourselves and from the world.

Why do we travel ? Psychologists have given many reasons, but they do not

go beyond such superficial motives as " the desire for a change," " a craving

for excitement," " curiosity," " fatigue, the need for a rest," " flight from the

home,"  etc.  Some  go  further  and  attribute  the  desire  to  travel  to  theelementary  pleasure  of  being  in  motion.  For  these  psychologists  the  little

child's first step is its first journey, the last step of the weary aged their last

journey.  Others  again  veritably  classify  journeys  and  distinguish  between

trips undertaken for health reasons, business trips, scientific trips, etc.

  Vain  beginning  !  In  reality  one  trip  is  like  another.  If  we  would

understand the elementary feelings associated with a trip we must go back

  (133)

  to our youth. In youth we still have a sense of the wonderful; in youth the

horizon of our fantasies is aglow with wondrous visions. But of course the

world about us is solemn and wearisome, full of duties and obligations. But

ah, the wide world without! There dangerous adventures smile alluringly ;

there unrestrained freedom beckons ; there deeds may be achieved that may

make kings of us. In our thoughts we build a small skiff that will take us out

of the narrow channel of our homes into the vast sea ; we battle on the prairie

with the brave and crafty Indians ; we seek out the sun-burned gold-fields in

the new world ; we put a hurried girdle round about the earth, and—when at

top speed—we would even attempt a flight to the moon.

  Nothing that makes an impression on the human mind is ever lost. Our

youth with its fantasies and childish desires exerts an important influence on

us all our life. Henceforth all our excursions are journeys into the realm of

youth. All, all are alike. Life hems us in with innumerable obstacles, bonds,

and walls. The older we grow the greater becomes the weight that loads us

down. In the depths of the soul the tintinnabulation of youth is ringing and

speaking to us of life and freedom, and keeps on ringing alluringly till weary

man  surrenders  and  takes  a  trip.  The  tinkling  music  of  the  soul  works

strongest on the mind of youth. He, fortunate he, knows not the difference

between the music

  of his heart and the hum of the world without. He knows not yet that the

world  is  everywhere  the  same,  the  people  everywhere  the  same,  and  the

mountains,  the  lakes,  the  seas,  with  but  slight  variations,  the  same.  His

longings carry him out, far out, and he seeks their fulfilment.

  The adult lives a life of bitter disappointments. He never seeks the new.

He longs only to get rid of the old. And the aged wanderer, having reached

the end of the vale of life, follows his buried wishes, his memories of the

beautiful days in which there was still something to hope for, in which he was

not beyond self-deception.

  It is not to be denied that ours is the travelling age. This is partly due tothe fact that we experience so little, as we have already said, in our craving

for excitement. The many inventions that have conquered time and space

have made it possible for us to fly over the whole world, and thus the primary

purpose of travelling, the hunger for experience, shrinks into trivial, merry or

vexatious hotel adventures. But in every such trip one may discover a deeply

hidden kernel of the voyages of the old Vikings. Every journey is a tour of

conquest. Here at home we have found our level; our neighbours know us

and have passed their irrevocable judgment on our person. To travel means to

conquer the world anew, to make oneself respected and esteemed. Every new

touring acquaintance must stand for a new conquest. We display all

  our talents for which we no longer have any use at home and all our

almost  rusty  intellectual  weapons,  our  amiability,  our  courteousness,  our

gallantry, are again taken out of the soul's lumber chamber and put to use in

conquering new persons. This secret foolery compensates us for all the plans

of conquest that we have long ago given up. To conquer persons without

having to depend on one's social background is one of the greatest delights of

travelling.  How  strange  !  As  in  ordinary  life  we  seek  ourself  and  are

overjoyed  to  find  ourself  in  our  environment  and  get  most  out  of  the

individual who is most like ourself, so everywhere abroad we seek our own

home. How happy we are on beholding a familiar face even though it be that

of  a  person  who  has  been  ever  so  unsympathetic  or  indifferent.  We  are

delighted  with  him  and  greet  him  like  a  trusted  friend—only  because  he

represents for us a fragment of our home which we have been seeking out

here and which we have found, to some extent, in him. That is why such

discoveries make us happiest as revealing identities with our home. Even in

this the infantile character of travelling is shown. Just as in our youth we had

to learn many things that we had to forget subsequently so we act with regard

to our journeys; every new city, every new region is a kind of primer whose

fundamentals we have to make our own no matter how much it goes against

our grain to do so. The faithful visiting of all the objects

  of  interest  with  our  Baedeker  in  our  hands,  the  profound  sense  of  an

obHgation to have seen so-and-so is clearly such an infantile trait and has

about it much of the youthfulness and school-boyishness of the time in which

the teacher's authority meant compelling knowledge to follow a set norm.

  Much might be said about the technique of travelling. The manner in

which  the  thought  springs  from  the  unconscious,  gently  and  with  tender

longing, takes on more definite shape and apparently suddenly breaks outduring  the  night  with  the  violence  of  a  deed,  presents  almost  a  neurotic

picture,  and  one  is  justified,  from  this  point  of  view,  in  speaking  of  a  "

touring neurosis." Every repression begets a compulsive idea. The repression

of  the  emotions  of  youth  begets  a  touring  neurosis.  The  compulsion  is

strongest in the first few days during which difficult internal conflicts have to

be overcome. The threads that bind us to our home, our vocation, and our

beloved, must first be wholly severed. This happens only after several days,

after the so-called " travel-reaction." That is the name I would propose for

that unpleasant feeling that overcomes us after a few days. Suddenly we feel

lonesome and alone, curse the desire that prompted us to leave our home, and

play with the idea whether it would not be better to terminate the trip and go

back  home.  It  is  only  when  this  reaction  has  been  overcome,  when  the

confHct between the present and the

  past has been decided in favour of the latter, only then has one acquired

the correct attitude to travelling, an attitude which depends upon a complete

forgetting of our social and individual obligations. It is, for all the world, as if

after this reaction we had suppressed all our relations to our home and freed

all our inhibitions. Only then can we enjoy the pleasure of travelling, but,

alas, it lasts only a short time. For soon there rises before our eyes, like a

threatening monster, the time when we must again resume our obligations.

The sense of duty gets stronger and stronger, the desire for travelling gets

weaker  and  weaker,  and  after  a  short  but  decisive  conflict,  the  fever  for

travelling abates, leaving behind it a little heap of ashes in which the feeble

coals of memory gradually die.

  It is a profound feeling of bliss that we feel at home, for down at the

bottom  of  the  heart  we  have  always  been  faithful  to  the  home.  We  see

everything in the new colours with which our journey has beautified the dull

gray of daily life; alas! they are only temporary joys, borrowed harmonies,

which lose their intensity in the day's progress and are bound to return to their

former dulness.

    Particular  mention  must  be  made  of  the  journeys  of  married  couples.

These, too, are trips into the realm of youth, into the beautiful country of the

bethrothal period, and thus every such trip is a new honeymoon. The energies

which had hitherto been devoted to

  the discharge of their duties have now been freed and burst powerfully

into the amatory-sphere ; but they may also intensify components of aversion

and  hatred,  and  are  just  as  likely  to  emphasize  antagonisms  as,  undercircumstances, they may build bridges over bottomless depths. Inasmuch as

en tour thought and feeling are dominated by infantile traits, and inasmuch as

to a certain extent a new spring of love awakens with the youthful fire and

youthful tenderness, a journey may—just because of these results— result in

disappointments such as cannot otherwise be brought to light in staid old age.

  Let us also make mention of the opportunity a journey gives one of living

a purely physical existence, of enjoying the rare pleasure of feeling oneself a

creature of muscles, a thing all backbone and little brain. Let us also mention

the  delight  of  feeling  oneself  a  stranger,  of  shaking  off  every  irritating

constraint, of being able to break with impunity the rules of propriety and

good  breeding,  and  we  have,  in  comparison  with  all  the  really  important

psychological motives, touched only a small part of the surface psychology

of travelling.

  And now I come to the really important point of my thesis. What I have

hitherto said is of general validity, applying to the generality of travelling

people.  But  I  believe  that  every  individual  has  also  a  secret,  deep-lying

motive of which he himself is unaware and which one rarely is in a position

to discover. Now and then

  one may succeed in discovering such a motive and one is then astonished

at the strange things that may be hidden behind the passion of travelUng.

  There are so many things that we seek all our life and that, alas ! we can

never find. One is on the hunt for a friend who will " understand " him;

another for a beloved whom he can comprehend ; the third for a place where

he may find the people he has dreamed of. Which of us has not his secret,

dark desires and longings which really belong to " the other one " within us

and not to the outer personage on whom the sun shines ? What is denied us

by the environment may possibly be found somewhere beyond. What withers

here may bear luxuriant blossoms somewhere beyond. . .

  The deepest-lying, repressed desires are the driving power in the fever for

travelling. We are infected—infected by the seeds that have been slumbering

within us for years and which have now with mysterious power engendered

the ardour that drives us on to travel. Behind every journey there lies a hidden

motive. It will, of course, be a difficult matter to discover in every case this

deeply hidden motive, this innermost spring of action. In some cases one

succeeds, however, and lights upon most remarkable things. One may hit

upon  some  exciting  touring  experience  of  earlier  days,  upon  a  strange

fantasy, upon some sweet wish that seems to be too grotesque to be spoken ofopenly.

  No one has yet fathomed just what constitutes happiness. It is never the

present, always the future. A trip is a journey into the future, a hunting after

happiness.

  The best Hght on the psychology of the " touring neurosis " is thrown by

a consideration of the opposite phenomenon—the " fear of travelling." There

are many persons who are afraid of every journey, for whom a railroad trip is

a  torture,  for  whom  going  away  from  home  is  a  punishment.  There  are

persons who have compromised with the present and have given up all hope

of a future ; who have no happiness to lose and therefore have no wish to

achieve any; who fear any great change and who have become wrapped up in

themselves. They are the great panegyrists of home, the enthusiastic patriots,

the contemners of everything foreign. They behave exactly like the fox for

whom the grapes were too sour. Because their fears won't let them travel they

prove to themselves and to the world at large that travelling is nonsensical,

that  the  city  they  live  in  is  the  best  of  all  places  to  live  in.  The  fear  of

travelling also has a hidden motive which not rarely is fortified by justifiable

and unjustifiable consciousness of guilt. Why we do not travel is often a

much more interesting problem than why we do travel.

  Fear and desire are brother and sister and emanate from the same primal

depths. The wish often converts to fear and fear to wish.

  One who is incapable in his heart to fly from himself and his environment

bears a heavy and unbreakable chain within his soul. So do we all. But we

break it now and then. The future may perhaps create free human beings.

Then there may perhaps be no abysms of the soul. Just at present darkness

surrounds  us.  The  mysteries  of  the  soul  are  barred  to  us.  Its  depths  are

unfathomable. Even if we have illumined some hidden corner and brought

something that was long concealed to the light of consciousness, it is only

like a drop snatched from the infinity of the ocean. The real reason why we

travel can be told us only by our " other self," that " other one" whom we

buried in our remote youth. Whither we travel is quite clear. Large and small,

young and old, fools and wise men—all journey to the realm of youth. Life

takes us into the kingdom of dreams, and the dream takes us back again into

life, into that life to which we have been assigned and to which our deepmost

desires belong. What desires ? Those are the secrets we anxiously conceal

from ourselves.

    MOODY PERSONS  A beautiful warm summer day. The churchyard lies dreamily in the sultry

noonday  atmosphere.  All  nature  seems  to  be  possessed  by  the  desire  to

imitate the sleep of those interred in the womb of earth. Suddenly there is

heard a grinding sound in the fine gravel and a curly, rosy-cheeked, dark-

haired  lad  is  seen  leaping  over  hedges  and  over  mounds  after  a  gilded

butterfly . . .

  Wondrous images loom up before me like large great question marks in

the trembling air. Similar scenes from the distant mirage of my own youth

come to mind. Like a hot, long-dammed-up stream my emotions break from

the unconsciousness into consciousness. I am overcome by a long-forgotten

yearning. Is not my heart beating faster ? Is there not a wild pleasure in the

melancholy that oppresses me ?

  How strange ! A little while ago I lay lost in cheerful reflections in the tall

grass, delighting in the noiseless pace of time, and now I am excited, restless,

disturbed, and sad, but not unhappy. My mood has undergone a complete

change.  What  has  brought  this  transformation  about  ?  Surely,  only  the

appearance of the beautiful boy who was trying to catch a butter-

  (143)

  fly with his green net. Why did this scene excite me so ? There must have

been set up in my mind a thinking process of which I was not conscious.

Some secret power that drives the wheels of the emotions had set into action

a long-inhibited and hidden spring.

  Gradually  the  shadowy  thoughts  came  into  the  bright  light  of

comprehension. The boy was to me a symbol of my life. An echo of my

distant youth. And the slumbering cemetery, my inevitable future. My heart

too is a cemetery. Numberless buried hopes, too early slain, unblown buds,

longings goaded to death, unfulfilled wishes lie buried here within and no

cross betrays their presence. And over all these dead possibilities I, too, am

chasing a gilded butterfly. And when I catch it in my net I seize it with my

rude heavy hands, doing violence to the delicate dust on its wings, and throw

the lusterless remainders among the dead. Or it is destined to a place in a box,

transfixed with the fine needle named " impression " and constituting one of

the collection of dead butterflies which go to make up " memory."

  It really was an " unconscious" thought, then, that transformed my mood

from  dur  into  molL  And  the  truth  dawns  on  me  that  all  our  "

incomprehensible " moods are logical and that they must all have a secret

psychic motivation. Moody persons are persons with whom things are not inorder. Their consciousness

  is  split  up  into  numerous  emotionally-toned  "  complexes."  An

unconscious complex is like a state within a state. A sovereign power, too

repressed,  too  weak,  and  too  tightly  fettered  to  break  into  consciousness

without having to unmask, but strong enough to influence the individual's

conduct. Moody persons have their good and their bad days. The bad days are

incomprehensible puzzles to them. Simple souls speak of being under the

influence of demons ; poets share their pains with the rest of the world and "

sublimate"  their  petty  individual  woes  into  a  gigantic  world-woe;

commonplace souls place the responsibility for their moods upon " nature,"

the bad weather, the boss, the husband, or wife, their cook, their employment,

and what not.

  In the grasp of an incomprehensible mood we are ill at ease and anxious,

very much like a brave person who finds himself threatened in a dark forest

by  a  vindictive  enemy  whom  he  cannot  see.  To  muster  up  courage  we

deceive ourselves, just as the little child that falteringly proclaims : " Please,

please ! I am good. The bogey man won't come!" But the bogey man does

come,  for  a  certainty.  He  always  comes  again  because  everything  that  is

repressed must take on the characteristics of a psychic compulsion. If we do

not want him to come again we must bravely raise our eyelids and look at

him fixedly with eyes of understanding and reaHse that he is nothing but a

phantom of our

  excited senses, that he does not exist and has not existed. The bogey man

cannot  long  endure  this  penetrating  look  ;  slowly  he  dissolves  into  grey

shadows and disappears for ever.

  Modern  psychologists  have  pointed  out  the  relationship  between

unmotived moods and the periodical character of certain phenomena of life. It

is, of course, a fact that we are all subject to certain partly known and partly

unknown periodical influences. But whether this alone is sufficient reason for

attacks of depression does not seem to me to have been proved. My own

experiences speak against it. Just as a stone, thrown into a body of water,

causes the appearance of broad circular ripples which gradually get feebler

and feebler until they disappear with a scarcely perceptible undulation of the

surface, so does a strong impression continue to work within us, giving rise to

ever wider but ever feebler circles. Only when these circles set a floating

mine in motion does the water shoot up, the mud is thrown on high, and the

clear surface is muddied. These floating mines are the split off, unconsciouscomplexes. The secret thought must not be put in motion.

  But enough of metaphors! Let us take an example from our daily life. A

women is suffering from frequently-recurring incomprehensible depressions.

She has everything that a childish, spoiled heart can desire. And she is not a

spoiled  child,  for  she  had  been  a  poor  seamstress  when  she  made  her

husband's acquaint-

  ance. Now she lives in a magnificent palace, wears costly garments, has a

houseful of servants, adorns herself with the finest laces ; her husband clothes

her like a doll, pampers and coddles her, treats her with the greatest affection

—in short, worships her. And this woman, the envy of her associates as she

rides by them in her splendid automobile, has days on which she cries for

hours. Our first guess is she does not love her husband. You are wrong, you

psychologists of the old school! She does love her husband, she is as happy

with her finery and wealth as a child with a toy ; she can assign no cause for

her melancholy.

    Notwithstanding  this,  her  depression  was  of  pyschic  origin.  When  we

investigated carefully the experiences and excitements that ushered in one of

these  attacks  it  became  clear  that  subterranean  bridges  led  to  secret

(suppressed) desires. Quite often the immediate occasion was of a trifling

nature. She had seen a poor woman pass her in the street. Alone ? No— with

a young man, very happy, care-free, their arms affectionately intertwined. On

another occasion she had been reading of a pair of lovers who had drowned

themselves. Suicide was a subject, beyond all others, which she could not

bear to hear. At the theatre she once sat in a box on the third tier. Suddenly

she looked down into the orchestra and was seized with horror. That was a

yawning abyss ! What if her opera glass fell down there ! Or if she lost

  her balance and toppled over! A shudder passed through her. She put the

opera glass aside and became greatly depressed.

  The mystery surrounding her melancholy was soon solved. Her husband,

fifteen years her senior, is not adapted to her temperamentally. In secret she

longs for a life rich in emotions, full of sin and perhaps also of vice. Nature

probably intended her for a fast woman, not for an eminently respectable

lady. Alluring melodies beckon her to the metropolis. She would rather lose

her breath in an endless dance in the tight embrace of a pair of coarse arms

than  ride  sedately  down  the  main  avenue.  She  loves  her  husband,  but

sometimes she hates him. He's the obstacle. She knows how terribly jealous

he is. He was very sick once ; just then the wicked thought entered her mind :" If he died now I'd be rich and free ! " The reaction was not long in coming.

She saw herself as a dreadful sinner. Life had no more interest for her. Since

then she has been suffering from periodical attacks of depression.

  What happened in this case in the wake of powerful repressions happens

a little in all moody persons. An unconscious motive for the depression can

always  be  demonstrated.  In  most  instances  it  is  secret  reproaches  that

provoke  the  change  in  mood.  In  young  people  they  are  the  sequel  of

exaggerated warnings about not injuring their health. Sins against religion

and morality. Reproaches for too readily yielding to one's impulses. But also

the opposite!

  Many an attack of depression is nothing but the expression of regret at

having to be virtuous.

  A girl suffers from violent (psychically), apparently wholly unmotived

crying  spells.  The  last  one  lasted  half  a  day.  I  inquired  whether  she  had

excited herself in some way. Had she any reason for being depressed ? No !

Was she sure ? A trifling matter—" of no particular significance "—occurs to

her.  On  one  of  the  city  bridges  a  very  elegant,  young  gentleman  had

addressed her. Would she permit him to accompany her ? Indignantly she

repelled him. What did he think she was ! But he persisted in his role; he

painted in glowing colours the delights of a rendezvous, till finally she found

the courage to exclaim : " If you do not leave me at once, I shall call a

policeman ! " Then, flushed, bathed in perspiration, she rushed home, ate her

meal in silence and soon thereafter gave vent to an almost unending crying

spell.

  And  now  I  discover  that  her  first  attack  of  crying  followed  a  similar

occurrence. She was coming home from the country and had to travel at

night. She asked the conductor to point out the ladies' coupe. To her horror a

tall,  blonde  lieutenant  entered  her  coupe  at  the  next  station.  She  at  once

protested vigorously at the intrusion. The officer very politely offered his

apologies,  explaining  that  the  train  was  full  and  that  he  would  be  quite

satisfied with a modest corner. He would be greatly obliged to her for her

kindness. But so anxious was she about her

  virtue  that  she  was  proof  against  his  entreaties.  She  appealed  to  the

conductor  and  insisted  on  her  rights.  The  spruce  officer  had  to  leave  the

coupe and for the rest of the night she was not molested. But the occurrence

had so excited her that she could not fall asleep and she lay awake till dawn.

The  following  day  she  had  the  first  attack  of  depression  and  crying.  Shebewailed her cruel fate that compelled her to be virtuous while all the hidden

voices within clamoured for a gay life. She did not find herself strong enough

to conquer her ethical inhibitions. She was too weak to sin and not strong

enough to be really virtuous.

  I could cite many such examples. They all show convincingly that there

are  no  "  inexplicable  "  psychic  depressions,  that  consciousness  does  not

embrace all the psychic forces that govern and direct us.

  The classification of human beings into those that are free and those that

are  not  was  determined  by  a  social  or  ethical  canon.  But  in  reality  most

human beings are the slaves of their unconscious complexes. Only he can be

free who knows himself thoroughly, who has dared to look unafraid into the

frightful depths of the unconscious. Most persons are under the yoke of their

" other self " who, with his biting whip, drives them to pains and to pleasures,

compels them to leave the table of life and goads them into the arms of crime.

  The greatest happiness in life is to have

  achieved one's inner freedom. This thought is still expressed in an old

aphorism. " Everyone may have his moods ; but his moods must not have

him."

  Moody persons are the slaves of their past, masters of renunciation and

assuredly bunglers in the art of life. Their only salvation is in learning the

truth or in the art of transforming their depression into works of art. Most of

the time they glide through life's turbulence like dreamers. Their ears are

turned inward and thus it comes about that life's call is perceived but faintly

by them. They are chasing butterflies in cemeteries. . .

    OVERVALUED IDEAS

  Ideas resemble coins which have a certain exchange value according to

written and unwritten laws. Some are copper coins, so defaced and dirty that

no one would suspect from their looks that they had once sparkled like bright

gold.  Others  shine  even  to-day,  after  a  lapse  of  a  thousand  years,  and  a

commanding figure proudly proclaims its origin. One might even more aptly

say that ideas resemble securities that are highly valued to-day and may be

worthless to-morrow; one day they promise their possessor wealth and fame,

and the next day there comes a spiritual break, he is impoverished, and is left

with an apparently worthless piece of paper. . .

  There is as yet, alas ! no standard by which the values of different ideas

might be measured. Every man constructs for himself without much ado a

canon whereby to value his own thoughts. As a rule he swims with the tide ofcurrent opinion ; more rarely he goes with the minority and very rarely he

independently makes his own measure wherewith to judge matters. Strange!

In  the  end  the  conflict  of  minds  turns  altogether  about  ideas  and  their

estimation. What else do geniuses, the pathfinders of mankind, accomplish

but to disseminate a hitherto neglected or even unknown idea and cause it to

  (152)

  be generally accepted or to cause ideas that have hitherto stood high in

the world's estimation to topple from their thrones ?

  Just as everything else in life runs a circuitous course, in which beginning

and end touch, so is it also with the valuation of ideas. Not only the genius,

but the fool also strips old, highly esteemed ideas and overvalues others that

he has created for himself. The genius and the fool agree in that they permit

themselves to be led by the " overvaluation " of their ideas. This expression

was coined in a happy moment by the psychiatrist Wernicke. It tells more in

its pregnant brevity than a long-winded definition would. Formerly it was the

custom to speak of the " fixed ideas" of the sufferers from the peculiar form

of insanity which physicians call " paranoia," the mental disease which the

laiety knows better and understands less than any other psychosis. A delusion

was regarded as a fixed idea which neither experience nor logic could shake.

To-day we have penetrated deeper into the problems of delusions. We know

that  ideas  differ  from  one  another  tremendously.  Some  are  anemic  and

colourless,  come  like  pale  shadows  and  so  depart.  Others  have  flesh  and

blood and scintillate in brilliant colours. Long after they have vanished, their

image still trembles in our souls in gently dying oscillations. The explanation

for this phenomenon is very simple. Our attention is dependent upon our

emotions. Pale thoughts are indifferent and have no em-

  phasis. Coloured ideas are richly endowed with emotions, being either

pleasurable or painful.

  As a rule ideas are in continual conflict with one another. The instincts

surge upward from the depth, the inhibitions bear down from above, and

between them—owing to stimuli from within and without—the sea of ideas

rocks up and down, during which time another idea rises to the mirror-like

surface  of  consciousness.  Suddenly-one  remains  on  top  and  becomes

stationary, like a buoy anchored deep to the sea's bottom. This is the " fixed

idea " of older writers and the " overvalued ideas" of modern psychother-

apeutists.

  This idea is really deeply anchored. At the bottom of the unconscious liethe great " complexes " which impart a corresponding accent to our various

ideas. An overvalued idea is anchored in a " complex " which has repressed

all other " complexes." It is accompanied or invested with a powerful affect

which has stripped other ideas of their affects.

  A very old example—if one may so call it— of physiological insanity is

the condition known as " being in love." A German psychiatrist has taken the

wholly supererogatory pains to prove anew that a lover is a kind of madman

and he designates love as " physiological paranoia." But, unfortunately, he

makes no distinction between loving and being in love. But it is just through

this distinction that we are enabled precisely to define the conception of an

    overvalued idea. Like an example from a text-book. For love is an idea

whose value is generally acknowledged. We love our parents, our teacher,

our country, art, our friends, etc.

  But as regards being in love it is quite a different matter. As to this the

environment does not accept the exaggerated valuation of the emotions. Here

love becomes an overvalued idea. Arguing with one who is in love about

common sense, religion, education, station, or politics will not affect him in

the least. He is dominated solely by the love-complex. This alone determines

the resonance of his thoughts and feelings. The attraction to the chosen object

has attracted all the other affects to it, has placed all the impulses at the

service of one overvalued idea. He loves life but only if he be together with

his beloved ; he is jealous, but only with reference to the love-object; he is

interested only in such matters as are in some way related to that object. The

fool who is being dominated by an overvalued idea acts exactly in the same

way. The lunatic who imagines himself the king of the world, and in whom a

childhood  wish  had  over-poweringly  established  itself  as  a  fact  in  his

consciousness, has interest only for such things as find access to this wish ;

the victim of ideas of persecution discovers in the news items of the daily

papers the important communication that his enemies are laying traps for him

; the unfortunate love-sick youth who imagines that Princess X wants to give

him her hand in marriage

  sees  in  all  sorts  of  advertisements  of  love-hungry  ladies  secret

communications from his princess.

  These poor fools bring everything they see and everything they feel into

relationship with the overvalued idea which, projected outward in the shape

of an hallucination, sounds to their ears like a spiritual echo and blinds their

eyes like a vision.  A lover acts essentially like this. That is why the world says of a person

in  love  that  he  makes  himself  ridiculous.  A  handkerchief  or  a  glove,  or

anything belonging to the beloved, becomes a fetich which can evoke the

most  ecstatic  emotions.  Anything  that  can  be  associated  with  love  is

overvalued.

  Another question involuntarily presents itself. Is love, in the form known

as " being in love," the only overvalued idea with which a normal person may

be afflicted ? Are there any other forms of " physiological insanity "—if we

may use the term coined by Lower and subsequently imitated by Moebius ?

  The answer to these questions is not difficult. A backward look teaches us

what unspeakable evils overvalued ideas have wrought in man's history. For

overvalued ideas are sources of great danger. They are richly endowed with

emotions and consequently lend themselves to suggestion more readily than

almost any other idea. Bleuler has proved that suggestion is nothing but the

transference of an emotion. And such overvalued ideas can be hurled with

great

    suggestive  force  among  the  multitude  and  change  the  individual—and

even whole communities— into a fool. That is how the psychoses of whole

nations  have  arisen.  The  tremendous  power  of  overvalued  ideas  can  be

understood  if  one  thinks  of  the  crusades,  the  witchcraft  persecutions,

hysterical epidemics, the Dreyfus affair, anarchism, etc.

  It is a sad fact that none of us can be free from overvalued ideas. In this

sense  there  is  really  no  difference  between  fools  and  healthy  persons.

Everyone  of  us  bears  within  himself  a  hidden  quantity  of  neurosis  and

psychosis.  What  saves  us  from  the  insane  asylum  is  perhaps  only  the

circumstance that we hide our overvalued ideas or that so many persons share

our folly and that the multitude accepts it as wisdom.

  There  are  innumerable  aphorisms,  the  crystallised  precipitations  of

thousands of years, experience, that express this truth. " Every man has his

little crack, his dross and his sliver." (In the German saying the overvalued

idea is compared to a splinter in the brain. An excellent mata-phor !) "If you

see a fool take hold of your own ears." '* You cannot name a wise man who

was not guilty of some folly." (The reader will find ample material on this

subject  in  Dr.  Moenken-moller's  book  on  *  mental  disease  and  mental

weakness in satire, proverb, and humour,' published in 1907.) In other words

: We all suffer from a false and subjective valuation of our ideas. We all drag

overvalued ideas about with us.  It  is  the  dream  of  all  great  minds  to  revise  these  overvalued  ideas.

Nietzsche's  life  work  was  a  struggle  with  overvalued  ideas.  While  so

engaged,  he  himself  became  the  victim  of  an  overvalued  idea,  and  his

superman will forever remain a literary myth. But if the twilight of Gods

could once set in for the overvalued ideas then only could we do full justice

to his rhapsodies in " Beyond Good and Evil." For in no other sphere is there

such luxuriance of overvalued ideas as in the ethical. All progress has been

brought about by the suppression of the natural impulses. All our education,

using  the  word  in  its  true  sense,  consists  in  investing  our  instincts  and

impulses with dont's. The sum total of these inhibitions we call moralitv.

Progress consists in getting pleasure out of the inhibition, in converting the

displeasure of being inhibited into ethical pleasure. The striving for this goal

results in a kind of ethical burdening. One who has had the opportunity to

study neurotics will be amazed at the many agonizing conscious pangs they

suffer from owing to their ignorance of man's true nature. These times pant

under the burden of morality as an overvalued idea. They are in danger of

asphyxiating under the ethical burden. A false and hypocritical morality, by

disseminating  an  unhealthy  conception  of  our  dispositions  (instincts),  has

turned our views on what constitutes sin topsy-turvy. The consequences are

only too evident. On the one hand, we behold, as

  evidences  of  suppression,  indulgence  in  frivolities,  pleasure  in  the

piquant, a delight in indelicate jokes, which forcibly intrude into life and art;

on  the  other  hand,  as  the  natural  reaction  to  this,  an  over-luxuriance  of

scientific and pseudo-scientific sexual literature. And all because morality

became  a  ruinously  overvalued  idea.  I  do  not  wish  to  be  misunderstood.

Morality will always remain the goal of noble souls, but only that kind of

morality which harmonizes with man's nature. Where morality does violence

to nature it becomes natural, and brings about not ethical freedom but ethical

burdening.

  But  moraHty  is  not  the  only  overvalued  idea  that  turns  the  half  of

mankind into fools. If we survey the chaos of modern social life we shall

easily  find  everywhere  evidences  of  the  endless  disputes  and  irritating

conflicts caused by overvalued ideas. Scientists may prove that the theory of

races is no longer tenable, that the asserted purity of races is a fable, etc.

Notwithstanding all that, the German Workurka and the Checko rustic are

always at each other's throats. Why cite other examples ? In racial, religious,

national, and other discords it is always an overvalued idea that makes aharmonious  evolution  impossible.  Verily,  the  whole  world  is  an  insane

asylum  because  the  essential  factor  in  delusions,  an  overvalued  idea,

pervades the air like infectious psychic germs.

  Will the world ever be better ? From a

  survey  of  the  past  we  are  justified  only  in  being  coldly  sceptical  and

discouragingly dubious. A conflict of ideas will continue as long as there are

dissensions between human beings. Ideas to wage a war for exsistence. A few

survive longer than others, are highly esteemed till their course is run and are

discovered to have been overvalued. But as long as they have the mastery

they change credulous men into foolish children. From this endless round

there is no escape. And folly and wisdom lead the never-ending dance until

the dark, wide open gates of the future swallow them.

    AFFECTIONATE PARENTS

  The last few years the child has become the centre of interest. Funny as it

may sound, it may almost be asserted that we had just rediscovered the child.

Congresses are held, artists devote their talents to portraying the life of the

child, expositions acquaint us with the many aspects of the advances that

have been made in the new knowledge. Is it any wonder then that we have

suddenly been made acquainted with the abuses of children ? That we have

shudderingly learned that there are children who are tortured by their own

mothers ? There were loud cries of horror. The fountain of humanity became

a broad stream which must drive the mills of a new social organization in the

interests of the defenceless child. Who would withhold his approval of this

movement ? Who would oppose it ? For truly there is no sadder spectacle

than a child tortured to death by its own parents. The whole instinct for race

preservation cries out against it. . .

  But this theme may also be regarded from another angle, and I purpose

showing from the point of view of the physician and the pedagog that the

reverse of abuse, viz., excessive affection, has a dark side, that it, too, is

capable of

  (i6i)

  i62 AFFECTIONATE PARENTS

  ruining  a  child's  life  and  condemning  an  innocent  being  to  lifelong

suffering.

  At a private gathering of physicians not long ago the subject of the last

congress for the protection of children was discussed from its more serious as

well as lighter aspects. A Viennese neurologist ventured the following remark; " I regard it as a great misfortune if a woman's affection for her husband is

expended upon her child. A misfortune for humanity, for, in this way, the

number of nervous persons will be incalculably increased."

  One is strongly inclined at first energetically to attack this opinion. What!

A tender, affectionate bringing up will make a child neurotic ? Who can

prove that a happy childhood results in an unhappy life ? Shall parents be

afraid to show their children love ? To hug them, kiss them, pet them ? Is not

nervousness rather the sequel to draconic sternness, tyrannical compulsion ?

    Nonsense! Nonsense! I shall attempt to answer these obtrusive questions

seriatim.

  But, first, one remarkable fact has to be postulated. Parents are really

becoming more and more affectionate from year to year. Such fanatically

affectionate parents as are quite common now were formerly the exception.

Today the parents' thoughts all centre around the child : How to feed it, bring

it up, dress it hygienically, harden it, how to instruct it in sexual matters. ... A

flood of books and

    AFFECTIONATE PARENTS 163

    magazines scarcely suffices to meet the tremendous concern about these

matters. Can this emanate solely from the fact that the pressing movement for

emancipation of woman has displaced the woman's interest from the man to

the child ? I think that herein the neurologist is in error. That cannot possibly

be the sole cause.

  The cause for the hypertrophied love of the child is adduced from the

consideration of those cases which even in former times offered instances of

an  exaggerated  parental  affection  amounting  to  doting  love.  The  over-

indulged child was almost invariably an only child whom popular speech

designates a " trembling joy."

  It is to be regretted that most modern families are made up of such "

trembling  joys."  "  Neo-Malthusianism  "  has  infected  the  whole  world.  In

consequence of the employment of innumerable and more or less generally

employed anti-conceptives the birth rate is steadily declining. " Two-children

families " is the rule, and families with many children—especially among the

well-to-do—the exception. Even the vaunted fecundity of the Germans which

is always being held up as a model to the French will soon be a thing of the

past. In former decades 1,000 married women in BerHn gave birth to 220

children and from 1873 to 1877 the number even rose to 231. Since then the

birth rate is decHning from year to year, so that in 1907 1,000 women onlyhad ill children. In other large cities matters are even worse than in Berlin

  i64 AFFECTIONATE PARENTS

  in this regard. But it would be decidedly wrong to infer that there is a

diminution in the number of marriages. In Prussia the number of marriages

from 1901 to 1904 was at the rate of 8 per 1,000, whereas in 1850 it was

somewhat less, to wit: 7*8 per 1,000. Sociologists have detected in this state

of affairs a great danger for the mental prospects of the race inasmuch as

matters in this regard are much better in the country and, consequently, they

say, the progeny of the farmer class will in a not remote period tremendously

exceed the intelligent descendants of urban people in number. The country

will get the best of the city and not vice versa. But we must not wander away

from our subject. Let us take this fact for granted : The " two-children system

" is the cause for the excessive parental affection we have described. But

wherein is this dangerous ?

  I shall not attempt here a detailed statement of the well-known dangers.

We all know that coddled children very often become helpless, dependent

persons, that they cannot find their place in life, and do not seem to be armed

against adversity. It seems superfluous to dwell at greater length on this. Of

greater  significance  is  the  phenomenon  that  the  exaggerated  affection

lavished on the child creates a correspondingly large need for affection in it.

A need for affection that is tempestuous in its demand for gratification. As

long as these children are young so long is this demand fully satisfied. The

    AFFECTIONATE PARENTS 165

    parents,  and  especially  mothers,  are  so  overjoyed  at  their  children's

manifestations of love that out of their overflowing hearts they reward them

by  overwhelming  them  with  caresses.  Thus  the  measure  of  affectionate

demonstrations rises instead of gradually sinking. And now the time comes

for the child to go to school. And for the first time in its life it stands in the

presence of the will of a stranger who demands neither petting nor love, only

work done without grumbling. How easily this situation gives rise to conflict!

The child thinks it is not loved by the teacher, it is terrified by a harsh word

and begins to cry. School becomes odious to it ; it learns unwillingly. It asks

for another school and for other teachers. If its wish is gratified the same

thing is soon repeated.

  Matters  get  much  worse  when  these  children  grow  up.  They  have  an

unquenchable craving for caresses. From them are developed the women who

kill their husband's love by their own immoderate love. Every day they wantto be told that their husbands still love them. Daily—nay, hourly—they wish

to be the recipients of sweets, loving words, private pet names and kisses

without number. The men, on the other hand, who had been so coddled in

their childhood, are only in the rarest instances satisfied with their wives ;

sooner  or  later  they  seek  to  compensate  outside  of  the  home  for  the

insufficient affection shown by the wife ; or they transfer this requirement

upon the children who

  i66 AFFECTIONATE PARENTS

  thus become seriously (though not congenitally) burdened. But even this

is not the worst.

  The greatest dangers of excessive affection are known to only very few

persons. They consist in a premature excitation of the erotic emotions. We are

so prone to forget unpleasant experiences. Hence comes it that most adults

have  no  recollection  of  their  own  youthful  erotic  experiences.  Parents

especially  are  very  forgetful  in  this  regard—so  much  so  that  their

forgetfulness  amounts  almost  to  a  pathological  condition  bordering  on

hysterical amnesia. Thence comes it that most mothers will take an oath on

their  daughters'  innocence  and  fathers  on  their  sons'  purity.  They  talk

themselves into the belief that their children are exceptions, that they are

incredibly simple, still believe in the stork myth and other similar stupidities.

  That the sexual enlightenment of the child is an important problem and of

far-reaching significance for its whole life is proved in numberless books and

essays dealing with the subject. We are told that open scientific instruction

should take the place of secret knowledge obtained from turbid channels.

Very  fine!  But  the  world  must  not  believe  that  the  child's  first  erotic

knowledge is awakened as a result of such instruction. That is a widespread

superstition. The sexual life of the child does not begin with puberty, the old

books to the contrary notwithstanding, but with the day of its birth.

  On the occasion of a sad criminal trial in

    AFFECTIONATE PARENTS 167

  which children were charged with being prostitutes, public opinion was

horrified at the wickedness of these poor creatures. And yet most of them

were victims of their environment. Does any one really believe that such

occurrences are rare exceptions ? That is a myth. We talk ourselves into the

belief that the little child that is still unable to speak is not receptive to erotic

impressions.  How  do  we  know  this  ?  The  brain  of  a  child  is  like  a

photographic  plate  that  greedily  catches  impressions,  independently  ofwhether  they  are  intelligible  or  not,  impressions  whose  influence  may  be

operative  throughout  its  life.  As  we  know,  there  is  a  large  group  of

investigators which traces all perverse manifestations of the sexual impulses

back to a fixation of the earliest erotic experience. Erotic stimulation can

subsequently be brought about only by way of an association with this early

impression.  This  explanation  certainly  does  seem  to  fit  the  curious

phenomenon known as fetichism. In this way children's experiences influence

their  whole  life.  In  sexual  matters  human  beings  behave  with  incredible

naivete. They close their eyes and will not see. Frank Wedekind is perfectly

right  in  deriding  a  world  that  has  secrets  even  from  itself.  So  infantile

sexuality is a secret which every intelligent person knows.

  If parents only kept this in their mind's eye ! Then it would not happen

that children ten years of age and older would be permitted to

  168 AFFECTIONATE PARENTS

  sleep in their parents' bedrooms that the anxious father and mother might

watch over the gentlest breath of their precious darHngs. These parents do

not want to consider the possibility that the children may in this way receive

impressions  which  may  prove  very  injurious  to  them.  Many  a  case  of

obstinate insomnia in childhood or of nocturnal attacks of apprehension is

explained  in  this  way.  I  have  repeatedly  cured  sleepless  children  by  the

simple remedy of ordering them to sleep in separate bedrooms.

  Let us assume then that all children are susceptible to erotic stimuli and

that  such  stimulation  may  harm  them.  For  the  later  a  person's  conscious

sexual  life  begins  the  greater  the  prospects  of  his  becoming  a  healthy,

mentally  well-balanced  individual.  Among  the  factors  capable  of

permanently arousing erotic emotions we must include excessive affection.

Between the affections of one who loves and of a mother there are really no

differences.  Both  kiss,  caress,  fondle,  hug,  embrace,  pet,  etc.  That  the

excitement is transmitted to the same central organs is obvious.

  In this way the child receives its first erotic sensations from its nurse.

Interpret it as we may the nurse, the attendant, the mother, the father are the

child's first love, the first erotic love, as our psychoanalysis has convincingly

demonstrated.  But  this  must  not  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  I  wish  to

condemn the affectionate management of children. On the contrary!

    AFFECTIONATE PARENTS 169

  A certain quantity of affection is, as a matter of fact, essential to the

normal development of the individual. But the affection lavished on themmust not be excessive. For if it is the child will be prematurely brought into a

condition  of  erotic  overstimulation.  It  grows  older  and  begins  to  feel  the

power of education. To restrain and curb the force of the natural impulses

powerful  inhibitions  are  erected.  As  a  reaction  to  the  premature  sexual

stimulation there begins a remarkable process which may be designated as "

sexual repression." This repression may succeed so well that even the child

forgets  its  early  experiences  or  the  repression  does  not  succeed  and  the

individual's erotic requirements grow from year to year. In the latter case

there develops in the child a serious psychic conflict between sexual longing

and sexual renunciation and thus the soil in which a neurosis may grow is

prepared.  Perhaps  the  conflict  is  the  neurosis.  We  shall  mention  only  in

passing that such exaggerated affection begets in many children the habit of

securing for themselves a certain amount of pleasurable sensations by way of

certain auto-erotic actions. It is not possible, nor necessary, to enter into a

detailed  discussion  of  these  matters  here.  For  most  people  know  that  our

experiences  in  childhood  influence  our  whole  life.  But  it  is  a  tragic

commentary  on  human  strivings  that  excessive  parental  love  may  bring

sickness  upon  the  child,  that  a  happy  present  is  replaced  by  an  unhappy

future, that

  170 AFFECTIONATE PARENTS

  the roses a mother strews in her child's path only later show their thorns.

  We cannot say it too often : We fuss too much with our children. There is

too much theory in this matter of bringing up children. We pay too much

attention to our children. Let us leave them their peaceful childhood, their

merry games, the wondrous product of their untiring phantasy. Let us clearly

realize that with our excessive affection we give ourselves a great deal of

pleasure but that at the same time we are doing the children a great injury. Let

no one discourage mothers from being affectionate to their children, from

expending loving attentions on them, from making their youth as pleasant as

possible. But the parents' affection should not expend itself mechanically. It

should be a uniformly warm fire that only warms, kindles no fire, and bursts

into a bright flame only on life's great holidays.

  WHY THEY QUARREL

  When a happy married couple laughingly assures me that the heaven of

their marriage was always cloudless and that there were no thunderstorms

and no lightning flashes I accept it as self-evident, but to myself I think : they

are lying. When two friends assure me that they have never quarrelled I thinkthe same thing. I know that they have not been telling the truth. That is, they

are liars without the consciousness of lying. They are firmly convinced that

they were telling only what was true, because they have " repressed " the

unpleasant,  the  painful,  the  objectionable.  And  thus  it  comes  to  pass  that

lovers forget all the " scenes " that had occurred between them, and that

friends become oblivious of the little unpleasantnesses that had caused them

so much suffering, and that they can assert, with the utmost conviction, that

they had never quarrelled. We do not quaff the lethe-potion of oblivion at our

life's end. No, we sip it daily, and it is this that enables us to maintain that

optimism which ever looks hopefully into the future and anticipates thornless

roses.

  There  are  people  who  must  always  be  quarrelling,  whose  exuberant

energy must be discharged in this way, to whom life does not seem worth

  (171)

  while if it runs along smoothly. These arc the everlastingly unsatisfied

who have not found the ideals of their youth, who have not attained their

dreams. They project their discontent, their internal distraction, upon all their

daily experiences. That is why they so often appear to be overcharged with

emotion ; that is why the intensity of their excitement is imcomprehen-sible

to us. For it is a fact that they fly into rages about trivial matters. But it is this

very intensity of emotion that shows that there is more behind these little

rows than they will ordinarily admit, that the quarrel derives its fuel from a

deeper source than appears on the surface.

  It has struck many observers that the external provocation to quarrelling

is often very trivial. Of course we frequently hear a man or his wife declare

that they would gladly avoid a quarrel if it were possible to do so. Either one

says something that seems to be quite innocent, and yet it will be the occasion

for  a  heated  altercation,  a  great  domestic  scene  with  all  its  unpleasant

consequences.

  This is due to the fact that most persons do not distinguish between cause

and  provocation.  The  provocation  to  a  quarrel  is  easily  found  if  hidden

unconscious forces seek for it, if a deeper cause, acting as a driving power,

sets the wheels of passion in motion.

  A  somewhat  careful  investigation  of  every  quarrel  easily  brings  the

conviction that it is

    invariably the secret, unconscious emotions that bring about the conflict

of opinions. Where this deep resonance of the unconscious is lacking weplayfully  pass  over  differences.  Unfortunately  there  are  probably  no  two

human beings whose souls vibrate so harmoniously that there never occurs a

discord. This phenomenon is altogether too deeply rooted in human nature

for an exception ever to occur. And paradoxical as it may sound, it is lovers

who love each other most who cause each other the greatest pain. The great

intensity  which  their  emotions  attain  is  due  only  to  the  fact  they  have

repressed a series of experiences and feelings. They are blind to the faults of

the beloved because they do not wish to see these faults. But the suppressed

forces have not yet lost their power over the soul. These bring about the

quarrel, and are capable, even if only for a few seconds, to transform love

into hatred.

  But a few practical examples will do more to make this subject clear than

all our theoretical explanations. Mr. N. S., a pious, upright man, asserts that

his present ailment dates from a quarrel that had been frightfully upsetting

him  for  months.  He  had  inherited  from  his  father  a  large  library  rich  in

manuscripts, and had also succeeded him in his position. One day his brother

came to him and stormily demanded the return of the books. But inasmuch as

he was the older he felt himself entitled to be the sole heir. A violent quarrel

ensued, during which

  he exclaimed : " I'll die before I give up any of these books ! " After the

quarrel he became very neurotic. He tortures himself with self-reproaches ; he

is  convinced  that  with  that  exclamation  he  had  been  guilty  of  an  act  of

impiety ; he is very unhappy and finds no rest, no peace, either at home or in

his office.

  Many persons may be satisfied with the superficial explanation offered by

the patient himself that he is an ardent bibhophile and collector of ancient

manuscripts. But the physician who treats sick souls must not be so easily

satisfied.

  We  know  that  every  collector  is  an  unconscious  Don  Juan  who  has

transferred his passion from an erotic upon a non-erotic sphere. But we also

know that the passion with which the collected objects are loved emanates

from the erotic domain. And what did our psychoanalysis of the above case

bring out ? Remarkably enough a rivalry between the two brothers which

went back all the way to their youth. The older one had the privileges of the

first-born and was a good-for-nothing. The younger one was a pattern of what

a  child  ought  to  be.  From  their  childhood  they  had  been  rivals  for  the

affection of their parents, and more especially of the mother. We encounterhere the so-called '^ Oedipus motive," a son's love for his mother—a motive

whose instinctive force and urge are still too imperfectly appreciated. The

two had been rivals, the older one being jealous of the parents' preference for

the

  younger one, and the younger jealous of the older one's privileges. In this

we have the first of the deeper motives for the quarrel. Further investigation

brought a second and a third motive to light. The older had, very naturally,

married  first,  and  repeatedly  boasted  in  the  presence  of  his  younger  and

unmarried brother of his wife's charms and virtues. In fact, he had even led

him into his wife's bedroom that he might see for himself what a treasure he

possessed. (You see the motives of such stories as *' Gyges and his Ring "

and " King Candaules " occurring even nowadays.) At that moment a great

passion for his sister-in-law flared up in the younger brother's breast. Here we

have then a second cause for dissension. But other factors are also involved.

Our pious young man married a beautiful woman and would have been happy

if he had not been the victim of a jealous passion. Jealousy always has its

origin in the knowledge of one's inferiority. He thought he noticed that his

older brother was too devoted to his wife. And during an excursion into the

country they had been in the woods a little too long, as he thought, and it

occurred to him—and here we have the fourth motive—to tempt his sister-in-

law. He is a Don Juan who runs after every petticoat and wants to drain life in

large draughts. N. S. was a pious virtuous man who knew how to turn his

sinful cravings to good account for the success of his business and to bad

account as far as his health was concerned. The brother whom

  he despised openly he envied in secret. But we could mention still other

motives for their quarrel if Mrs. Grundy considerations did not bar the way . .

.

    Unconscious sexual motives lurk behind many quarrels, one might almost

say behind most quarrels. We have already hinted that dissensions between

brothers or sisters are due to rivalry. But even in the quarrels between parents

and children we may frequently enough demonstrate the identical undertone

for the dis-'harmony. The infant son sees in his father a rival for the mother's

favour. The reverse also occurs, though not so frequently. I was once the

witness to a violent quarrel between a father and his son. The father had, as it

seemed to me, not the slightest cause for grievance against the son, and yet a

little trifle led to a violent altercation that ended in a tragic scene. At the

height of the row the father screamed to his wife : " You are to blame for itall! You robbed me of my son's love ! "

    Naturally one would think that this lava stream belched forth in a great

burst of passion from a volcano would contain the truth in its torrid current.

And so it does, but in a disguised form. The true reproach should have been

directed at the son, and should have been : " You have robbed me of my

wife's love ! "

  We see in this a " transference " of a painful emotion from one person

upon another. Such transferences or ** displacements" are ex-

  tremely common in everyday life, and it is only with their aid that we can

account for the many domestic conflicts. A man will rarely admit that he

erred in the choice of a wife. The feeling of hatred that his wife engenders in

him he transfers upon others. Upon whom ? The answer is obvious. Upon her

next of kin. Most frequently upon her mother, the most immediate cause of

her existence. This is the secret meaning of the many mother-in-law jokes, a

never-failing and inexhaustible and perpetual theme for wits.

  So that, for example, if we hear a young woman complain that she cannot

bear her husband's family but that she loves him beyond bounds we may with

perfect  safety  translate  this  in  the  language  of  the  unconscious  thus  :  "  I

would not care a rap about my husband's family if I did not have to love my

husband."

  The  rows  with  servants,  well-known  daily  occurrences,  become

intelligible only if we know the law of transference. An unfaithful wife, who

had been betrayed and deserted by her lover, suddenly began to watch her

servant girls suspiciously, and to strike them on the slightest provocations.

The woman had for years employed '* help " without having had more than

the customary quarrels with them. After a short sojourn with her husband the

rage of the abandoned woman, who would have loved to give her faithless

lover a good thrashing in true southern fashion, was transferred upon her

servants. And exactly Hke this the resentment

  of many a housewife is discharged through these more or less innocent

lightning rods, and thus is brought about the phenomenon so common in

modern large cities which may be designated as " servant-girl neurosis."

    Obviously the deeper motives slumber in the unconscious, and if they

ever become conscious they are looked upon as sinfulness and bad temper.

Freud has become the founder of a wholly new psychology by virtue of his

discovery of the laws of repression and of transference— a psychology which

will be indispensable to the criminologist of the future. What is nowadaysbrought to light in our halls of justice as the psychological bases for conflicts

is generally only superficial psychology.

  This is strikingly illustrated by one of the saddest of legal proceedings of

last  year.  I  mean  the  trial  for  murder  in  the  Murri-Bou-martini  case,  in

consequence of which an innocent victim—so I am convinced—the Countess

Linda  Boumartini  is  languishing  in  prison.  Her  brother  TuUio,  who  had

murdered his brother-in-law, was accused of an illicit relationship with his

sister, for otherwise the murder would have been inexplicable. One who has

carefully read Linda's memoirs and her letters, which are now before the

public, as well as the confessions of the imprisoned Tullio, will be sure to

laugh at the accusation, which unquestionably owed its origin to a clerical

plot. What may have really happened is that unconscious brotherly

  love  which  deep  down  under  consciousness  in  all  likelihood  takes  it

origin  from  the  sexual  but  whose  flowers  appear  on  the  surface  of

consciousness as the loftiest manifestations of ethical feeling. It was brotherly

love, the primal motive which Wagner immortalised in his " Walkyre," that

forced the dagger into Tulho Murri's hand. He saw his sister suffer and go to

pieces because of the brutal stupidity of his brother-in-law. What lay hidden

behind his pure fraternal love may never have entered his consciousness.

  Oh, we unfortunates, doomed to eternal blindness ! What we see of the

motives of great conflicts is usually only the surface. Even in the case of the

httle domestic quarrels, the irritating frictions of everyday life, the vessel of

knowledge sails only over the easily excited ripples. But what gives these

waters their black aspect is the deep bed over which they lie. Down there, at

the  bottom  of  the  sea  which  represents  our  soul,  there  ever  abide  ugly,

deformed  monsters—  our  instincts  and  desires—emanating  from  the

beginnings of man's history. When they bestir their coarse bodies the sea too

trembles and is slightly set in motion. And we stupid human beings think it is

the surface wind that has begot the waves.

    LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE

  It was getting late. The last guests had left the caf6. The waiters, tired and

sleepy, were prowling around our table with a peculiar expression in their

countenances which clearly challenged us to call for our checks . . .

  We took no notice of them. Or rather, we refused to take notice. The

sudden  death  of  one  of  our  dearest  friends  had  aroused  something

incomprehensible in us which made us very restless. We were speaking about

premonitions,  and  that  peculiar  intangible  awe  which  one  feels  in  thepresence of the incomprehensible, the supernatural, which at certain times

overcomes even the most confirmed sceptic, sat at our table.

  The journalist—-who could not deny a slight tendency to mysticism—

was of the opinion that he would certainly not die a natural death. That was

all we could get him to say on the subject at this time. Finally however he

confessed, with pretended indifference, that he has the certain premonition

that he will one day be trampled to death by frightened horses.

  " Nonsense ! "—" Nursery tales ! "—" Superstition ! " several voices

exclaimed simultaneously

  But the physician shook his head gravely.

  (i8©)

    LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE i8i

  " Strange ! Very strange ! Do you put any stock in this looking into the

future ? "

  The journalist blushed so slightly that it could hardly be noticed, the way

men blush when they fear that they had betrayed a weakness. Cautiously he

replied : " And why not ? Can you prove the contrary ? Have we not until

only  a  few  years  ago  pooh-poohed  the  idea  of  telepathy  and  called  it

superstition ? But now-a-days that the X-rays, wireless telegraphy and other

marvels  have  revolutionised  our  ideas  about  matter  and  energy  and  even

space,  we  no  longer  laugh  pityingly  at  the  poor  dreamers  who,  like

Swedenburg, the northern magician, see things that are beyond the field of

vision  of  their  bodily  eyes.  Why  then  should  I  doubt  the  possibility  of

somebody some day finding an explanation for the ability to ' look into the

future ' ? "

  " Bosh ! " exclaimed the lawyer. " That's aU fantastic piffle! I can cite

you an example from my own experience which is as interesting as it is

instructive. I was very sick and confined to bed. Suddenly I awoke, my heart

palpitating, and heard a loud voice screaming these words right into my ears :

' You will live fourteen days more ! Take advantage of this period !' Just

fourteen days later I was sailing on the ocean. A frightful sirocco wind was

tossing our little steamer from right to left and from left to right so violently

that we could not retain our upright positions. And suddenly my prophecy—

which I

  had almost completely forgotten—came back to me. But I remained very

cool,  like  a  scientist  who  is  on  the  eve  of  making  a  great  discovery  and

risking his life to do so. As you see I did not die, and the ship came safelyinto port. But had I accidentally perished, and if my prophetic dream—the

outward projection of my unconscious fear—my unpleasant hallucination had

been known to the people about me—the matter would have been construed

as  a  new  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  premonitions.  We  have  so  many

premonitions that are never fulfilled that the few that happen accidentally to

come true do not really matter. Lots of things in life are that way. We speak

of our ' hard luck ' because we forget the times when we have been lucky.

Luck rushes by so swiftly ! Bad luck creeps, oh, so slowly ! And, coming

down to facts, I do not know of a single instance of an undoubted fulfillment

of a prophecy. For I must confess that all these American and Berlin prophets

who have recently given such striking proofs of their * second sight' do not

impress  me.  They  have  not  uttered  a  single  prophecy  precisely  and

accurately, and oracular speeches delivered in general terms are as elastic as a

rubber band, and can be applied to almost anything. A great conflagration, a

destructive  earthquake,  or  a  cruel  war  will  rarely  disappoint  a  prophet.

Somewhere or other in this wide world there is a conflagration some time

during the year, the earth rocks somewhere, and somewhere machine guns

    LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE 183

  are being fired. I therefore do not believe that our friend will be trampled

to death by frightened horses. At the most what will happen will be that his

pegasus, growing tired of being abused by him, will suddenly throw him

down."

  For  a  little  while  there  was  silence.  We  had  the  feeling  that  the

counsellor's malicious witti-ism was out of place at this time. The doctor

broke the silence. " What will you say, my dear friends, if I tell you that a

prominent  scientist  and  psychologist  has  reported  a  case  which  seems  to

prove the possibility of looking into the future. I say * seems ' only because

there is an explanation which re-transforms the supernatural into the natural.

The physician in question, the well-known Dr. Flournoy, had frequently been

consulted  by  a  young  man  w^ho  was  suffering  from  peculiar  attacks  of

apprehension. Day and night he was haunted by the idea that he would fall

from a high mountain into a deep precipice, and so be killed. Logic and

persuasion  were  of  no  avail  in  dealing  with  this  obsession.  It  was  easy

enough for Flournoy to point out that all the young man had to do was to

keep away from mountains, and there would be no possibility of his meeting

such a frightful end. The patient grew very melancholic, and could not be

persuaded to enjoy life as formerly. Imagine this experienced psychologist'samazement on reading in his newspaper one day that his patient had been

instantly killed by accidentally falling from a steep but easily passable ridge

while he was taking a walk

  184 LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE

  in a sanitarium in the Alps."

  The journalist exclaimed triumphantly: " Doctor, you've disproved your

own theory. If what you've just told us doesn't prove the power to look into

the future, then nothing does."

  " Pish! Pish! " replied the physician. " Haven't I said that the explanation

is to follow ? "

  We were all very curious to hear how such a strange occurrence could be

explained without the aid of the supernatural. The physician lit another cigar

and continued : " What, coming down to facts, is fear ? You all know what it

is, for I have told you often enough : fear—anxiety —apprehension—is a

repressed wish. Every time that two wishes are in conflict as to which one is

to have mastery over the individual the wish that has to yield is perceived in

consciousness as apprehension. A young girl is apprehensive when she finds

herself for the first time alone in a room with her sweetheart. For the time

being  she  is  afraid  of  what  later  on  she  may  wish  for.  Dr.  Flournoy's

melancholic young man was clearly tired of life. The wish may have come

upon him once to make an end of his life by throwing himself from a great

height—from such a height as would make failure of the suicidal attempt

impossible. This wish may have come to him at night in a dream, or perhaps

just before he fell asleep, while he was in a state between sleep and waking.

Who knows ? But it must have prevailed before the will to live had re-

    LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE 185

  pressed  it  and  converted  it  into  apprehension.  And  his  prophetic

premonitions were nothing but the misunderstood voice from within. And his

mysterious death was nothing but—suicide. I have forgotten to tell you that,

according  to  the  newspaper  reporters,  he  had  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  a

precipice and fallen asleep. He had fallen down while asleep. As if the voices

in his dream had whispered to him : * Come ! do what you so earnestly yearn

to do ! Die ! Now you have a fine opportunity !' The moment had come when

the fear had become the stronger wish."

  The journalist was pale. The doctor's explanation seemed to have stirred

up something in the deepest layers of his soul. His voice box was seen to

make that automatic movement which we all make when we are embarrassed,as if we wished to speak but could not find the right word. Finally, after he

had coughed a little several times, as if to clear his vocal cords, he remarked

in a somewhat heavy voice : " That would throw a peculiar light upon many

accidental falls in the mountains. You recall, no doubt, that a short time ago a

well-known tourist had fallen from a relatively safe cliff. He carried a lot of

insurance, and the insurance companies were very anxious to prove it a case

of suicide. Is it possible that in this case, too, an " unconscious power co-

operated ? "

  " Certainly! " exclaimed the physician. " Certainly! At any rat«, it is my

conviction

  186 LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE

  that  many  persons  seek  nothing  but  death  in  the  mountains.  I  have

certainly met many tourists who had nothing more to hope for from life. One

who does not fear death no longer loves life, or, at any rate, no longer loves it

to such an extent as not to be willing to gamble with it. Have any of you an

idea how many of our actions have their origin in * unconscious' motives ?

All our life our shadow, our other self, walks by our side and has its say in

everything we do. As long as it is only a shadow it is not dangerous. But,

woe, if the shadow materialises, as the spiritualists say. The tourist makes a

false step and falls into an abyss. Who or what guided his foot ? Was it

chance—or the unacted wish that slumbered so long beyond the threshold of

consciousness ? Or shall we say that while one was climbing up a steep

mountain path his strength failed him, and he was precipitated into the depths

below ? Who can decide in such a case as to just what happened ? For a little

moment the climber must have had the thought ' if you are not careful now

you will fall and be killed.' The next moment there may have issued from the

repressed * complexes ' the command : ' Do it! Then you are free and rid of

all your troubles ! ' So our young man could have continued to live on the

even ground, as Flournoy had advised him to do. But he preferred to go to the

mountains. Perhaps it would be better to say that something drew him to the

mountains. It was the same power that

    LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE 187

    precipitated him into the abyss : his life-weariness. The trip he took to the

country for the sake of his health was from the very beginning a flight into

the realm of death. He pursued his shadow just as "

  He did not finish his sentence. His cigar had gone out. He Ht it again, and

with wide open eyes gazed into the distance as if he had more to say butcould not find the right word.

  There was silence for a time, and finally the counsellor ventured to say : "

Very interesting case ! I wonder if its psychology could not be generalised ?

Isn't it possible that a large number of the other daily fatal accidents could not

be instances of ' unconscious suicide' ? There is, for example, the case of the

man who is run over by a cable-car because he did not hear the bell, the

unlucky swimmer who is overcome by cramps, the victim of the fellow who

did  not  know  the  revolver  was  loaded.  Haven't  all  these  little  and  big

accidents their shadowy motivation ? "

  " Of course they have," replied the physician. " Of course ! We really

know  so  little  of  the  things  we  do  and  even  less  why  we  do  them.  Our

emotions, our feelings, are really only the resultants of numerous components

; they are only tensions giving shadowy testimony of ripening forces. We

think we are directing these forces, but we are being driven by them ; we

think we make our decisions, but we only accept the decisions of ' the other

fellow ' in us.

  188 LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE

    Professor Freud has assured himself a place amongst the immortals with

his psychological theory concerning so-called ' symptomatic acts.' He has

substituted a ' secret inner will' for ' blind chance.' "

  " And what about looking into the future ? " inquired the journalist.

  " Why, that's only looking backward. We can easily predict for ourselves

anything we long for, and can easily have presentiments about what we do

not wish to avert. The facts which permit us to glimpse the future are gleaned

from our yesterdays. Our childhood wishes determine our subsequent history.

All  of  us  could  readily  read  our  future  could  we  call  into  new  life  our

childhood  emotions.  What  we  dreamed  of  in  childhood  we  wish  to

experience as adults. And if we cannot experience it we are drawn back into

the realm of eternal dreams. This is as true of humanity as a whole as of man

individually.  Only  when  we  study  our  past  can  we  see  the  future  of  our

present,  then  can  we  predict  that  our  modern,  ultra-modern  time  with  its

innumerable stupidities, with its conflicts and ideals, with its strivings and

discoveries,  will  be  as  far  outstripped  as  we  imagine  ourselves  to  have

outstripped  our  ancestors.  Science  and  art,  politics  and  public  life—all  a

perpetual circle tending towards an unknown future. . ."

  "  So  then,  to  return  to  my  glimpse  of  the  future,"  the  journalist

interrupted, " that I shall be crushed by runaway horses ? "  The physician smiled superiorly. " Just try to think back and see whether

your presentiment has not its roots in the past! "

  " Something now occurs to me," exclaimed the mystic ; " my mother used

to prophesy that I would not die a natural death. I was a very wild youth, and

managed to spend a lot of time with the horses in our stable. In great anger

my  dear  little  mother  would  then  launch  all  sorts  of  gloomy  predictions

concerning my destiny."

  His  mysterious  look  into  the  future  was  now  explained.  The  doctor

ventured  to  remark  that  this  "  case"  also  illustrated  how  intimately

superstition and a consciousness of guilt are linked together. The imaginary

glimpse into the future was in his friend's case also only a glimmer out of the

past.  He  referred  to  the  remarkable  fact  that  our  earliest  recollections

represent a reflection of our future. . . .

  " There are facts "—he said slowly, hesitatingly, as if the words had to be

forced out of his interior—" which one can hardly explain. I once loved a

woman with such an intense love as I have not felt for any woman since. We

spent  a  wonderful  day  together.  Then  we  bade  each  other  good-night.  I

remained standing, looking after her. She was walking through the high reeds

in a meadow. Her graceful figure was getting smaller and smaller. With a

slight turn in the road she disappeared from my view but soon reappeared.

Then for a while I saw her shadowy outline until a clump of trees again

  190 LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE

  hid  her  trom  my  view.  Then  I  saw  her  again,  but  very  small.  I  saw

something white—her handkerchief. At this moment a shiver went through

me, and I thought: that's how you will lose her ; gradually you will cease to

see her ; twice she will re-appear, and then she will be gone for ever !—

Nonsense, said I to myself, and spun bold plans for the future. . . . But the

future proved that my presentiment had been true. Everything happened as I

had felt it that evening. A glimpse into the future! And yet! Sometimes I

think to myself that I had only realised the impossibility of a union between

us.  What  I  felt  as  a  presentiment  may  have  been  only  clearer  inner

comprehension."

  The waiter yawned loud. This time we took the hint and paid. We went

home, and something oppressive, unspoken, weighed us all down. As if we

were not quite satisfied with the solution of the mystery—as if the shuddering

sweetness  of  a  superstitious  belief  in  supernatural  powers,  a  belief  in  a

something above and beyond us would be more to our liking. Silently wetook our way through the quiet streets. We felt, for all the world, like children

who had been told by their mother that the beautiful story was only a story—

that the prince and the princess had never really lived.

  We had been robbed of one of life's fairy tales. Fie ! Fie on this naked,

sober, empty reaHty ! How much nicer it would be if we could look into the

future !

    LOOKING BACKWARD

  Around Christmas of every year a pale woman clad in black consults me

and bewails her fate. It is a pitiful tale that she narrates tearfully. A ruined

life, a ruined marriage ! One of those fearful disappointments experienced by

women who, utterly unacquainted with the world, and not brought up to be

independent, entrust all their dammed-up longing for happiness and love to

the first man who happens to cross their path. The first time she came I was

touched with pity and could have wept with her. The best advice I could give

her was wholly to separate from her husband, forget the past, and to build up

a new life. The second time she came I was somewhat unpleasantly surprised,

because  the  unfortunate  woman  had  not  yet  screwed  her  courage  to  the

sticking-point  and  was  wasting  her  life  in  gloomy  broodings  about  the

incomprehensibleness of her destiny. But this time she promised to employ

all the means and resources at her disposal to get out of her fruitless conflict

and useless complainings. . . . Since her first visit ten years have passed, but

she still stands on the ruins of her hopes and laments her wasted life. Her

figure, which was once slender and sinewy, looks as if it were broken in

many parts ; her face

  shows the first traces of age. Now she hat additional cause for grieving.

She looks into the mirror and is unhappy that she has changed so. " What has

become of me and the beauty that so many admired ? " Before her mind's eye

she sees again the men who once wooed her and whom she had rejected.

Every one of them would probably have made her happier than the one she

had chosen !

  She  augments  her  complainings  and  emphasizes  her  despair.  All  her

friends and all her relatives, her physicians and her confidants, know her sad

lot and have no new words of consolation for her, only conventional phrases

and stereotyped gestures. Because of her complainings she is becoming a

nuisance to everybody. Her pain has reached that dangerous point where the

tragic  becomes  the  comic.  In  vain  she  tries  to  move  her  hearers  by

heightening the dramatic description of the unalterableness of her situation.She  becomes  aware  that  human  beings  can  become  partisans  only  in  the

presence of fresh conflicts and very quickly become accustomed to others'

unhappiness. And this, of course, gives her additional reason for thinking

herself lonesome, misunderstood, and forsaken, and thus a new melody is

added to her stale song. If she had before this compared herself with her

happier  sisters,  her  consciousness  of  still  possessing  youth  and  beauty

afforded her a certain comfort. Hope gently whispered to her : " You can still

change it! you are still

  young and desirable ! you will yet find a man to appreciate you and to

give you the happiness which the other destroyed ! "

  Gradually  there  crept  into  her  embittered  soul  envy  of  the  youth  and

beauty of others and augmented the poison of her depression. There was no

longer any escape from this labyrinth of woes ! In whatever direction she

looked, she saw only grey clouds ; everywhere she saw dark and confused

roads losing themselves in the darkness of a ruined life. One would suppose

that by this time she would have resolutely determined to end her sufferings

and remove herself from a world which had nothing more to offer her.

  One who supposes any such thing is not acquainted with this type of

person. He has not yet discovered the secret of " sweet sorrow," the delights

of self-pity. This woman, too, found her pleasure in the tragic role which life

had temporarily assigned her and to which she was clinging spasmodically

with all her power. She virtually drank herself drunk with the thought that she

was the unhappiest woman in the world. She directed over her own wounds

all  the  streams  of  love  that  flowed  from  her  warm  heart.  She  tore  these

wounds open again and again so as to be unhappy and pity herself. If it did

not sound so paradoxical, I would say that this woman would be unhappy if

one  deprived  her  of  her  unhappiness.  I  wonder  whether  an  unconscious

religious motive did not play a role in this self-assumed suffering. Did

  she hope for compensation in the life to come for all the happiness that

she had missed in this world ? Was her everlasting looking backwards only a

voluntarily maintained attitude behind which was concealed the anticipation

of never-ending looking into a radiant eternity ?

  All my attempts to restore her to an active life failed. The surest of all

therapeutic  remedies,  work,  failed  because  she  never  took  the  matter

seriously.  She  stubbornly  maintained  herself  in  the  position  of  looking

backward, and from this position no power on earth could move her . . .

  One who looks upon the Bible as a poetic account of eternal conflicts andhas learned to recognise the symbolic significance of legendary lore will have

no  difficulty  in  recognizing  in  the  story  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  the

significance of looking backwards. The woman who was converted into a

pillar  of  salt  because  she  looked  back  into  the  burning  city—what  a

wonderful  symbolisation  of  losing  oneself  in  the  past  !  Everyone  has  his

secret  Sodom,  his  Gomorrah,  his  disappointments,  his  defeats,  his  fearful

judgments ! Woe to him who looks back into the dangerous moments of his

life ! And does not one of von Schwab's legends warn us against the dangers

of past terrors ? Does it not tell us that we are flying madly over abysses, that

the perils of the road are concealed and that it is dangerous to retain in the

mind's eye the perils that are past ?

  There will be no difficulty now in comprehending my formula that to be

well  is  to  have  overcome  one's  past.  I  know  of  no  better  means  of

distinguishing the neurotic from the healthy. The healthy person also suffers

disappointments —who can escape them ?—^he too suffers many a fall when

he thinks he is rushing on to victory, but he will raise the tattered flag of hope

and continue on his way to the assured goal. The neurotic does not get done

with his past. All experiences have a tenfold seriousness for him. Whereas

the  healthy  person  throws  off  the  burden  of  past  disappointments,  and

occasionally even transforms the recollection of them to sources of pleasure,

and is stimulated to new efforts by the contrasts between the pleasureable

present  and  the  sad  past,  the  nervous  person  includes  in  his  burdensome

present the difficulties of the past. His memories become more and more

oppressive from year to year.

  It is for all the world as if the neurotic's soul were covered over with some

dangerous adhesive material. Everything sticks to it and does not permit itself

to be loosed from it, becomes organically united to it, wraps itself up in it,

blinds his clear vision and cripples his freedom of motion. This not getting

done with the past betrays itself also in his inability to forgive, in his craving

for revenge and in his resentments. A neurotic is capable of reproaching one

for some trifling humiliation or for some unconsidered word many years after

the event. He

  treasures up these humiliations and defeats and does not lose sight of

them for a single day. It might almost be said that he enacts daily the whole

repertoire of the past.

  How often are we amazed to find people who continue to make the same

mistakes over and over again and whom experience seems never to teachanything. Nietzsche says : " If one has character he has his experience which

keeps on recurring." In reality all that life is capable of depends upon this

ability to forget the past. Of course some experiences continue to live as

lessons and warnings and go to make up that uncertain treasure which we call

Experience. True greatness, however, shows itself in being able to act in spite

of one's experiences, in overcoming latent mistrust.

  What would become of us if all of us permitted our unhappy experiences

to operate as inhibitions ! We should resemble a person who avoided an

article of diet because it had once disagreed with him. Experience may be that

which  no  one  can  learn  unless  one  has  been  born  with  it:  to  find  the

appropriate mean from one's experiences and one's inclinations.

  The  nervous  individual  becomes  useless  as  far  as  life  is  concerned

because his experience becomes a source of doubt for him and intensifies his

wanting  will-power.  In  the  presence  of  a  new  task  he  takes  his  past  into

consideration  and  makes  his  unhappy  experiences  serve  as  warnings,

hesitates, vacillates, weighs, and finally

  docs nothing. How much could any of us do if we lacked the courage to

venture ? What could we accomplish if we never thought the game worth the

candle ? I have often been enabled to prove that the neurotic's will is weak

because his will is divided. I must supplement this with the statement that his

will is oppressed by the burden of his past.

  Let us after this disgression turn back to the unhappy woman with whom

we began. I intimated that it was within her power to alter her destiny. Virile

and  kindly  disposed  men  offered  her  a  helping  hand.  But  her  unhappy

experience  begot  a  fear  of  a  second  disillusionment.  She  preferred  to  be

unhappy rather than to venture a second time and again be unhappy.

  But it is not only our past unhappiness that is dangerous. Past happiness,

too, must be overcome and grow pale. Who does not know persons who are

ever speaking of the past, the good old days that never return ? This is a

particularly striking phenomenon with reference to childhood. Some people

do not seem to be capable of forgetting their blissful childhood. There is an

important  hint  here  for  parents  and  educators  who  wish  to  assure  their

children a beautiful childhood. One must be careful that it is not made too

beautiful!  Because  of  the  pleasureable  initiation  into  life  the  later

disharmonies prove too painful and awaken a longing for childhood which

can be fulfilled only in fruitless dreams !

    Recollections must not be permitted to kill the present. We must not bepermitted  to  be  ever  lured  back  into  the  past  and  forever  to  be  making

comparisons. Every one of us carries the key-to his past about in his bosom

and opens the secret portals in order to roam about in it during the night in his

dreams. In the morning, just before awaking, he locks the shrine and his daily

duties resume their career. But there are people who cannot tear themselves

away from their dreams and are ever barkening back to the voices of the past.

  In  insanity  this  absorption  in  one's  past  may  easily  be  observed.  The

invalids become children again, with all their failings, their childish prattle,

their childish pranks, and their childish games. They have come upon the

road to childhood and lost the way so that they cannot get back again into the

world of the grownups. They have looked backwards so long that finally they

went backwards.

  This " return to childhood" may also be observed in nervous people who

have retained their critical faculty. I recall a woman of forty who employed a

maid to dress and undress her, also to wash her, and who did not perform

certain personal functions without the company and assistance of the maid.

And I must not forget to mention the twenty-four-year-old youth who was

brought to me by his mother because he was incapable of doing any work and

who was not ashamed in my presence to take a good swallow

  of milk every five minutes from an ordinary-baby's milk-bottle. This kind

of  "  infantilism  "  often  attains  grotesque  proportions.  To-day  the

aforementioned woman laughs at the " incomprehensible malady," and the

grown-up suckling is an industrious official who supports his family very

comfortably. Both of them wished to defeat nature and return to childhood.

Not infrequently a bodily change accompanies this mental state. The hair falls

out, the features become softer, and the signs of adult masculinity undergo

regressive changes. In all probability this condition is associated with certain

disturbances of the internal metabolism. But who can say positively whether

the impulse to these disturbances did not proceed from the stubborn look

backwards, the yearning for childhood, and the enraptured glance into the

depths of the past ?

  All the wisdom of life consists in the manner of our forgetting. What fine

overtones of the harmonies and discords of the past must accompany the

concords of the day ! But every day has a right to its melody. Each one lives

its own life and is a preparation for the future. One who fills his day with the

delights and the pains of the past murders it. Only on appropriate occasions

may  we,  must  we,  direct  our  eyes  backwards,  survey  the  path  we  havetraversed, and again concentrate our gaze on the milestones of memory.

  All ye who are ever bewailing your lot and are

  incapable of rising above your fate—hearken unto me and know that ye

no longer live, that ye died ere the law of destruction robbed ye of life ! Let

me  tell  ye  what  ye  may  find  writ  in  burning  letters  in  the  firmament  of

knowledge : it is never too late I Only he has lost his life who thinks he has

lost it. Forgive and forget I Drink of the lethe of work and solicitude for

others ! Ye are egoists ! For even the mirror of your woes on which your eyes

are riveted shows you only your own agonized image. And measure your

pains by the infinity of pain that fills the world.

    ALL-SOULS.

  I am not crying for the dead who have died but who are still alive for me.

I am crying for the dead who are still alive but who are dead for me. When I

look back upon the long succession of years that I have travelled, and think of

all my lovers who accompanied me part of the way, and then left me to

wander  alone,  I  feel  as  if  a  heavy  fog  were  enveloping  everything  that

otherwise appears beautiful and delightful . . .

  But the dead have clung to me. They live with me, feel with me, and

speak to me. When the noise of the day dies out and when the bells within

begin  to  ring,  when  shapeless  forms  emerge  from  the  unconscious  with

strange questions and uncanny gestures, when I turn from the world of reality

into that of mystery, then my dead friends are with me and I hold converse

with them. With every question I wish I had asked another, and I get the

conviction that this other one would have answered my question, or, that

other one would have understood me.

  Ah ! there is really so Httle that we desire : we wish to be understood, and

do not know that we are demanding the impossible, the unattainable. For we

must know ourselves ere others

  (20I)

  can comprehend us. But the urge to share ourselves with another, the

longing for a heart attuned to ours deceives us as to our own inadequacy.

What we do not possess we would find in another. And we compress all our

stupid  cravings  into  the  one  wish  which  appears  to  us  as  the  wish  for

friendship.

  Frightful is the thought how many friends I have lost, how many persons

whom I had once thought so valuable and unreplaceable have died as far as I

am  concerned.  And  even  more  painful  is  the  thought  that  this  is  theexperience of all of us. Every one of us finds persons who accompany us a

short distance, their hands in ours, their arms about us lovingly, and we think

this will continue for ever, and then we come to a turn in the road and they

have vanished. Or they travel along a road that seems to run very near our

own. So near one another do we travel that we can almost touch hands even

though our paths are not the same. And gradually our paths diverge. We are

still within sight of one another. We can still converse with one another. Then

this, too, becomes impossible. If we shout we may make ourselves heard on

the other highway, but there is no reply. They are gone !

  First, there were the friends of our childhood ! Among these there were

some whom we termed friends but who were really only a plaything, like the

rocking-horse and the wooden sword. They were created only for the purpose

of

  playing a role in the rich world of our fantasies. There was something

impersonal about our friend—he did not yet cling to us. Mother used to say to

us : " To-day you have a new friend ! " And we were ready to accept him as

such at once unless he was unsympathetic to us or obstinate or inclined to

lord  it  over  us.  Of  course  no  one  could  be  forced  on  us,  no  matter  how

earnestly mother demanded it. Gradually there developed in us that dark and

puzzling  concept,  made  up  of  the  fusion  of  numerous  primary  impulses,

which we call " friendship."

  Then one came along who was more to us than all the others. In his

presence life was much more beautiful and richer than we had supposed ;

when he was absent we longed for him. When he came all our pains were

forgotten. Ah, what great loves and hatreds we were capable of in the blessed

era of our first friendship !

  It is incomprehensible to me that I have lost the friend of my early youth.

On one occasion our teachers interfered and separated us. Why they did so I

do not know. But I was a wild, unruly youngster ; they may have feared that

by my example I might poison the inexperienced soul of my friend. But of

what avail were prohibitions in the presence of our great friendship ! We met

secretly behind dark hedges, where no teacher's eyes could discover us. As

evening approached we roamed out upon the meadow beyond the city, as far

as the

  cemetery wall upon the gentle slope of the mountain, where we could lie

down at our ease and gaze up at the stars, while we discussed the many

serious questions which were beginning to trouble the souls of the maturingyoungsters. When night came and wrapped the white buildings and the green

gardens in a dark veil, and when the distant trumpet summoned the soldiers

to their barracks, and at the sound there sprang from many an obscure nook

frightened couples who quickly embraced again and said hurried farewells,

we grasped each other's hands feverishly, and it seemed as if we could never,

never be separated. Once we were angry at each other. It had been a serious

dispute. Both of us were obstinate, for months we sulked and did not speak to

each other. But one day my friend's heart melted. He confessed that he had

suffered the tortures of jealousy, and that he made up only because he feared

he might lose me for ever.

  He was quite right. Slowly I had become half a man. Instinctively I had

found among the High School pupils one who had my own inclinations, who

spent sleepless nights with me in measuring verses on our fingers, fearing we

might  be  too  late  for  immortality.  If  it  was  the  sensuous  that  had  to  be

disposed of formerly, it was now the supersensuous that forced itself between

the innocent pleasures of life. Now we could sit in the moonlight for hours

speculating on the mysteries of existence,

  infinity, and immortality. Every time we discovered something beautiful

we were happy for days thereafter.

  He was not our only friend in those days of youthful enthusiasms. Then

we had many, many friends. And when we sat in the close cafes and with

palpitating hearts sang the old student-songs, and the pitcher filled with beer

was passed around, we spoke of " eternal friendship" and " eternal loyalty."

The " eternal" pledge was sealed by the shaking of hands, and we really felt

like  brothers.  Every  one  had  his  good  qualities  which  were  admired,  his

weaknesses which were smiled at indulgently, and his strength which was

feared. Each one seemed unreplaceable, and once when death snatched one of

our friends from our midst we all cried like little children who want their

mother.

  And when we scattered in the directions of the winds, one going to the

High School, the second into the army, the third into a vocation, our passion

flared up again, and we swore to come together again after a certain number

of years had gone by. What merry, spirited, and lusty boys we were ! . . .

  If only I had not seen them again, these friends! If only they could have

continued to live in my memory as a precious heritage from a period that was

rich in hopes and poor in disillusionments. It is with a shudder that I recall

the evening, when, after many years of    separation, we had a re-union. Were these my living friends ? No, these

had been dead many-years. I sat among corpses, among alien corpses who

spoke  a  language  that  was  not  mine.  One  whom  fortune  had  made  a

millionaire sat there vain and self-conscious. Absorbed in himself and morose

sat  one  who  clung  to  his  grandiose  fantasies  in  the  modest  station  he

occupied. A third kept looking at his watch uneasily because he had promised

his wife to be home before ten o'clock. The fourth stroked his paunch and

was  absorbed  in  the  mysteries  of  the  menu.  A  fifth  gazed  at  his  highly-

polished finger-nails and yawned. The sixth and the seventh—but enough!

They looked at one another strangely, and on the lips of all was the unuttered

question : " Why in —did we come here ? "

  These were friendships which had been made when we were still in our

childhood. Later on the matter was not quite so simple, and it took a long

time before we found one with whom we could become as one. In reality, we

are  still  like  children.  We  want  to  find  a  playmate  for  our  thoughts  and

feelings. We let each other speak and we listen, and we call that " being

understood."  That  is  not  so  easy  as  one  would  like  to  believe.  There  are

people  who  cannot  listen  and  people  to  whom  we  cannot  listen.  But

ultimately one finds the right person, one to whom we can entrust our secrets,

one with whom we share our joys and our woes. But for  how long ? How strange ! The fate of these friendships is sealed the

moment a third person acquires the right to participate : a woman. Marriage is

the rock on which most friendships split. What was formerly a question for

two is now a question for three. And if the friend too marries it becomes a

question for four. But how difficult it is to find four persons whose hearts

beat  harmoniously  !  What  new  elements  now  enter  into  the  previous

requirements " to understand each other!" Vanity, jealousy, envy, disfavour.

  And  thus  we  lose  one  friend  after  the  other.  And  one  day  we  find

ourselves in an all-souls' mood, and place wreaths on the graves of the dead

who are dead to us. We ask ourselves anxiously whose the fault was that we

are so lonesome. And if we are not honest we blame the others. But if we are

honest we see that we were not free from guilt and from all the hateful things

that human beings say about one another, and we realize that it is man's

destiny to be alone. The more pronounced our individuality becomes, the

more sharply our qualities are outlined, the more difficult is it to lose oneself

in a crowd. We are not capable of keeping our friends. We demand instead of

giving. And that is why we lose them and weep at their graves.

  I had one friend who was true to me through all the vicissitudes of life.

Fate drove this one friend far away, and when we got the chance

  occasionally to see each other it was only for a few hours, which fled like

seconds—so  much  did  we  have  to  say  to  each  other.  It  was  our  earnest

yearning once to get a chance to go away during the summer and spend a

vacation together, free and unhampered, satiate ourselves with each other,

and then have enough for a whole year. At the cost of many sacrifices we

succeeded in having our dream fulfilled. But I would not make the attempt

again. I am afraid I would lose my friend altogether.

  When we found the long days before us and heard ourselves again and

wanted  to  open  our  hearts  to  each  other,  we  became  aware—with  secret

horror—that we had become different in many respects. And occasionally in

those beautiful hours we were conscious of something like a shudder at the

thought that something fine and delicate that had been anxiously guarded

might  die.  We  separated  sooner  than  we  had  planned  or  had  originally

wished. We were happy that we had parted, for we were still carrying home

with us a precious heritage from our youth : our friendship—which had not

yet  been  destroyed,  but  slightly  bruised  by  rude  and  heavy  hands.  We

shuddered how near wc were to including ourselves among the dead.

  Was that anything wonderful ? Years had passed. Each one of us hadexperienced thousands of impressions, and what had once been common and

had borne the same image had become so different that it would have been

  impossible to recognize them as having had a common origin. And thus it

is that we stand on the roads that once were so near each other but are now so

wide apart and that we call to each other like frightened children seeking

flowers  in  the  woods  and  longing  anxiously  to  hear  the  voices  of  their

comrades. We call to each other to prove to ourselves that we have not died.

  It is all souls' day. Numberless persons are making pilgrimages to the

graves of their dead to lay a flower there. I stay at home and close my eyes. I

am not crying for the dead who have died but live for me. I am weeping for

the dead who still live but who are dead to me. . . .

  MIRROR SLAVES.

  There are persons who spend their entire lives under the tyranny of the

mirror. From early morning to late at night they are thinking, *' How do I

look to-day ? " The mirror follows them into their dreams and shows them

their ego horribly distorted and grotesquely transformed, or it annihilates the

imperfections which make them so unhappy. Everybody has a tremendous

interest  in  his  personal  appearance,  an  interest  which  may  assume  such

proportions as to amount to self-love, to being in love with one's bodily ego,

or  to  hatred  of  one's  self,  disgust  with  one's  own  appearance.  Ultimately

every one of us is egocentric. For each one of us our ego is the hub of the

world. Every slightest happening is looked at and judged from the standpoint

of  our  own  ego.  In  the  mirror  slaves  this  trait  is  exaggerated  to  the  n-th

degree, to the extent of being uncanny and neurotic. They spend their lives in

front of the corporeal and spiritual mirror. For they fix their gaze not only on

their physical appearance, but even on their thoughts, feelings, sensations,

and work; they are constantly checking themselves up, criticising themselves,

and are most discontented with themselves,

  (2IO)

  ©r they are ridicously conceited, and never cease to admire their actions

and transformations.

  Mirror slaves waste a part of their lives in front of the mirror. They keep a

little mirror by them constantly so as to look at themselves from time to time.

They can't pass a mirror without stopping in front of it long enough to survey

themselves from head to foot. There is a story of a king who promised to give

his daughter in marriage to the man who would pass a certain mirror without

looking into it. Vanity foiled all but a poet, and the princess was awarded tohim. (And, in all probability, the poet did not look into the mirror because he

was  absorbed  in  admiring  his  ego  in  the  mirror  of  his  soul!)  This  story

teaches us the intensity of human vanity. In the case of mirror slaves this

human  failing  becomes  a  disease  ;  it  fills  their  lives  and,  under  certain

circumstances, unfits them for life.

  A  mirror  slave  devotes  a  great  deal  of  attention  to  the  matter  of  his

external appearance. He is dominated by an imperative which makes life a

torture. This imperative is: " What will people think of me ? " He feels all

eyes are upon him, everybody is looking at him, everybody is thinking of his

appearance. He has a horrible fear of being laughed at. For God's sake ! only

not to be laughed at, not to become the subject of other people's mirth ! He

would  love  to  be  lost  in  the  crowd  and  not  be  noticed.  If  he  could  only

possess a magic cap that would enable

  him to go about invisible ! On the other hand he thirsts for triumphs. He

would  like  to  find  favour,  to  be  larger,  bigger,  more  elegant  and  more

beautiful than others, would like to shine in society, and be able to outshine

others  in  wit,  intellect,  vivacity,  education  and  culture.  Above  all  he  is

desirous of making an impression on the opposite sex, to make conquests, to

be a Lothario, free from all restraints, uninterfered with in his inclinations,

and unconcerned about the judgment of his environment.

  The mirror slave begins his day with the question, " What shall I wear to-

day ? " As soon as a careful inspection has convinced him that this is going to

be a good or a bad day for him, that he is looking younger or older, sick or

well, the painful task of selection begins. What dress will be most adapted to

the tasks of this day, to the weather, or to the mood ? After some deliberation

a choice is made. But then, all of a sudden, the mirror discloses a blemish !

Woe ! The toilet must be gone all over again. Everything is weighed carefully

in the balance, and finally the arduous task is completed.

  And now the mirror slave's martyrdom begins. He studies the people he

meets to see whether they greet him or ignore him, are friendly or unfriendly,

pleased or indifferent, etc., whether they take note of him, whisper behind his

back, criticise him, make remarks about him, or make merry over him. If one

laughs without his participation he is on the rack ; unquestionably

  it was he who was being laughed at: there must be something wrong with

his clothes. Why-is everybody looking at him so curiously ? In his distress he

may even be induced to address strangers. ** Why did they stare at me so

fixedly ? " In a sudden outburst of passion he may even call an acquaintanceto account for not having greeted him or for having done so carelessly.

  He experiences extraordinary sensations when he puts on new articles of

clothing. What a difficult task it is to go out in new shoes ! All eyes must be

magically directed on his shoes. He makes himself ridiculous with his new

shoes. People surely think him silly or a slave of fashion. He lives through aU

this with every new garment, and ultimately he develops a fear of changing

his clothes and goes about in old, worn, and even shabby clothing, thinking

that thus he attracts less attention.

  All daily tasks become a great undertaking. To go into a store to make a

purchase, to enter a theatre when other spectators are already seated, or to

look around for a seat in a restaurant, etc., are difficult and often impossible

tasks. He loves to be the first person in the theatre or at the concert—to come

in while the hall is still empty. The selection of a seat is a source of worry. A

mirror slave would love to sit alone in a box or in the front row if he were not

so  afraid  of  being  looked  at—which  is  exactly  what  he  longs  for.  He

therefore conceals himself in a

  modest  inconspicuous  seat,  but  docs  n©t  enjoy  himself  because  he  is

always impelled to observe and study the people.

  He is a slave of public opinion. At no price would he do anything not

quite proper, that would cause the slightest head-shake, or would make him

the subject of public comment. He would purchase the good-will of all, court

everybody's favour, and wants to be loved and admired by the whole world.

He spares no pains to get the approval of his environment. He is one of the

eternally amiable, modest, and helpful persons that we encounter now and

then. He gives very liberal tips in order that he may be highly thought of. In

fact, he loves to give presents and fears nothing so much as being thought

niggardly.

  In time he becomes socially useless. A trivial public function, a speech, a

betrothal, any appearance in public liberates a whole host of apprehensive

ideas. If he happens to be an artist he fears to make a public appearance, and

contents himself with being a teacher. If he overcomes his fear of appearing

in  public,  he  becomes  the  slave  of  the  critics.  An  unfavourable  criticism

brings him to the verge of despair ; a favourable criticism temporarily lifts

him above all difficulties.

  If we inquire into the cause of this neurosis we find it to be a defective

educational method in childhood, which has led the child to overvalue its

environment and has inplanted in it a    pathologic degree of vanity. How many parents have the habit of calling

the child's attention to the fact that people are looking at it, observing it, or

laughing at it! How often when a child is wearing a new garment is it told

that everybody is looking at it and admiring it ! And how often is a child

admired and worshipped to such an extent that it really imagines itself the

hub of its Httle world ! All the boundless over-valuation of the world, of

one's  surroundings,  the  striving  for  public  recognition,  for  reputation,  for

honour emanate from our childhood years. We ought to make it our object to

bring about just the opposite. The child should be brought up to be modest, to

learn that happiness lies in the feeling of having done one's duty, in the quiet

joys of life, in work, in a capacity for enjoyment. It is our duty to limit the

child's vanity, to restrain his ambition, and to train him to be self-reliant. One

who has learned to consider contentment with oneself—not self-satisfaction

based on vanity and arrogance— as worth more than what people say about

one has found the way to health and happiness.

  Who would deny that a mirror has its uses ? Who does not know that it is

necessary occasionally to observe ourselves in the mirror of the body and the

soul so that we may recognize our shortcomings, remove our blemishes, and

make ourselves better and more beautiful ? All excess becomes a vice. A

mirror is a dangerous thing for the vain person who cannot live

  without  it.  Everything  is  a  mirror  to  him.  The  world  as  a  whole  is  a

mirrored salon which reflects his image from every point. But he fails to see

that behind these mirrors there is another world to which he has lost access.

For the next step beyond this mirror-neurosis is insanity, a disease which we

now know is a losing of oneself in oneself.

  Printtd in Gr«at Britain by Th$ Ch»lt»nkam Pr$is, Cfulttnham, Glos.

  r

  PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE  CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS

POCKET

  I UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY

  i

  BF Stekel, Wilhelm

  173 The depths of the soul

  S753

  I 










































   