 


                      IMMANUEL KANT


                    COMPLETE WORKS


                          –––––––––––––––––––––––––––

                              M I N E R V A   C L A S S I C S                                        TITLES

 

THE CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON

THE CRITIQUE OF PRACTICAL REASON

THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGEMENT

THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGEMENT

INTRODUCTION TO THE METAPHYSIC OF MORALS

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF THE METAPHYSIC OF MORALS

THE METAPHYSICAL ELEMENTS OF ETHICS

THE SCIENCE OF RIGHT                    The Critique of Pure Reason

 

                        Translated by J. M. D. Meiklejohn

             

 

                                     CONTENTS

 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION, 1781
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION, 1787
INTRODUCTION.
I. OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PURE AND EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE
II. THE HUMAN INTELLECT, EVEN IN AN UNPHILOSOPHICAL STATE, IS IN POSSESSION OF CERTAIN COGNITIONS “A
PRIORI”.
III. PHILOSOPHY STANDS IN NEED OF A SCIENCE WHICH SHALL DETERMINE THE POSSIBILITY, PRINCIPLES, AND
EXTENT OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE “A PRIORI”
IV. OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ANALYTICAL AND SYNTHETICAL JUDGEMENTS.
V. IN ALL THEORETICAL SCIENCES OF REASON, SYNTHETICAL JUDGEMENTS “A PRIORI” ARE CONTAINED AS
PRINCIPLES.
VI. THE UNIVERSAL PROBLEM OF PURE REASON.
VII. IDEA AND DIVISION OF A PARTICULAR SCIENCE, UNDER THE NAME OF A CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON.
I. TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF ELEMENTS.
FIRST PART. TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC.
§§ 1. INTRODUCTORY.
SECTION I. OF SPACE.
§§ 2. METAPHYSICAL EXPOSITION OF THIS CONCEPTION.
§§ 3. TRANSCENDENTAL EXPOSITION OF THE CONCEPTION OF SPACE.
§§ 4. CONCLUSIONS FROM THE FOREGOING CONCEPTIONS.
SECTION II. OF TIME.
§§ 5 METAPHYSICAL EXPOSITION OF THIS CONCEPTION.
§§ 6 TRANSCENDENTAL EXPOSITION OF THE CONCEPTION OF TIME.
§§ 7 CONCLUSIONS FROM THE ABOVE CONCEPTIONS.
§§ 8 ELUCIDATION.
§§ 9 GENERAL REMARKS ON TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC.
§§ 10 CONCLUSION OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC.
SECOND PART. TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC.
INTRODUCTION. IDEA OF A TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC.
I. OF LOGIC IN GENERAL.
II. OF TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC.
III. OF THE DIVISION OF GENERAL LOGIC INTO ANALYTIC AND DIALECTIC.
IV. OF THE DIVISION OF TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC INTO TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC AND DIALECTIC.
TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC.  FIRST DIVISION.  TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC.
BOOK I. – ANALYTIC OF CONCEPTIONS.
CHAPTER I. OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL CLUE TO THE DISCOVERY OF ALL PURE CONCEPTIONS OF THE
UNDERSTANDING.
INTRODUCTORY. §§ 3
SECTION I. OF DEFINED ABOVE USE OF UNDERSTANDING IN GENERAL. §§ 4
SECTION II. OF THE LOGICAL FUNCTION OF THE UNDERSTANDING IN JUDGEMENTS. §§ 5
SECTION III. OF THE PURE CONCEPTIONS OF THE UNDERSTANDING, OR CATEGORIES. §§ 6
CHAPTER II OF THE DEDUCTION OF THE PURE CONCEPTIONS OF THE UNDERSTANDING.
SECTION I OF THE PRINCIPLES OF A TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION IN GENERAL. §§ 9
TRANSITION TO THE TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION OF THE CATEGORIES. §§ 10SECTION II TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION OF THE PURE CONCEPTIONS OF THE UNDERSTANDING. §§ 11
OF THE ORIGINALLY SYNTHETICAL UNITY OF APPERCEPTION. §§ 12
THE PRINCIPLE OF THE SYNTHETICAL UNITY OF APPERCEPTION IS THE HIGHEST PRINCIPLE OF ALL EXERCISE OF
THE UNDERSTANDING. §§ 13
WHAT OBJECTIVE UNITY OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS IS. §§ 14
THE LOGICAL FORM OF ALL JUDGEMENTS CONSISTS IN THE OBJECTIVE UNITY OF APPERCEPTION OF THE
CONCEPTIONS CONTAINED THEREIN. §§ 15
ALL SENSUOUS INTUITIONS ARE SUBJECT TO THE CATEGORIES, AS CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH ALONE THE
MANIFOLD CONTENT OF THEM CAN BE UNITED IN ONE CONSCIOUSNESS. §§ 16
OBSERVATION. §§ 17
IN COGNITION, ITS APPLICATION TO OBJECTS OF EXPERIENCE IS THE ONLY LEGITIMATE USE OF THE CATEGORY. §§
18
§§ 19
OF THE APPLICATION OF THE CATEGORIES TO OBJECTS OF THE SENSES IN GENERAL. §§ 20
§§ 21
TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION OF THE UNIVERSALLY POSSIBLE EMPLOYMENT IN EXPERIENCE OF THE PURE
CONCEPTIONS OF THE UNDERSTANDING. §§ 22
RESULT OF THIS DEDUCTION OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF THE UNDERSTANDING. §§ 23
BOOK II. – ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES.
INTRODUCTION. OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL FACULTY OF JUDGEMENT IN GENERAL.
TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF THE FACULTY OF JUDGEMENT OR, ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES.
CHAPTER I. OF THE SCHEMATISM AT OF THE PURE CONCEPTIONS OF THE UNDERSTANDING.
CHAPTER II. SYSTEM OF ALL PRINCIPLES OF THE PURE UNDERSTANDING.
SYSTEM OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE PURE UNDERSTANDING.
SECTION I. OF THE SUPREME PRINCIPLE OF ALL ANALYTICAL JUDGEMENTS.
SECTION II. OF THE SUPREME PRINCIPLE OF ALL SYNTHETICAL JUDGEMENTS.
SECTION III. SYSTEMATIC REPRESENTATION OF ALL SYNTHETICAL PRINCIPLES OF THE PURE UNDERSTANDING.
CHAPTER III. OF THE GROUND OF THE DIVISION OF ALL OBJECTS INTO PHENOMENA AND NOUMENA.
APPENDIX.
TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC.  SECOND DIVISION.  TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC.
INTRODUCTION.
I. OF TRANSCENDENTAL ILLUSORY APPEARANCE.
II. OF PURE REASON AS THE SEAT OF TRANSCENDENTAL ILLUSORY APPEARANCE.
BOOK I. – OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF PURE REASON.
SECTION I.  OF IDEAS IN GENERAL.
SECTION II. OF TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS.
SECTION III. SYSTEM OF TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS.
BOOK II. – OF THE DIALECTICAL PROCEDURE OF PURE REASON.
CHAPTER I. OF THE PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON.
CHAPTER II. THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON.
SECTION I. SYSTEM OF COSMOLOGICAL IDEAS.
SECTION II. ANTITHETIC OF PURE REASON.
SECTION III. OF THE INTEREST OF REASON IN THESE SELF-CONTRADICTIONS.
SECTION IV. OF THE NECESSITY IMPOSED UPON PURE REASON OF PRESENTING A SOLUTION OF ITS
TRANSCENDENTAL PROBLEMS.
SECTION V. SCEPTICAL EXPOSITION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL PROBLEMS PRESENTED IN THE FOUR
TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS.
SECTION VI. TRANSCENDENTAL IDEALISM AS THE KEY TO THE SOLUTION OF PURE COSMOLOGICAL DIALECTIC.
SECTION VII. CRITICAL SOLUTION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL PROBLEM.
SECTION VIII. REGULATIVE PRINCIPLE OF PURE REASON IN RELATION TO THE COSMOLOGICAL IDEAS.SECTION IX. OF THE EMPIRICAL USE OF THE REGULATIVE PRINCIPLE OF REASON WITH REGARD TO THE
COSMOLOGICAL IDEAS.
I. SOLUTION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL IDEA OF THE TOTALITY OF THE COMPOSITION OF PHENOMENA IN THE
UNIVERSE.
II. SOLUTION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL IDEA OF THE TOTALITY OF THE DIVISION OF A WHOLE GIVEN IN INTUITION.
III. SOLUTION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL IDEA OF THE TOTALITY OF THE DEDUCTION OF COSMICAL EVENTS FROM
THEIR CAUSES.
IV. SOLUTION OF THE COSMOLOGICAL IDEA OF THE TOTALITY OF THE DEPENDENCE OF PHENOMENAL
EXISTENCES.
CHAPTER III. THE IDEAL OF PURE REASON.
SECTION I. OF THE IDEAL IN GENERAL.
SECTION II. OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAL (PROTOTYPON TRANCENDENTALE).
SECTION III. OF THE ARGUMENTS EMPLOYED BY SPECULATIVE REASON IN PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF A
SUPREME BEING.
SECTION IV. OF THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF AN ONTOLOGICAL PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.
SECTION V. OF THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF A COSMOLOGICAL PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.
SECTION VI. OF THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF A PHYSICO-THEOLOGICAL PROOF.
SECTION VII. CRITIQUE OF ALL THEOLOGY BASED UPON SPECULATIVE PRINCIPLES OF REASON.
APPENDIX.
OF THE REGULATIVE EMPLOYMENT OF THE IDEAS OF PURE REASON.
II. – TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER I. THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON.
SECTION I. THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON IN THE SPHERE OF DOGMATISM.
SECTION II. THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON IN POLEMICS.
SECTION III. THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON IN HYPOTHESIS.
SECTION IV. THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON IN RELATION TO PROOFS.
CHAPTER II. THE CANON OF PURE REASON.
SECTION I. OF THE ULTIMATE END OF THE PURE USE OF REASON.
SECTION II. OF THE IDEAL OF THE SUMMUM BONUM AS A DETERMINING GROUND OF THE ULTIMATE END OF
PURE REASON.
SECTION III. OF OPINION, KNOWLEDGE, AND BELIEF.
CHAPTER III. THE ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON.
CHAPTER IV. THE HISTORY OF PURE REASON.                    Preface to the First Edition, 1781

 

 

              Human reason, in one sphere of its cognition, is called upon to

consider questions, which it cannot decline, as they are presented by its own

nature, but which it cannot answer, as they transcend every faculty of the

mind.

              It falls into this difficulty without any fault of its own. It begins with

principles, which cannot be dispensed with in the field of experience, and the

truth and sufficiency of which are, at the same time, insured by experience.

With these principles it rises, in obedience to the laws of its own nature, to

ever higher and more remote conditions. But it quickly discovers that, in this

way, its labours must remain ever incomplete, because new questions never

cease to present themselves; and thus it finds itself compelled to have

recourse to principles which transcend the region of experience, while they

are regarded by common sense without distrust. It thus falls into confusion

and contradictions, from which it conjectures the presence of latent errors,

which, however, it is unable to discover, because the principles it employs,

transcending the limits of experience, cannot be tested by that criterion. The

arena of these endless contests is called Metaphysic.

              Time was, when she was the queen of all the sciences; and, if we

take the will for the deed, she certainly deserves, so far as regards the high

importance of her object-matter, this title of honour. Now, it is the fashion of

the time to heap contempt and scorn upon her; and the matron mourns,

forlorn and forsaken, like Hecuba:

  Modo maxima rerum, Tot generis, natisque potens... Nunc trahor exul,
      11
inops.                   Ovid, Metamorphoses. [xiii, “But late on the pinnacle of

fame, strong in my many sons. now exiled, penniless.”]

              At first, her government, under the administration of the dogmatists,

was an absolute despotism. But, as the legislative continued to show traces of

the ancient barbaric rule, her empire gradually broke up, and intestine wars

introduced the reign of anarchy; while the sceptics, like nomadic tribes, who

hate a permanent habitation and settled mode of living, attacked from time to

time those who had organized themselves into civil communities. But their

number was, very happily, small; and thus they could not entirely put a stopto the exertions of those who persisted in raising new edifices, although on no

settled or uniform plan. In recent times the hope dawned upon us of seeing

those disputes settled, and the legitimacy of her claims established by a kind

of physiology of the human understanding — that of the celebrated Locke.

But it was found that — although it was affirmed that this so-called queen

could not refer her descent to any higher source than that of common

experience, a circumstance which necessarily brought suspicion on her

claims — as this genealogy was incorrect, she persisted in the advancement

of her claims to sovereignty. Thus metaphysics necessarily fell back into the

antiquated and rotten constitution of dogmatism, and again became

obnoxious to the contempt from which efforts had been made to save it. At

present, as all methods, according to the general persuasion, have been tried

in vain, there reigns nought but weariness and complete indifferentism — the

mother of chaos and night in the scientific world, but at the same time the

source of, or at least the prelude to, the re-creation and reinstallation of a

science, when it has fallen into confusion, obscurity, and disuse from ill

directed effort.

              For it is in reality vain to profess indifference in regard to such

inquiries, the object of which cannot be indifferent to humanity. Besides,

these pretended indifferentists, however much they may try to disguise

themselves by the assumption of a popular style and by changes on the

language of the schools, unavoidably fall into metaphysical declarations and

propositions, which they profess to regard with so much contempt. At the

same time, this indifference, which has arisen in the world of science, and

which relates to that kind of knowledge which we should wish to see

destroyed the last, is a phenomenon that well deserves our attention and

reflection. It is plainly not the effect of the levity, but of the matured
          2
judgement of the age, which refuses to be any longer entertained with

illusory knowledge, It is, in fact, a call to reason, again to undertake the most

laborious of all tasks — that of self-examination — and to establish a

tribunal, which may secure it in its well-grounded claims, while it pronounces

against all baseless assumptions and pretensions, not in an arbitrary manner,

but according to its own eternal and unchangeable laws. This tribunal is

nothing less than the critical investigation of pure reason.

        2
               We very often hear complaints of the shallowness of the present

age, and of the decay of profound science. But I do not think that those whichrest upon a secure foundation, such as mathematics, physical science, etc., in

the least deserve this reproach, but that they rather maintain their ancient

fame, and in the latter case, indeed, far surpass it. The same would be the

case with the other kinds of cognition, if their principles were but firmly

established. In the absence of this security, indifference, doubt, and finally,

severe criticism are rather signs of a profound habit of thought. Our age is the

age of criticism, to which everything must be subjected. The sacredness of

religion, and the authority of legislation, are by many regarded as grounds of

exemption from the examination of this tribunal. But, if they on they are

exempted, they become the subjects of just suspicion, and cannot lay claim to

sincere respect, which reason accords only to that which has stood the test of

a free and public examination.

              I do not mean by this a criticism of books and systems, but a critical

inquiry into the faculty of reason, with reference to the cognitions to which it

strives to attain without the aid of experience; in other words, the solution of

the question regarding the possibility or impossibility of metaphysics, and the

determination of the origin, as well as of the extent and limits of this science.

All this must be done on the basis of principles.

              This path — the only one now remaining — has been entered upon

by me; and I flatter myself that I have, in this way, discovered the cause of —

and consequently the mode of removing — all the errors which have hitherto

set reason at variance with itself, in the sphere of non-empirical thought. I

have not returned an evasive answer to the questions of reason, by alleging

the inability and limitation of the faculties of the mind; I have, on the

contrary, examined them completely in the light of principles, and, after

having discovered the cause of the doubts and contradictions into which

reason fell, have solved them to its perfect satisfaction. It is true, these

questions have not been solved as dogmatism, in its vain fancies and desires,

had expected; for it can only be satisfied by the exercise of magical arts, and

of these I have no knowledge. But neither do these come within the compass

of our mental powers; and it was the duty of philosophy to destroy the

illusions which had their origin in misconceptions, whatever darling hopes

and valued expectations may be ruined by its explanations. My chief aim in

this work has been thoroughness; and I make bold to say that there is not a

single metaphysical problem that does not find its solution, or at least the key

to its solution, here. Pure reason is a perfect unity; and therefore, if the if theprinciple presented by it prove to be insufficient for the solution of even a

single one of those questions to which the very nature of reason gives birth,

we must reject it, as we could not be perfectly certain of its sufficiency in the

case of the others.

              While I say this, I think I see upon the countenance of the reader

signs of dissatisfaction mingled with contempt, when he hears declarations

which sound so boastful and extravagant; and yet they are beyond

comparison more moderate than those advanced by the commonest author of

the commonest philosophical programme, in which the dogmatist professes

to demonstrate the simple nature of the soul, or the necessity of a primal

being. Such a dogmatist promises to extend human knowledge beyond the

limits of possible experience; while I humbly confess that this is completely

beyond my power. Instead of any such attempt, I confine myself to the

examination of reason alone and its pure thought; and I do not need to seek

far for the sum-total of its cognition, because it has its seat in my own mind.

Besides, common logic presents me with a complete and systematic

catalogue of all the simple operations of reason; and it is my task to answer

the question how far reason can go, without the material presented and the

aid furnished by experience.

              So much for the completeness and thoroughness necessary in the

execution of the present task. The aims set before us are not arbitrarily

proposed, but are imposed upon us by the nature of cognition itself.

              The above remarks relate to the matter of our critical inquiry. As

regards the form, there are two indispensable conditions, which any one who

undertakes so difficult a task as that of a critique of pure reason, is bound to

fulfil. These conditions are certitude and clearness.

              As regards certitude, I have fully convinced myself that, in this

sphere of thought, opinion is perfectly inadmissible, and that everything

which bears the least semblance of an hypothesis must be excluded, as of no

value in such discussions. For it is a necessary condition of every cognition

that is to be established upon a priori grounds that it shall be held to be

absolutely necessary; much more is this the case with an attempt to determine

all pure a priori cognition, and to furnish the standard — and consequently an

example- of all apodeictic (philosophical) certitude. Whether I have

succeeded in what I professed to do, it is for the reader to determine; it is theauthor’s business merely to adduce grounds and reasons, without determining

what influence these ought to have on the mind of his judges. But, lest

anything he may have said may become the innocent cause of doubt in their

minds, or tend to weaken the effect which his arguments might otherwise

produce — he may be allowed to point out those passages which may

occasion mistrust or difficulty, although these do not concern the main

purpose of the present work. He does this solely with the view of removing

from the mind of the reader any doubts which might affect his judgement of

the work as a whole, and in regard to its ultimate aim.

              I know no investigations more necessary for a full insight into the

nature of the faculty which we call understanding, and at the same time for

the determination of the rules and limits of its use, than those undertaken in

the second chapter of the “Transcendental Analytic,” under the title of

“Deduction of the Pure Conceptions of the Understanding”; and they have

also cost me by far the greatest labour — labour which, I hope, will not

remain uncompensated. The view there taken, which goes somewhat deeply

into the subject, has two sides, The one relates to the objects of the pure

understanding, and is intended to demonstrate and to render comprehensible

the objective validity of its a priori conceptions; and it forms for this reason

an essential part of the Critique. The other considers the pure understanding

itself, its possibility and its powers of cognition — that is, from a subjective

point of view; and, although this exposition is of great importance, it does not

belong essentially to the main purpose of the work, because the grand

question is what and how much can reason and understanding, apart from

experience, cognize, and not, how is the faculty of thought itself possible? As

the latter is an, inquiry into the cause of a given effect, and has thus in it some

semblance of an hypothesis (although, as I shall show on another occasion,

this is really not the fact), it would seem that, in the present instance, I had

allowed myself to enounce a mere opinion, and that the reader must therefore

be at liberty to hold a different opinion. But I beg to remind him that, if my

subjective deduction does not produce in his mind the conviction of its

certitude at which I aimed, the objective deduction, with which alone the

present work is properly concerned, is in every respect satisfactory.

              As regards clearness, the reader has a right to demand, in the first

place, discursive or logical clearness, that is, on the basis of conceptions, and,

secondly, intuitive or aesthetic clearness, by means of intuitions, that is, byexamples or other modes of illustration in concreto. I have done what I could

for the first kind of intelligibility. This was essential to my purpose; and it

thus became the accidental cause of my inability to do complete justice to the

second requirement. I have been almost always at a loss, during the progress

of this work, how to settle this question. Examples and illustrations always

appeared to me necessary, and, in the first sketch of the Critique, naturally

fell into their proper places. But I very soon became aware of the magnitude

of my task, and the numerous problems with which I should be engaged; and,

as I perceived that this critical investigation would, even if delivered in the

driest scholastic manner, be far from being brief, I found it unadvisable to

enlarge it still more with examples and explanations, which are necessary

only from a popular point of view. I was induced to take this course from the

consideration also that the present work is not intended for popular use, that

those devoted to science do not require such helps, although they are always

acceptable, and that they would have materially interfered with my present

purpose. Abbe Terrasson remarks with great justice that, if we estimate the

size of a work, not from the number of its pages, but from the time which we

require to make ourselves master of it, it may be said of many a book that it

would be much shorter, if it were not so short. On the other hand, as regards

the comprehensibility of a system of speculative cognition, connected under a

single principle, we may say with equal justice: many a book would have

been much clearer, if it had not been intended to be so very clear. For

explanations and examples, and other helps to intelligibility, aid us in the

comprehension of parts, but they distract the attention, dissipate the mental

power of the reader, and stand in the way of his forming a clear conception of

the whole; as he cannot attain soon enough to a survey of the system, and the

colouring and embellishments bestowed upon it prevent his observing its

articulation or organization — which is the most important consideration

with him, when he comes to judge of its unity and stability.

              The reader must naturally have a strong inducement to co-operate

with the present author, if he has formed the intention of erecting a complete

and solid edifice of metaphysical science, according to the plan now laid

before him. Metaphysics, as here represented, is the only science which

admits of completion — and with little labour, if it is united, in a short time;

so that nothing will be left to future generations except the task of illustrating

and applying it didactically. For this science is nothing more than the

inventory of all that is given us by pure reason, systematically arranged.Nothing can escape our notice; for what reason produces from itself cannot

lie concealed, but must be brought to the light by reason itself, so soon as we

have discovered the common principle of the ideas we seek. The perfect unity

of this kind of cognitions, which are based upon pure conceptions, and

uninfluenced by any empirical element, or any peculiar intuition leading to

determinate experience, renders this completeness not only practicable, but

also necessary.

                                                            33
  Tecum habita, et noris quam sit tibi curta supellex.                   Persius.

[Satirae iv. 52. “Dwell with yourself, and you will know how short your

household stuff is.”

              Such a system of pure speculative reason I hope to be able to publish

under the title of Metaphysic of Nature. The content of this work (which will

not be half so long) will be very much richer than that of the present Critique,

which has to discover the sources of this cognition and expose the conditions

of its possibility, and at the same time to clear and level a fit foundation for

the scientific edifice. In the present work, I look for the patient hearing and

the impartiality of a judge; in the other, for the good-will and assistance of a

co-labourer. For, however complete the list of principles for this system may

be in the Critique, the correctness of the system requires that no deduced

conceptions should be absent. These cannot be presented a priori, but must be

gradually discovered; and, while the synthesis of conceptions has been fully

exhausted in the Critique, it is necessary that, in the proposed work, the same

should be the case with their analysis. But this will be rather an amusement

than a labour.

 

 

                     Preface to the Second Edition, 1787

 

 

              Whether the treatment of that portion of our knowledge which lies

within the province of pure reason advances with that undeviating certainty

which characterizes the progress of science, we shall be at no loss to

determine. If we find those who are engaged in metaphysical pursuits, unable

to come to an understanding as to the method which they ought to follow; if

we find them, after the most elaborate preparations, invariably brought to a

stand before the goal is reached, and compelled to retrace their steps and

strike into fresh paths, we may then feel quite sure that they are far from

having attained to the certainty of scientific progress and may rather be said

to be merely groping about in the dark. In these circumstances we shall

render an important service to reason if we succeed in simply indicating the

path along which it must travel, in order to arrive at any results — even if it

should be found necessary to abandon many of those aims which, without

reflection, have been proposed for its attainment.

              That logic has advanced in this sure course, even from the earliest

times, is apparent from the fact that, since Aristotle, it has been unable to

advance a step and, thus, to all appearance has reached its completion. For, if

some of the moderns have thought to enlarge its domain by introducing

psychological discussions on the mental faculties, such as imagination and

wit, metaphysical, discussions on the origin of knowledge and the different

kinds of certitude, according to the difference of the objects (idealism,

scepticism, and so on), or anthropological discussions on prejudices, their

causes and remedies: this attempt, on the part of these authors, only shows

their ignorance of the peculiar nature of logical science. We do not enlarge

but disfigure the sciences when we lose sight of their respective limits and

allow them to run into one another. Now logic is enclosed within limits

which admit of perfectly clear definition; it is a science which has for its

object nothing but the exposition and proof of the formal laws of all thought,

whether it be a priori or empirical, whatever be its origin or its object, and

whatever the difficulties — natural or accidental- which it encounters in the

human mind.              The early success of logic must be attributed exclusively to the

narrowness of its field, in which abstraction may, or rather must, be made of

all the objects of cognition with their characteristic distinctions, and in which

the understanding has only to deal with itself and with its own forms. It is,

obviously, a much more difficult task for reason to strike into the sure path of

science, where it has to deal not simply with itself, but with objects external

to itself. Hence, logic is properly only a propaedeutic — forms, as it were, the

vestibule of the sciences; and while it is necessary to enable us to form a

correct judgement with regard to the various branches of knowledge, still the

acquisition of real, substantive knowledge is to be sought only in the sciences

properly so called, that is, in the objective sciences.

              Now these sciences, if they can be termed rational at all, must

contain elements of a priori cognition, and this cognition may stand in a

twofold relation to its object. Either it may have to determine the conception

of the object — which must be supplied extraneously, or it may have to

establish its reality. The former is theoretical, the latter practical, rational

cognition. In both, the pure or a priori element must be treated first, and must

be carefully distinguished from that which is supplied from other sources.

Any other method can only lead to irremediable confusion.

              Mathematics and physics are the two theoretical sciences which have

to determine their objects a priori. The former is purely a priori, the latter is

partially so, but is also dependent on other sources of cognition.

              In the earliest times of which history affords us any record,

mathematics had already entered on the sure course of science, among that

wonderful nation, the Greeks. Still it is not to be supposed that it was as easy

for this science to strike into, or rather to construct for itself, that royal road,

as it was for logic, in which reason has only to deal with itself. On the

contrary, I believe that it must have remained long — chiefly among the

Egyptians — in the stage of blind groping after its true aims and destination,

and that it was revolutionized by the happy idea of one man, who struck out

and determined for all time the path which this science must follow, and

which admits of an indefinite advancement. The history of this intellectual

revolution — much more important in its results than the discovery of the

passage round the celebrated Cape of Good Hope — and of its author, has not

been preserved. But Diogenes Laertius, in naming the supposed discoverer of

some of the simplest elements of geometrical demonstration — elementswhich, according to the ordinary opinion, do not even require to be proved —

makes it apparent that the change introduced by the first indication of this

new path, must have seemed of the utmost importance to the mathematicians

of that age, and it has thus been secured against the chance of oblivion. A

new light must have flashed on the mind of the first man (Thales, or whatever

may have been his name) who demonstrated the properties of the isosceles

triangle. For he found that it was not sufficient to meditate on the figure, as it

lay before his eyes, or the conception of it, as it existed in his mind, and thus

endeavour to get at the knowledge of its properties, but that it was necessary

to produce these properties, as it were, by a positive a priori construction; and

that, in order to arrive with certainty at a priori cognition, he must not

attribute to the object any other properties than those which necessarily

followed from that which he had himself, in accordance with his conception,

placed in the object.

              A much longer period elapsed before physics entered on the

highway of science. For it is only about a century and a half since the wise

Bacon gave a new direction to physical studies, or rather — as others were

already on the right track — imparted fresh vigour to the pursuit of this new

direction. Here, too, as in the case of mathematics, we find evidence of a

rapid intellectual revolution. In the remarks which follow I shall confine

myself to the empirical side of natural science.

              When Galilei experimented with balls of a definite weight on the

inclined plane, when Torricelli caused the air to sustain a weight which he

had calculated beforehand to be equal to that of a definite column of water, or

when Stahl, at a later period, converted metals into lime, and reconverted
                                                                              4
lime into metal, by the addition and subtraction of certain elements; a light

broke upon all natural philosophers. They learned that reason only perceives

that which it produces after its own design; that it must not be content to

follow, as it were, in the leading-strings of nature, but must proceed in

advance with principles of judgement according to unvarying laws, and

compel nature to reply its questions. For accidental observations, made

according to no preconceived plan, cannot be united under a necessary law.

But it is this that reason seeks for and requires. It is only the principles of

reason which can give to concordant phenomena the validity of laws, and it is

only when experiment is directed by these rational principles that it can have

any real utility. Reason must approach nature with the view, indeed, ofreceiving information from it, not, however, in the character of a pupil, who

listens to all that his master chooses to tell him, but in that of a judge, who

compels the witnesses to reply to those questions which he himself thinks fit

to propose. To this single idea must the revolution be ascribed, by which,

after groping in the dark for so many centuries, natural science was at length

conducted into the path of certain progress.

        4
               I do not here follow with exactness the history of the experimental

method, of which, indeed, the first steps are involved in some obscurity.

              We come now to metaphysics, a purely speculative science, which

occupies a completely isolated position and is entirely independent of the

teachings of experience. It deals with mere conceptions — not, like

mathematics, with conceptions applied to intuition — and in it, reason is the

pupil of itself alone. It is the oldest of the sciences, and would still survive,

even if all the rest were swallowed up in the abyss of an all-destroying

barbarism. But it has not yet had the good fortune to attain to the sure

scientific method. This will be apparent; if we apply the tests which we

proposed at the outset. We find that reason perpetually comes to a stand,

when it attempts to gain a priori the perception even of those laws which the

most common experience confirms. We find it compelled to retrace its steps

in innumerable instances, and to abandon the path on which it had entered,

because this does not lead to the desired result. We find, too, that those who

are engaged in metaphysical pursuits are far from being able to agree among

themselves, but that, on the contrary, this science appears to furnish an arena

specially adapted for the display of skill or the exercise of strength in mock-

contests- a field in which no combatant ever yet succeeded in gaining an inch

of ground, in which, at least, no victory was ever yet crowned with

permanent possession.

              This leads us to inquire why it is that, in metaphysics, the sure path

of science has not hitherto been found. Shall we suppose that it is impossible

to discover it? Why then should nature have visited our reason with restless

aspirations after it, as if it were one of our weightiest concerns? Nay, more,

how little cause should we have to place confidence in our reason, if it

abandons us in a matter about which, most of all, we desire to know the truth

— and not only so, but even allures us to the pursuit of vain phantoms, only

to betray us in the end? Or, if the path has only hitherto been missed, what

indications do we possess to guide us in a renewed investigation, and toenable us to hope for greater success than has fallen to the lot of our

predecessors?

              It appears to me that the examples of mathematics and natural

philosophy, which, as we have seen, were brought into their present condition

by a sudden revolution, are sufficiently remarkable to fix our attention on the

essential circumstances of the change which has proved so advantageous to

them, and to induce us to make the experiment of imitating them, so far as the

analogy which, as rational sciences, they bear to metaphysics may permit. It

has hitherto been assumed that our cognition must conform to the objects; but

all attempts to ascertain anything about these objects a priori, by means of

conceptions, and thus to extend the range of our knowledge, have been

rendered abortive by this assumption. Let us then make the experiment

whether we may not be more successful in metaphysics, if we assume that the

objects must conform to our cognition. This appears, at all events, to accord

better with the possibility of our gaining the end we have in view, that is to

say, of arriving at the cognition of objects a priori, of determining something

with respect to these objects, before they are given to us. We here propose to

do just what Copernicus did in attempting to explain the celestial movements.

When he found that he could make no progress by assuming that all the

heavenly bodies revolved round the spectator, he reversed the process, and

tried the experiment of assuming that the spectator revolved, while the stars

remained at rest. We may make the same experiment with regard to the

intuition of objects. If the intuition must conform to the nature of the objects,

I do not see how we can know anything of them a priori. If, on the other

hand, the object conforms to the nature of our faculty of intuition, I can then

easily conceive the possibility of such an a priori knowledge. Now as I

cannot rest in the mere intuitions, but — if they are to become cognitions —

must refer them, as representations, to something, as object, and must

determine the latter by means of the former, here again there are two courses

open to me. Either, first, I may assume that the conceptions, by which I effect

this determination, conform to the object — and in this case I am reduced to

the same perplexity as before; or secondly, I may assume that the objects, or,

which is the same thing, that experience, in which alone as given objects they

are cognized, conform to my conceptions — and then I am at no loss how to

proceed. For experience itself is a mode of cognition which requires

understanding. Before objects, are given to me, that is, a priori, I must

presuppose in myself laws of the understanding which are expressed inconceptions a priori. To these conceptions, then, all the objects of experience

must necessarily conform. Now there are objects which reason thinks, and

that necessarily, but which cannot be given in experience, or, at least, cannot

be given so as reason thinks them. The attempt to think these objects will

hereafter furnish an excellent test of the new method of thought which we

have adopted, and which is based on the principle that we only cognize in
                                                              5
things a priori that which we ourselves place in them.

        5
               This method, accordingly, which we have borrowed from the

natural philosopher, consists in seeking for the elements of pure reason in that

which admits of confirmation or refutation by experiment. Now the

propositions of pure reason, especially when they transcend the limits of

possible experience, do not admit of our making any experiment with their

objects, as in natural science. Hence, with regard to those conceptions and

principles which we assume a priori, our only course ill be to view them from

two different sides. We must regard one and the same conception, on the one

hand, in relation to experience as an object of the senses and of the

understanding, on the other hand, in relation to reason, isolated and

transcending the limits of experience, as an object of mere thought. Now if

we find that, when we regard things from this double point of view, the result

is in harmony with the principle of pure reason, but that, when we regard

them from a single point of view, reason is involved in self-contradiction,

then the experiment will establish the correctness of this distinction.

              This attempt succeeds as well as we could desire, and promises to

metaphysics, in its first part — that is, where it is occupied with conceptions

a priori, of which the corresponding objects may be given in experience —

the certain course of science. For by this new method we are enabled

perfectly to explain the possibility of a priori cognition, and, what is more, to

demonstrate satisfactorily the laws which lie a priori at the foundation of

nature, as the sum of the objects of experience — neither of which was

possible according to the procedure hitherto followed. But from this

deduction of the faculty of a priori cognition in the first part of metaphysics,

we derive a surprising result, and one which, to all appearance, militates

against the great end of metaphysics, as treated in the second part. For we

come to the conclusion that our faculty of cognition is unable to transcend the

limits of possible experience; and yet this is precisely the most essential

object of this science. The estimate of our rational cognition a priori at whichwe arrive is that it has only to do with phenomena, and that things in

themselves, while possessing a real existence, lie beyond its sphere. Here we

are enabled to put the justice of this estimate to the test. For that which of

necessity impels us to transcend the limits of experience and of all

phenomena is the unconditioned, which reason absolutely requires in things

as they are in themselves, in order to complete the series of conditions. Now,

if it appears that when, on the one hand, we assume that our cognition

conforms to its objects as things in themselves, the unconditioned cannot be

thought without contradiction, and that when, on the other hand, we assume

that our representation of things as they are given to us, does not conform to

these things as they are in themselves, but that these objects, as phenomena,

conform to our mode of representation, the contradiction disappears: we shall

then be convinced of the truth of that which we began by assuming for the

sake of experiment; we may look upon it as established that the

unconditioned does not lie in things as we know them, or as they are given to

us, but in things as they are in themselves, beyond the range of our
          6
cognition.

        6
               This experiment of pure reason has a great similarity to that of the

chemists, which they term the experiment of reduction, or, more usually, the

synthetic process. The analysis of the metaphysician separates pure cognition

a priori into two heterogeneous elements, viz., the cognition of things as

phenomena, and of things in themselves. Dialectic combines these again into

harmony with the necessary rational idea of the unconditioned, and finds that

this harmony never results except through the above distinction, which is,

therefore, concluded to be just.

              But, after we have thus denied the power of speculative reason to

make any progress in the sphere of the supersensible, it still remains for our

consideration whether data do not exist in practical cognition which may

enable us to determine the transcendent conception of the unconditioned, to

rise beyond the limits of all possible experience from a practical point of

view, and thus to satisfy the great ends of metaphysics. Speculative reason

has thus, at least, made room for such an extension of our knowledge: and, if

it must leave this space vacant, still it does not rob us of the liberty to fill it

up, if we can, by means of practical data — nay, it even challenges us to
                  7
make the attempt.

        7
               So the central laws of the movements of the heavenly bodiesestablished the truth of that which Copernicus, first, assumed only as a

hypothesis, and, at the same time, brought to light that invisible force

(Newtonian attraction) which holds the universe together. The latter would

have remained forever undiscovered, if Copernicus had not ventured on the

experiment — contrary to the senses but still just- of looking for the observed

movements not in the heavenly bodies, but in the spectator. In this Preface I

treat the new metaphysical method as a hypothesis with the view of rendering

apparent the first attempts at such a change of method, which are always

hypothetical. But in the Critique itself it will be demonstrated, not

hypothetically, but apodeictically, from the nature of our representations of

space and time. and from the elementary conceptions of the understanding.

              This attempt to introduce a complete revolution in the procedure of

metaphysics, after the example of the geometricians and natural philosophers,

constitutes the aim of the Critique of Pure Speculative Reason. It is a treatise

on the method to be followed, not a system of the science itself. But, at the

same time, it marks out and defines both the external boundaries and the

internal structure of this science. For pure speculative reason has this

peculiarity, that, in choosing the various objects of thought, it is able to

define the limits of its own faculties, and even to give a complete

enumeration of the possible modes of proposing problems to itself, and thus

to sketch out the entire system of metaphysics. For, on the one hand, in

cognition a priori, nothing must be attributed to the objects but what the

thinking subject derives from itself; and, on the other hand, reason is, in

regard to the principles of cognition, a perfectly distinct, independent unity,

in which, as in an organized body, every member exists for the sake of the

others, and all for the sake of each, so that no principle can be viewed, with

safety, in one relationship, unless it is, at the same time, viewed in relation to

the total use of pure reason. Hence, too, metaphysics has this singular

advantage — an advantage which falls to the lot of no other science which

has to do with objects — that, if once it is conducted into the sure path of

science, by means of this criticism, it can then take in the whole sphere of its

cognitions, and can thus complete its work, and leave it for the use of

posterity, as a capital which can never receive fresh accessions. For

metaphysics has to deal only with principles and with the limitations of its

own employment as determined by these principles. To this perfection it is,

therefore, bound, as the fundamental science, to attain, and to it the maxim

may justly be applied:                                                          88
  Nil actum reputans, si quid superesset agendum.                   ”He

considered nothing done, so long as anything remained to be done.”

              But, it will be asked, what kind of a treasure is this that we propose

to bequeath to posterity? What is the real value of this system of metaphysics,

purified by criticism, and thereby reduced to a permanent condition? A

cursory view of the present work will lead to the supposition that its use is

merely negative, that it only serves to warn us against venturing, with

speculative reason, beyond the limits of experience. This is, in fact, its

primary use. But this, at once, assumes a positive value, when we observe

that the principles with which speculative reason endeavours to transcend its

limits lead inevitably, not to the extension, but to the contraction of the use of

reason, inasmuch as they threaten to extend the limits of sensibility, which is

their proper sphere, over the entire realm of thought and, thus, to supplant the

pure (practical) use of reason. So far, then, as this criticism is occupied in

confining speculative reason within its proper bounds, it is only negative; but,

inasmuch as it thereby, at the same time, removes an obstacle which impedes

and even threatens to destroy the use of practical reason, it possesses a

positive and very important value. In order to admit this, we have only to be

convinced that there is an absolutely necessary use of pure reason — the

moral use — in which it inevitably transcends the limits of sensibility,

without the aid of speculation, requiring only to be insured against the effects

of a speculation which would involve it in contradiction with itself. To deny

the positive advantage of the service which this criticism renders us would be

as absurd as. to maintain that the system of police is productive of no positive

benefit, since its main business is to prevent the violence which citizen has to

apprehend from citizen, that so each may pursue his vocation in peace and

security. That space and time are only forms of sensible intuition, and hence

are only conditions of the existence of things as phenomena; that, moreover,

we have no conceptions of the understanding, and, consequently, no elements

for the cognition of things, except in so far as a corresponding intuition can

be given to these conceptions; that, accordingly, we can have no cognition of

an object, as a thing in itself, but only as an object of sensible intuition, that

is, as phenomenon — all this is proved in the analytical part of the Critique;

and from this the limitation of all possible speculative cognition to the mere

objects of experience, follows as a necessary result. At the same time, it must

be carefully borne in mind that, while we surrender the power of cognizing,
                                                                                  9
we still reserve the power of thinking objects, as things in themselves. For,otherwise, we should require to affirm the existence of an appearance,

without something that appears — which would be absurd. Now let us

suppose, for a moment, that we had not undertaken this criticism and,

accordingly, had not drawn the necessary distinction between things as

objects of experience and things as they are in themselves. The principle of

causality, and, by consequence, the mechanism of nature as determined by

causality, would then have absolute validity in relation to all things as

efficient causes. I should then be unable to assert, with regard to one and the

same being, e.g., the human soul, that its will is free, and yet, at the same

time, subject to natural necessity, that is, not free, without falling into a

palpable contradiction, for in both propositions I should take the soul in the

same signification, as a thing in general, as a thing in itself — as, without

previous criticism, I could not but take it. Suppose now, on the other hand,

that we have undertaken this criticism, and have learnt that an object may be

taken in two senses, first, as a phenomenon, secondly, as a thing in itself; and

that, according to the deduction of the conceptions of the understanding, the

principle of causality has reference only to things in the first sense. We then

see how it does not involve any contradiction to assert, on the one hand, that

the will, in the phenomenal sphere — in visible action — is necessarily

obedient to the law of nature, and, in so far, not free; and, on the other hand,

that, as belonging to a thing in itself, it is not subject to that law, and,

accordingly, is free. Now, it is true that I cannot, by means of speculative

reason, and still less by empirical observation, cognize my soul as a thing in

itself and consequently, cannot cognize liberty as the property of a being to

which I ascribe effects in the world of sense. For, to do so, I must cognize

this being as existing, and yet not in time, which — since I cannot support my

conception by any intuition — is impossible. At the same time, while I

cannot cognize, I can quite well think freedom, that is to say, my

representation of it involves at least no contradiction, if we bear in mind the

critical distinction of the two modes of representation (the sensible and the

intellectual) and the consequent limitation of the conceptions of the pure

understanding and of the principles which flow from them. Suppose now that

morality necessarily presupposed liberty, in the strictest sense, as a property

of our will; suppose that reason contained certain practical, original principles

a priori, which were absolutely impossible without this presupposition; and

suppose, at the same time, that speculative reason had proved that liberty was

incapable of being thought at all. It would then follow that the moralpresupposition must give way to the speculative affirmation, the opposite of

which involves an obvious contradiction, and that liberty and, with it,

morality must yield to the mechanism of nature; for the negation of morality

involves no contradiction, except on the presupposition of liberty. Now

morality does not require the speculative cognition of liberty; it is enough

that I can think it, that its conception involves no contradiction, that it does

not interfere with the mechanism of nature. But even this requirement we

could not satisfy, if we had not learnt the twofold sense in which things may

be taken; and it is only in this way that the doctrine of morality and the

doctrine of nature are confined within their proper limits. For this result, then,

we are indebted to a criticism which warns us of our unavoidable ignorance

with regard to things in themselves, and establishes the necessary limitation

of our theoretical cognition to mere phenomena.

        9
               In order to cognize an object, I must be able to prove its possibility,

either from its reality as attested by experience, or a priori, by means of

reason. But I can think what I please, provided only I do not contradict

myself; that is, provided my conception is a possible thought, though I may

be unable to answer for the existence of a corresponding object in the sum of

possibilities. But something more is required before I can attribute to such a

conception objective validity, that is real possibility — the other possibility

being merely logical. We are not, however, confined to theoretical sources of

cognition for the means of satisfying this additional requirement, but may

derive them from practical sources.

              The positive value of the critical principles of pure reason in relation

to the conception of God and of the simple nature of the soul, admits of a

similar exemplification; but on this point I shall not dwell. I cannot even

make the assumption — as the practical interests of morality require — of

God, freedom, and immortality, if I do not deprive speculative reason of its

pretensions to transcendent insight. For to arrive at these, it must make use of

principles which, in fact, extend only to the objects of possible experience,

and which cannot be applied to objects beyond this sphere without converting

them into phenomena, and thus rendering the practical extension of pure

reason impossible. I must, therefore, abolish knowledge, to make room for

belief. The dogmatism of metaphysics, that is, the presumption that it is

possible to advance in metaphysics without previous criticism, is the true

source of the unbelief (always dogmatic) which militates against morality.              Thus, while it may be no very difficult task to bequeath a legacy to

posterity, in the shape of a system of metaphysics constructed in accordance

with the Critique of Pure Reason, still the value of such a bequest is not to be

depreciated. It will render an important service to reason, by substituting the

certainty of scientific method for that random groping after results without

the guidance of principles, which has hitherto characterized the pursuit of

metaphysical studies. It will render an important service to the inquiring mind

of youth, by leading the student to apply his powers to the cultivation of.

genuine science, instead of wasting them, as at present, on speculations

which can never lead to any result, or on the idle attempt to invent new ideas

and opinions. But, above all, it will confer an inestimable benefit on morality

and religion, by showing that all the objections urged against them may be

silenced for ever by the Socratic method, that is to say, by proving the

ignorance of the objector. For, as the world has never been, and, no doubt,

never will be without a system of metaphysics of one kind or another, it is the

highest and weightiest concern of philosophy to render it powerless for harm,

by closing up the sources of error.

              This important change in the field of the sciences, this loss of its

fancied possessions, to which speculative reason must submit, does not prove

in any way detrimental to the general interests of humanity. The advantages

which the world has derived from the teachings of pure reason are not at all

impaired. The loss falls, in its whole extent, on the monopoly of the schools,

but does not in the slightest degree touch the interests of mankind. I appeal to

the most obstinate dogmatist, whether the proof of the continued existence of

the soul after death, derived from the simplicity of its substance; of the

freedom of the will in opposition to the general mechanism of nature, drawn

from the subtle but impotent distinction of subjective and objective practical

necessity; or of the existence of God, deduced from the conception of an ens

realissimum — the contingency of the changeable, and the necessity of a

prime mover, has ever been able to pass beyond the limits of the schools, to

penetrate the public mind, or to exercise the slightest influence on its

convictions. It must be admitted that this has not been the case and that,

owing to the unfitness of the common understanding for such subtle

speculations, it can never be expected to take place. On the contrary, it is

plain that the hope of a future life arises from the feeling, which exists in the

breast of every man, that the temporal is inadequate to meet and satisfy the

demands of his nature. In like manner, it cannot be doubted that the clearexhibition of duties in opposition to all the claims of inclination, gives rise to

the consciousness of freedom, and that the glorious order, beauty, and

providential care, everywhere displayed in nature, give rise to the belief in a

wise and great Author of the Universe. Such is the genesis of these general

convictions of mankind, so far as they depend on rational grounds; and this

public property not only remains undisturbed, but is even raised to greater

importance, by the doctrine that the schools have no right to arrogate to

themselves a more profound insight into a matter of general human

concernment than that to which the great mass of men, ever held by us in the

highest estimation, can without difficulty attain, and that the schools should,

therefore, confine themselves to the elaboration of these universally

comprehensible and, from a moral point of view, amply satisfactory proofs.

The change, therefore, affects only the arrogant pretensions of the schools,

which would gladly retain, in their own exclusive possession, the key to the

truths which they impart to the public.

  Quod mecum nescit, solus vult scire videri.  At the same time it does not

deprive the speculative philosopher of his just title to be the sole depositor of

a science which benefits the public without its knowledge — I mean, the

Critique of Pure Reason. This can never become popular and, indeed, has no

occasion to be so; for finespun arguments in favour of useful truths make just

as little impression on the public mind as the equally subtle objections

brought against these truths. On the other hand, since both inevitably force

themselves on every man who rises to the height of speculation, it becomes

the manifest duty of the schools to enter upon a thorough investigation of the

rights of speculative reason and, thus, to prevent the scandal which

metaphysical controversies are sure, sooner or later, to cause even to the

masses. It is only by criticism that metaphysicians (and, as such, theologians

too) can be saved from these controversies and from the consequent

perversion of their doctrines. Criticism alone can strike a blow at the root of

materialism, fatalism, atheism, free-thinking, fanaticism, and superstition,

which are universally injurious — as well as of idealism and scepticism,

which are dangerous to the schools, but can scarcely pass over to the public.

If governments think proper to interfere with the affairs of the learned, it

would be more consistent with a wise regard for the interests of science, as

well as for those of society, to favour a criticism of this kind, by which alone

the labours of reason can be established on a firm basis, than to support the

ridiculous despotism of the schools, which raise a loud cry of danger to thepublic over the destruction of cobwebs, of which the public has never taken

any notice, and the loss of which, therefore, it can never feel.               This

critical science is not opposed to the dogmatic procedure of reason in pure

cognition; for pure cognition must always be dogmatic, that is, must rest on

strict demonstration from sure principles a priori — but to dogmatism, that is,

to the presumption that it is possible to make any progress with a pure

cognition, derived from (philosophical) conceptions, according to the

principles which reason has long been in the habit of employing- without first

inquiring in what way and by what right reason has come into the possession

of these principles. Dogmatism is thus the dogmatic procedure of pure reason

without previous criticism of its own powers, and in opposing this procedure,

we must not be supposed to lend any countenance to that loquacious

shallowness which arrogates to itself the name of popularity, nor yet to

scepticism, which makes short work with the whole science of metaphysics.

On the contrary, our criticism is the necessary preparation for a thoroughly

scientific system of metaphysics which must perform its task entirely a priori,

to the complete satisfaction of speculative reason, and must, therefore, be

treated, not popularly, but scholastically. In carrying out the plan which the

Critique prescribes, that is, in the future system of metaphysics, we must have

recourse to the strict method of the celebrated Wolf, the greatest of all

dogmatic philosophers. He was the first to point out the necessity of

establishing fixed principles, of clearly defining our conceptions, and of

subjecting our demonstrations to the most severe scrutiny, instead of rashly

jumping at conclusions. The example which he set served to awaken that

spirit of profound and thorough investigation which is not yet extinct in

Germany. He would have been peculiarly well fitted to give a truly scientific

character to metaphysical studies, had it occurred to him to prepare the field

by a criticism of the organum, that is, of pure reason itself. That be failed to

perceive the necessity of such a procedure must be ascribed to the dogmatic

mode of thought which characterized his age, and on this point the

philosophers of his time, as well as of all previous times, have nothing to

reproach each other with. Those who reject at once the method of Wolf, and

of the Critique of Pure Reason, can have no other aim but to shake off the

fetters of science, to change labour into sport, certainty into opinion, and

philosophy into philodoxy.

              In this second edition, I have endeavoured, as far as possible, to

remove the difficulties and obscurity which, without fault of mine perhaps,have given rise to many misconceptions even among acute thinkers. In the

propositions themselves, and in the demonstrations by which they are

supported, as well as in the form and the entire plan of the work, I have found

nothing to alter; which must be attributed partly to the long examination to

which I had subjected the whole before offering it to the public and partly to

the nature of the case. For pure speculative reason is an organic structure in

which there is nothing isolated or independent, but every Single part is

essential to all the rest; and hence, the slightest imperfection, whether defect

or positive error, could not fail to betray itself in use. I venture, further, to

hope, that this system will maintain the same unalterable character for the

future. I am led to entertain this confidence, not by vanity, but by the

evidence which the equality of the result affords, when we proceed, first,

from the simplest elements up to the complete whole of pure reason and, and

then, backwards from the whole to each part. We find that the attempt to

make the slightest alteration, in any part, leads inevitably to contradictions,

not merely in this system, but in human reason itself. At the same time, there

is still much room for improvement in the exposition of the doctrines

contained in this work. In the present edition, I have endeavoured to remove

misapprehensions of the aesthetical part, especially with regard to the

conception of time; to clear away the obscurity which has been found in the

deduction of the conceptions of the understanding; to supply the supposed

want of sufficient evidence in the demonstration of the principles of the pure

understanding; and, lastly, to obviate the misunderstanding of the

paralogisms which immediately precede the rational psychology. Beyond this

point — the end of the second main division of the “Transcendental
                                                        10
Dialectic”— I have not extended my alterations, partly from want of time,

and partly because I am not aware that any portion of the remainder has given

rise to misconceptions among intelligent and impartial critics, whom I do not

here mention with that praise which is their due, but who will find that their

suggestions have been attended to in the work itself.

        10
               The only addition, properly so called — and that only in the

method of proof — which I have made in the present edition, consists of a

new refutation of psychological idealism, and a strict demonstration — the

only one possible, as I believe — of the objective reality of external intuition.

However harmless idealism may be considered — although in reality it is not

so — in regard to the essential ends of metaphysics, it must still remain a

scandal to philosophy and to the general human reason to be obliged toassume, as an article of mere belief, the existence of things external to

ourselves (from which, yet, we derive the whole material of cognition for the

internal sense), and not to be able to oppose a satisfactory proof to any one

who may call it in question. As there is some obscurity of expression in the

demonstration as it stands in the text, I propose to alter the passage in

question as follows: “But this permanent cannot be an intuition in me. For all

the determining grounds of my existence which can be found in me are

representations and, as such, do themselves require a permanent, distinct

from them, which may determine my existence in relation to their changes,

that is, my existence in time, wherein they change.” It may, probably, be

urged in opposition to this proof that, after all, I am only conscious

immediately of that which is in me, that is, of my representation of external

things, and that, consequently, it must always remain uncertain whether

anything corresponding to this representation does or does not exist

externally to me. But I am conscious, through internal experience, of my

existence in time (consequently, also, of the determinability of the former in

the latter), and that is more than the simple consciousness of my

representation. It is, in fact, the same as the empirical consciousness of my

existence, which can only be determined in relation to something, which,

while connected with my existence, is external to me. This consciousness of

my existence in time is, therefore, identical with the consciousness of a

relation to something external to me, and it is, therefore, experience, not

fiction, sense, not imagination, which inseparably connects the external with

my internal sense. For the external sense is, in itself, the relation of intuition

to something real, external to me; and the reality of this something, as

opposed to the mere imagination of it, rests solely on its inseparable

connection with internal experience as the condition of its possibility. If with

the intellectual consciousness of my existence, in the representation: I am,

which accompanies all my judgements, and all the operations of my

understanding, I could, at the same time, connect a determination of my

existence by intellectual intuition, then the consciousness of a relation to

something external to me would not be necessary. But the internal intuition in

which alone my existence can be determined, though preceded by that purely

intellectual consciousness, is itself sensible and attached to the condition of

time. Hence this determination of my existence, and consequently my

internal experience itself, must depend on something permanent which is not

in me, which can be, therefore, only in something external to me, to which Imust look upon myself as being related. Thus the reality of the external sense

is necessarily connected with that of the internal, in order to the possibility of

experience in general; that is, I am just as certainly conscious that there are

things external to me related to my sense as I am that I myself exist as

determined in time. But in order to ascertain to what given intuitions objects,

external me, really correspond, in other words, what intuitions belong to the

external sense and not to imagination, I must have recourse, in every

particular case, to those rules according to which experience in general (even

internal experience) is distinguished from imagination, and which are always

based on the proposition that there really is an external experience. We may

add the remark that the representation of something permanent in existence,

is not the same thing as the permanent representation; for a representation

may be very variable and changing — as all our representations, even that of

matter, are — and yet refer to something permanent, which must, therefore,

be distinct from all my representations and external to me, the existence of

which is necessarily included in the determination of my own existence, and

with it constitutes one experience — an experience which would not even be

possible internally, if it were not also at the same time, in part, external. To

the question How? we are no more able to reply, than we are, in general, to

think the stationary in time, the coexistence of which with the variable,

produces the conception of change.

              In attempting to render the exposition of my views as intelligible as

possible, I have been compelled to leave out or abridge various passages

which were not essential to the completeness of the work, but which many

readers might consider useful in other respects, and might be unwilling to

miss. This trifling loss, which could not be avoided without swelling the book

beyond due limits, may be supplied, at the pleasure of the reader, by a

comparison with the first edition, and will, I hope, be more than compensated

for by the greater clearness of the exposition as it now stands.

              I have observed, with pleasure and thankfulness, in the pages of

various reviews and treatises, that the spirit of profound and thorough

investigation is not extinct in Germany, though it may have been overborne

and silenced for a time by the fashionable tone of a licence in thinking, which

gives itself the airs of genius, and that the difficulties which beset the paths of

criticism have not prevented energetic and acute thinkers from making

themselves masters of the science of pure reason to which these pathsconduct — a science which is not popular, but scholastic in its character, and

which alone can hope for a lasting existence or possess an abiding value. To

these deserving men, who so happily combine profundity of view with a

talent for lucid exposition — a talent which I myself am not conscious of

possessing — I leave the task of removing any obscurity which may still

adhere to the statement of my doctrines. For, in this case, the danger is not

that of being refuted, but of being misunderstood. For my own part, I must

henceforward abstain from controversy, although I shall carefully attend to

all suggestions, whether from friends or adversaries, which may be of use in

the future elaboration of the system of this propaedeutic. As, during these

labours, I have advanced pretty far in years this month I reach my sixty-

fourth year — it will be necessary for me to economize time, if I am to carry

out my plan of elaborating the metaphysics of nature as well as of morals, in

confirmation of the correctness of the principles established in this Critique

of Pure Reason, both speculative and practical; and I must, therefore, leave

the task of clearing up the obscurities of the present work — inevitable,

perhaps, at the outset — as well as, the defence of the whole, to those

deserving men, who have made my system their own. A philosophical system

cannot come forward armed at all points like a mathematical treatise, and

hence it may be quite possible to take objection to particular passages, while

the organic structure of the system, considered as a unity, has no danger to

apprehend. But few possess the ability, and still fewer the inclination, to take

a comprehensive view of a new system. By confining the view to particular

passages, taking these out of their connection and comparing them with one

another, it is easy to pick out apparent contradictions, especially in a work

written with any freedom of style. These contradictions place the work in an

unfavourable light in the eyes of those who rely on the judgement of others,

but are easily reconciled by those who have mastered the idea of the whole. If

a theory possesses stability in itself, the action and reaction which seemed at

first to threaten its existence serve only, in the course of time, to smooth

down any superficial roughness or inequality, and — if men of insight,

impartiality, and truly popular gifts, turn their attention to it — to secure to it,

in a short time, the requisite elegance also.

              Konigsberg, April 1787.

 

                                      Introduction.

 

 

      I. Of the difference between Pure and Empirical Knowledge

 

 

              That all our knowledge begins with experience there can be no

doubt. For how is it possible that the faculty of cognition should be awakened

into exercise otherwise than by means of objects which affect our senses, and

partly of themselves produce representations, partly rouse our powers of

understanding into activity, to compare to connect, or to separate these, and

so to convert the raw material of our sensuous impressions into a knowledge

of objects, which is called experience? In respect of time, therefore, no

knowledge of ours is antecedent to experience, but begins with it.

              But, though all our knowledge begins with experience, it by no

means follows that all arises out of experience. For, on the contrary, it is quite

possible that our empirical knowledge is a compound of that which we

receive through impressions, and that which the faculty of cognition supplies

from itself (sensuous impressions giving merely the occasion), an addition

which we cannot distinguish from the original element given by sense, till

long practice has made us attentive to, and skilful in separating it. It is,

therefore, a question which requires close investigation, and not to be

answered at first sight, whether there exists a knowledge altogether

independent of experience, and even of all sensuous impressions? Knowledge

of this kind is called a priori, in contradistinction to empirical knowledge,

which has its sources a posteriori, that is, in experience.

              But the expression, “a priori,” is not as yet definite enough

adequately to indicate the whole meaning of the question above started. For,

in speaking of knowledge which has its sources in experience, we are wont to

say, that this or that may be known a priori, because we do not derive this

knowledge immediately from experience, but from a general rule, which,

however, we have itself borrowed from experience. Thus, if a man

undermined his house, we say, “he might know a priori that it would have

fallen;” that is, he needed not to have waited for the experience that it didactually fall. But still, a priori, he could not know even this much. For, that

bodies are heavy, and, consequently, that they fall when their supports are

taken away, must have been known to him previously, by means of

experience.

              By the term “knowledge a priori,” therefore, we shall in the sequel

understand, not such as is independent of this or that kind of experience, but

such as is absolutely so of all experience. Opposed to this is empirical

knowledge, or that which is possible only a posteriori, that is, through

experience. Knowledge a priori is either pure or impure. Pure knowledge a

priori is that with which no empirical element is mixed up. For example, the

proposition, “Every change has a cause,” is a proposition a priori, but impure,

because change is a conception which can only be derived from experience.    II. The Human Intellect, even in an Unphilosophical State, is in

                  Possession of Certain Cognitions “a priori”.

 

 

              The question now is as to a criterion, by which we may securely

distinguish a pure from an empirical cognition. Experience no doubt teaches

us that this or that object is constituted in such and such a manner, but not

that it could not possibly exist otherwise. Now, in the first place, if we have a

proposition which contains the idea of necessity in its very conception, it is a

if, moreover, it is not derived from any other proposition, unless from one

equally involving the idea of necessity, it is absolutely priori. Secondly, an

empirical judgement never exhibits strict and absolute, but only assumed and

comparative universality (by induction); therefore, the most we can say is —

so far as we have hitherto observed, there is no exception to this or that rule.

If, on the other hand, a judgement carries with it strict and absolute

universality, that is, admits of no possible exception, it is not derived from

experience, but is valid absolutely a priori.

              Empirical universality is, therefore, only an arbitrary extension of

validity, from that which may be predicated of a proposition valid in most

cases, to that which is asserted of a proposition which holds good in all; as,

for example, in the affirmation, “All bodies are heavy.” When, on the

contrary, strict universality characterizes a judgement, it necessarily indicates

another peculiar source of knowledge, namely, a faculty of cognition a priori.

Necessity and strict universality, therefore, are infallible tests for

distinguishing pure from empirical knowledge, and are inseparably connected

with each other. But as in the use of these criteria the empirical limitation is

sometimes more easily detected than the contingency of the judgement, or the

unlimited universality which we attach to a judgement is often a more

convincing proof than its necessity, it may be advisable to use the criteria

separately, each being by itself infallible.

              Now, that in the sphere of human cognition we have judgements

which are necessary, and in the strictest sense universal, consequently pure a

priori, it will be an easy matter to show. If we desire an example from the

sciences, we need only take any proposition in mathematics. If we cast oureyes upon the commonest operations of the understanding, the proposition,

“Every change must have a cause,” will amply serve our purpose. In the latter

case, indeed, the conception of a cause so plainly involves the conception of a

necessity of connection with an effect, and of a strict universality of the law,

that the very notion of a cause would entirely disappear, were we to derive it,

like Hume, from a frequent association of what happens with that which

precedes; and the habit thence originating of connecting representations —

the necessity inherent in the judgement being therefore merely subjective.

Besides, without seeking for such examples of principles existing a priori in

cognition, we might easily show that such principles are the indispensable

basis of the possibility of experience itself, and consequently prove their

existence a priori. For whence could our experience itself acquire certainty, if

all the rules on which it depends were themselves empirical, and

consequently fortuitous? No one, therefore, can admit the validity of the use

of such rules as first principles. But, for the present, we may content

ourselves with having established the fact, that we do possess and exercise a

faculty of pure a priori cognition; and, secondly, with having pointed out the

proper tests of such cognition, namely, universality and necessity.

              Not only in judgements, however, but even in conceptions, is an a

priori origin manifest. For example, if we take away by degrees from our

conceptions of a body all that can be referred to mere sensuous experience —

colour, hardness or softness, weight, even impenetrability — the body will

then vanish; but the space which it occupied still remains, and this it is utterly

impossible to annihilate in thought. Again, if we take away, in like manner,

from our empirical conception of any object, corporeal or incorporeal, all

properties which mere experience has taught us to connect with it, still we

cannot think away those through which we cogitate it as substance, or

adhering to substance, although our conception of substance is more

determined than that of an object. Compelled, therefore, by that necessity

with which the conception of substance forces itself upon us, we must

confess that it has its seat in our faculty of cognition a priori.III. Philosophy stands in need of a Science which shall Determine the

  Possibility, Principles, and Extent of Human Knowledge “a priori”

 

 

              Of far more importance than all that has been above said, is the

consideration that certain of our cognitions rise completely above the sphere

of all possible experience, and by means of conceptions, to which there exists

in the whole extent of experience no corresponding object, seem to extend the

range of our judgements beyond its bounds. And just in this transcendental or

supersensible sphere, where experience affords us neither instruction nor

guidance, lie the investigations of reason, which, on account of their

importance, we consider far preferable to, and as having a far more elevated

aim than, all that the understanding can achieve within the sphere of sensuous

phenomena. So high a value do we set upon these investigations, that even at

the risk of error, we persist in following them out, and permit neither doubt

nor disregard nor indifference to restrain us from the pursuit. These

unavoidable problems of mere pure reason are God, freedom (of will), and

immortality. The science which, with all its preliminaries, has for its especial

object the solution of these problems is named metaphysics — a science

which is at the very outset dogmatical, that is, it confidently takes upon itself

the execution of this task without any previous investigation of the ability or

inability of reason for such an undertaking.

              Now the safe ground of experience being thus abandoned, it seems

nevertheless natural that we should hesitate to erect a building with the

cognitions we possess, without knowing whence they come, and on the

strength of principles, the origin of which is undiscovered. Instead of thus

trying to build without a foundation, it is rather to be expected that we should

long ago have put the question, how the understanding can arrive at these a

priori cognitions, and what is the extent, validity, and worth which they may

possess? We say, “This is natural enough,” meaning by the word natural, that

which is consistent with a just and reasonable way of thinking; but if we

understand by the term, that. which usually happens, nothing indeed could be

more natural and more comprehensible than that this investigation should be

left long unattempted. For one part of our pure knowledge, the science of

mathematics, has been long firmly established, and thus leads us to formflattering expectations with regard to others, though these may be of quite a

different nature. Besides, when we get beyond the bounds of experience, we

are of course safe from opposition in that quarter; and the charm of widening

the range of our knowledge is so great that, unless we are brought to a

standstill by some evident contradiction, we hurry on undoubtingly in our

course. This, however, may be avoided, if we are sufficiently cautious in the

construction of our fictions, which are not the less fictions on that account.

              Mathematical science affords us a brilliant example, how far,

independently of all experience, we may carry our a priori knowledge. It is

true that the mathematician occupies himself with objects and cognitions only

in so far as they can be represented by means of intuition. But this

circumstance is easily overlooked, because the said intuition can itself be

given a priori, and therefore is hardly to be distinguished from a mere pure

conception. Deceived by such a proof of the power of reason, we can

perceive no limits to the extension of our knowledge. The light dove cleaving

in free flight the thin air, whose resistance it feels, might imagine that her

movements would be far more free and rapid in airless space. just in the same

way did Plato, abandoning the world of sense because of the narrow limits it

sets to the understanding, venture upon the wings of ideas beyond it, into the

void space of pure intellect. He did not reflect that he made no real progress

by all his efforts; for he met with no resistance which might serve him for a

support, as it were, whereon to rest, and on which he might apply his powers,

in order to let the intellect acquire momentum for its progress. It is, indeed,

the common fate of human reason in speculation, to finish the imposing

edifice of thought as rapidly as possible, and then for the first time to begin to

examine whether the foundation is a solid one or no. Arrived at this point, all

sorts of excuses are sought after, in order to console us for its want of

stability, or rather, indeed, to enable Us to dispense altogether with so late

and dangerous an investigation. But what frees us during the process of

building from all apprehension or suspicion, and flatters us into the belief of

its solidity, is this. A great part, perhaps the greatest part, of the business of

our reason consists in the analysation of the conceptions which we already

possess of objects. By this means we gain a multitude of cognitions, which

although really nothing more than elucidations or explanations of that which

(though in a confused manner) was already thought in our conceptions, are, at

least in respect of their form, prized as new introspections; whilst, so far as

regards their matter or content, we have really made no addition to ourconceptions, but only disinvolved them. But as this process does furnish a

real priori knowledge, which has a sure progress and useful results, reason,

deceived by this, slips in, without being itself aware of it, assertions of a quite

different kind; in which, to given conceptions it adds others, a priori indeed,

but entirely foreign to them, without our knowing how it arrives at these, and,

indeed, without such a question ever suggesting itself. I shall therefore at

once proceed to examine the difference between these two modes of

knowledge.IV. Of the Difference Between Analytical and Synthetical Judgements.

 

 

              In all judgements wherein the relation of a subject to the predicate is

cogitated (I mention affirmative judgements only here; the application to

negative will be very easy), this relation is possible in two different ways.

Either the predicate B belongs to the subject A, as somewhat which is

contained (though covertly) in the conception A; or the predicate B lies

completely out of the conception A, although it stands in connection with it.

In the first instance, I term the judgement analytical, in the second,

synthetical. Analytical judgements (affirmative) are therefore those in which

the connection of the predicate with the subject is cogitated through identity;

those in which this connection is cogitated without identity, are called

synthetical judgements. The former may be called explicative, the latter

augmentative judgements; because the former add in the predicate nothing to

the conception of the subject, but only analyse it into its constituent

conceptions, which were thought already in the subject, although in a

confused manner; the latter add to our conceptions of the subject a predicate

which was not contained in it, and which no analysis could ever have

discovered therein. For example, when I say, “All bodies are extended,” this

is an analytical judgement. For I need not go beyond the conception of body

in order to find extension connected with it, but merely analyse the

conception, that is, become conscious of the manifold properties which I

think in that conception, in order to discover this predicate in it: it is therefore

an analytical judgement. On the other hand, when I say, “All bodies are

heavy,” the predicate is something totally different from that which I think in

the mere conception of a body. By the addition of such a predicate, therefore,

it becomes a synthetical judgement.

              Judgements of experience, as such, are always synthetical. For it

would be absurd to think of grounding an analytical judgement on

experience, because in forming such a judgement I need not go out of the

sphere of my conceptions, and therefore recourse to the testimony of

experience is quite unnecessary. That “bodies are extended” is not an

empirical judgement, but a proposition which stands firm a priori. For before

addressing myself to experience, I already have in my conception all therequisite conditions for the judgement, and I have only to extract the

predicate from the conception, according to the principle of contradiction,

and thereby at the same time become conscious of the necessity of the

judgement, a necessity which I could never learn from experience. On the

other hand, though at first I do not at all include the predicate of weight in my

conception of body in general, that conception still indicates an object of

experience, a part of the totality of experience, to which I can still add other

parts; and this I do when I recognize by observation that bodies are heavy. I

can cognize beforehand by analysis the conception of body through the

characteristics of extension, impenetrability, shape, etc., all which are

cogitated in this conception. But now I extend my knowledge, and looking

back on experience from which I had derived this conception of body, I find

weight at all times connected with the above characteristics, and therefore I

synthetically add to my conceptions this as a predicate, and say, “All bodies

are heavy.” Thus it is experience upon which rests the possibility of the

synthesis of the predicate of weight with the conception of body, because

both conceptions, although the one is not contained in the other, still belong

to one another (only contingently, however), as parts of a whole, namely, of

experience, which is itself a synthesis of intuitions.

              But to synthetical judgements a priori, such aid is entirely wanting.

If I go out of and beyond the conception A, in order to recognize another B as

connected with it, what foundation have I to rest on, whereby to render the

synthesis possible? I have here no longer the advantage of looking out in the

sphere of experience for what I want. Let us take, for example, the

proposition, “Everything that happens has a cause.” In the conception of

“something that happens,” I indeed think an existence which a certain time

antecedes, and from this I can derive analytical judgements. But the

conception of a cause lies quite out of the above conception, and indicates

something entirely different from “that which happens,” and is consequently

not contained in that conception. How then am I able to assert concerning the

general conception —“that which happens”— something entirely different

from that conception, and to recognize the conception of cause although not

contained in it, yet as belonging to it, and even necessarily? what is here the

unknown = X, upon which the understanding rests when it believes it has

found, out of the conception A a foreign predicate B, which it nevertheless

considers to be connected with it? It cannot be experience, because the

principle adduced annexes the two representations, cause and effect, to therepresentation existence, not only with universality, which experience cannot

give, but also with the expression of necessity, therefore completely a priori

and from pure conceptions. Upon such synthetical, that is augmentative

propositions, depends the whole aim of our speculative knowledge a priori;

for although analytical judgements are indeed highly important and

necessary, they are so, only to arrive at that clearness of conceptions which is

requisite for a sure and extended synthesis, and this alone is a real

acquisition.  V. In all Theoretical Sciences of Reason, Synthetical Judgements “a

                      priori” are contained as Principles.

 

 

              1. Mathematical judgements are always synthetical. Hitherto this

fact, though incontestably true and very important in its consequences, seems

to have escaped the analysts of the human mind, nay, to be in complete

opposition to all their conjectures. For as it was found that mathematical

conclusions all proceed according to the principle of contradiction (which the

nature of every apodeictic certainty requires), people became persuaded that

the fundamental principles of the science also were recognized and admitted

in the same way. But the notion is fallacious; for although a synthetical

proposition can certainly be discerned by means of the principle of

contradiction, this is possible only when another synthetical proposition

precedes, from which the latter is deduced, but never of itself which

              Before all, be it observed, that proper mathematical propositions are

always judgements a priori, and not empirical, because they carry along with

them the conception of necessity, which cannot be given by experience. If

this be demurred to, it matters not; I will then limit my assertion to pure

mathematics, the very conception of which implies that it consists of

knowledge altogether non-empirical and a priori.

              We might, indeed at first suppose that the proposition 7 + 5 = 12 is a

merely analytical proposition, following (according to the principle of

contradiction) from the conception of a sum of seven and five. But if we

regard it more narrowly, we find that our conception of the sum of seven and

five contains nothing more than the uniting of both sums into one, whereby it

cannot at all be cogitated what this single number is which embraces both.

The conception of twelve is by no means obtained by merely cogitating the

union of seven and five; and we may analyse our conception of such a

possible sum as long as we will, still we shall never discover in it the notion

of twelve. We must go beyond these conceptions, and have recourse to an

intuition which corresponds to one of the two — our five fingers, for

example, or like Segner in his Arithmetic five points, and so by degrees, add

the units contained in the five given in the intuition, to the conception ofseven. For I first take the number 7, and, for the conception of 5 calling in the

aid of the fingers of my hand as objects of intuition, I add the units, which I

before took together to make up the number 5, gradually now by means of the

material image my hand, to the number 7, and by this process, I at length see

the number 12 arise. That 7 should be added to 5, I have certainly cogitated in

my conception of a sum = 7 + 5, but not that this sum was equal to 12.

Arithmetical propositions are therefore always synthetical, of which we may

become more clearly convinced by trying large numbers. For it will thus

become quite evident that, turn and twist our conceptions as we may, it is

impossible, without having recourse to intuition, to arrive at the sum total or

product by means of the mere analysis of our conceptions. just as little is any

principle of pure geometry analytical. “A straight line between two points is

the shortest,” is a synthetical proposition. For my conception of straight

contains no notion of quantity, but is merely qualitative. The conception of

the shortest is therefore fore wholly an addition, and by no analysis can it be

extracted from our conception of a straight line. Intuition must therefore here

lend its aid, by means of which, and thus only, our synthesis is possible.

              Some few principles preposited by geometricians are, indeed, really

analytical, and depend on the principle of contradiction. They serve,

however, like identical propositions, as links in the chain of method, not as

principles — for example, a = a, the whole is equal to itself, or (a+b) > a, the

whole is greater than its part. And yet even these principles themselves,

though they derive their validity from pure conceptions, are only admitted in

mathematics because they can be presented in intuition. What causes us here

commonly to believe that the predicate of such apodeictic judgements is

already contained in our conception, and that the judgement is therefore

analytical, is merely the equivocal nature of the expression. We must join in

thought a certain predicate to a given conception, and this necessity cleaves

already to the conception. But the question is, not what we must join in

thought to the given conception, but what we really think therein, though

only obscurely, and then it becomes manifest that the predicate pertains to

these conceptions, necessarily indeed, yet not as thought in the conception

itself, but by virtue of an intuition, which must be added to the conception.

              2. The science of natural philosophy (physics) contains in itself

synthetical judgements a priori, as principles. I shall adduce two propositions.

For instance, the proposition, “In all changes of the material world, thequantity of matter remains unchanged”; or, that, “In all communication of

motion, action and reaction must always be equal.” In both of these, not only

is the necessity, and therefore their origin a priori clear, but also that they are

synthetical propositions. For in the conception of matter, I do not cogitate its

permanency, but merely its presence in space, which it fills. I therefore really

go out of and beyond the conception of matter, in order to think on to it

something a priori, which I did not think in it. The proposition is therefore

not analytical, but synthetical, and nevertheless conceived a priori; and so it

is with regard to the other propositions of the pure part of natural philosophy.

              3. As to metaphysics, even if we look upon it merely as an attempted

science, yet, from the nature of human reason, an indispensable one, we find

that it must contain synthetical propositions a priori. It is not merely the duty

of metaphysics to dissect, and thereby analytically to illustrate the

conceptions which we form a priori of things; but we seek to widen the range

of our a priori knowledge. For this purpose, we must avail ourselves of such

principles as add something to the original conception — something not

identical with, nor contained in it, and by means of synthetical judgements a

priori, leave far behind us the limits of experience; for example, in the

proposition, “the world must have a beginning,” and such like. Thus

metaphysics, according to the proper aim of the science, consists merely of

synthetical propositions a priori.

                VI. The Universal Problem of Pure Reason.

 

 

              It is extremely advantageous to be able to bring a number of

investigations under the formula of a single problem. For in this manner, we

not only facilitate our own labour, inasmuch as we define it clearly to

ourselves, but also render it more easy for others to decide whether we have

done justice to our undertaking. The proper problem of pure reason, then, is

contained in the question: “How are synthetical judgements a priori

possible?”

              That metaphysical science has hitherto remained in so vacillating a

state of uncertainty and contradiction, is only to be attributed to the fact that

this great problem, and perhaps even the difference between analytical and

synthetical judgements, did not sooner suggest itself to philosophers. Uponthe solution of this problem, or upon sufficient proof of the impossibility of

synthetical knowledge a priori, depends the existence or downfall of the

science of metaphysics. Among philosophers, David Hume came the nearest

of all to this problem; yet it never acquired in his mind sufficient precision,

nor did he regard the question in its universality. On the contrary, he stopped

short at the synthetical proposition of the connection of an effect with its

cause (principium causalitatis), insisting that such proposition a priori was

impossible. According to his conclusions, then, all that we term metaphysical

science is a mere delusion, arising from the fancied insight of reason into that

which is in truth borrowed from experience, and to which habit has given the

appearance of necessity. Against this assertion, destructive to all pure

philosophy, he would have been guarded, had he had our problem before his

eyes in its universality. For he would then have perceived that, according to

his own argument, there likewise could not be any pure mathematical

science, which assuredly cannot exist without synthetical propositions a

priori — an absurdity from which his good understanding must have saved

him.

              In the solution of the above problem is at the same time

comprehended the possibility of the use of pure reason in the foundation and

construction of all sciences which contain theoretical knowledge a priori of

objects, that is to say, the answer to the following questions:

              How is pure mathematical science possible?

              How is pure natural science possible?

              Respecting these sciences, as they do certainly exist, it may with

propriety be asked, how they are possible?— for that they must be possible is
                                                11
shown by the fact of their really existing. But as to metaphysics, the

miserable progress it has hitherto made, and the fact that of no one system yet

brought forward, far as regards its true aim, can it be said that this science

really exists, leaves any one at liberty to doubt with reason the very

possibility of its existence.

        11
               As to the existence of pure natural science, or physics, perhaps

many may still express doubts. But we have only to look at the different

propositions which are commonly treated of at the commencement of proper

(empirical) physical science — those, for example, relating to the

permanence of the same quantity of matter, the vis inertiae, the equality ofaction and reaction, etc.— to be soon convinced that they form a science of

pure physics (physica pura, or rationalis), which well deserves to be

separately exposed as a special science, in its whole extent, whether that be

great or confined.

              Yet, in a certain sense, this kind of knowledge must unquestionably

be looked upon as given; in other words, metaphysics must be considered as

really existing, if not as a science, nevertheless as a natural disposition of the

human mind (metaphysica naturalis). For human reason, without any

instigations imputable to the mere vanity of great knowledge, unceasingly

progresses, urged on by its own feeling of need, towards such questions as

cannot be answered by any empirical application of reason, or principles

derived therefrom; and so there has ever really existed in every man some

system of metaphysics. It will always exist, so soon as reason awakes to the

exercise of its power of speculation. And now the question arises: “How is

metaphysics, as a natural disposition, possible?” In other words, how, from

the nature of universal human reason, do those questions arise which pure

reason proposes to itself, and which it is impelled by its own feeling of need

to answer as well as it can?

              But as in all the attempts hitherto made to answer the questions

which reason is prompted by its very nature to propose to itself, for example,

whether the world had a beginning, or has existed from eternity, it has always

met with unavoidable contradictions, we must not rest satisfied with the mere

natural disposition of the mind to metaphysics, that is, with the existence of

the faculty of pure reason, whence, indeed, some sort of metaphysical system

always arises; but it must be possible to arrive at certainty in regard to the

question whether we know or do not know the things of which metaphysics

treats. We must be able to arrive at a decision on the subjects of its questions,

or on the ability or inability of reason to form any judgement respecting

them; and therefore either to extend with confidence the bounds of our pure

reason, or to set strictly defined and safe limits to its action. This last

question, which arises out of the above universal problem, would properly

run thus: “How is metaphysics possible as a science?”

              Thus, the critique of reason leads at last, naturally and necessarily, to

science; and, on the other hand, the dogmatical use of reason without

criticism leads to groundless assertions, against which others equally

specious can always be set, thus ending unavoidably in scepticism.              Besides, this science cannot be of great and formidable prolixity,

because it has not to do with objects of reason, the variety of which is

inexhaustible, but merely with Reason herself and her problems; problems

which arise out of her own bosom, and are not proposed to her by the nature

of outward things, but by her own nature. And when once Reason has

previously become able completely to understand her own power in regard to

objects which she meets with in experience, it will be easy to determine

securely the extent and limits of her attempted application to objects beyond

the confines of experience.

              We may and must, therefore, regard the attempts hitherto made to

establish metaphysical science dogmatically as non-existent. For what of

analysis, that is, mere dissection of conceptions, is contained in one or other,

is not the aim of, but only a preparation for metaphysics proper, which has

for its object the extension, by means of synthesis, of our a priori knowledge.

And for this purpose, mere analysis is of course useless, because it only

shows what is contained in these conceptions, but not how we arrive, a priori,

at them; and this it is her duty to show, in order to be able afterwards to

determine their valid use in regard to all objects of experience, to all

knowledge in general. But little self-denial, indeed, is needed to give up these

pretensions, seeing the undeniable, and in the dogmatic mode of procedure,

inevitable contradictions of Reason with herself, have long since ruined the

reputation of every system of metaphysics that has appeared up to this time.

It will require more firmness to remain undeterred by difficulty from within,

and opposition from without, from endeavouring, by a method quite opposed

to all those hitherto followed, to further the growth and fruitfulness of a

science indispensable to human reason — a science from which every branch

it has borne may be cut away, but whose roots remain indestructible.  VII. Idea and Division of a Particular Science, under the Name of a

                              Critique of Pure Reason.

 

 

              From all that has been said, there results the idea of a particular

science, which may be called the Critique of Pure Reason. For reason is the

faculty which furnishes us with the principles of knowledge a priori. Hence,

pure reason is the faculty which contains the principles of cognizing anything

absolutely a priori. An organon of pure reason would be a compendium of

those principles according to which alone all pure cognitions a priori can be

obtained. The completely extended application of such an organon would

afford us a system of pure reason. As this, however, is demanding a great

deal, and it is yet doubtful whether any extension of our knowledge be here

possible, or, if so, in what cases; we can regard a science of the mere

criticism of pure reason, its sources and limits, as the propaedeutic to a

system of pure reason. Such a science must not be called a doctrine, but only

a critique of pure reason; and its use, in regard to speculation, would be only

negative, not to enlarge the bounds of, but to purify, our reason, and to shield

it against error — which alone is no little gain. I apply the term

transcendental to all knowledge which is not so much occupied with objects

as with the mode of our cognition of these objects, so far as this mode of

cognition is possible a priori. A system of such conceptions would be called

transcendental philosophy. But this, again, is still beyond the bounds of our

present essay. For as such a science must contain a complete exposition not

only of our synthetical a priori, but of our analytical a priori knowledge, it is

of too wide a range for our present purpose, because we do not require to

carry our analysis any farther than is necessary to understand, in their full

extent, the principles of synthesis a priori, with which alone we have to do.

This investigation, which we cannot properly call a doctrine, but only a

transcendental critique, because it aims not at the enlargement, but at the

correction and guidance, of our knowledge, and is to serve as a touchstone of

the worth or worthlessness of all knowledge a priori, is the sole object of our

present essay. Such a critique is consequently, as far as possible, a

preparation for an organon; and if this new organon should be found to fail, at

least for a canon of pure reason, according to which the complete system ofthe philosophy of pure reason, whether it extend or limit the bounds of that

reason, might one day be set forth both analytically and synthetically. For

that this is possible, nay, that such a system is not of so great extent as to

preclude the hope of its ever being completed, is evident. For we have not

here to do with the nature of outward objects, which is infinite, but solely

with the mind, which judges of the nature of objects, and, again, with the

mind only in respect of its cognition a priori. And the object of our

investigations, as it is not to be sought without, but, altogether within,

ourselves, cannot remain concealed, and in all probability is limited enough

to be completely surveyed and fairly estimated, according to its worth or

worthlessness. Still less let the reader here expect a critique of books and

systems of pure reason; our present object is exclusively a critique of the

faculty of pure reason itself. Only when we make this critique our foundation,

do we possess a pure touchstone for estimating the philosophical value of

ancient and modern writings on this subject; and without this criterion, the

incompetent historian or judge decides upon and corrects the groundless

assertions of others with his own, which have themselves just as little

foundation.

              Transcendental philosophy is the idea of a science, for which the

Critique of Pure Reason must sketch the whole plan architectonically, that is,

from principles, with a full guarantee for the validity and stability of all the

parts which enter into the building. It is the system of all the principles of

pure reason. If this Critique itself does not assume the title of transcendental

philosophy, it is only because, to be a complete system, it ought to contain a

full analysis of all human knowledge a priori. Our critique must, indeed, lay

before us a complete enumeration of all the radical conceptions which

constitute the said pure knowledge. But from the complete analysis of these

conceptions themselves, as also from a complete investigation of those

derived from them, it abstains with reason; partly because it would be

deviating from the end in view to occupy itself with this analysis, since this

process is not attended with the difficulty and insecurity to be found in the

synthesis, to which our critique is entirely devoted, and partly because it

would be inconsistent with the unity of our plan to burden this essay with the

vindication of the completeness of such an analysis and deduction, with

which, after all, we have at present nothing to do. This completeness of the

analysis of these radical conceptions, as well as of the deduction from the

conceptions a priori which may be given by the analysis, we can, however,easily attain, provided only that we are in possession of all these radical

conceptions, which are to serve as principles of the synthesis, and that in

respect of this main purpose nothing is wanting.

              To the Critique of Pure Reason, therefore, belongs all that

constitutes transcendental philosophy; and it is the complete idea of

transcendental philosophy, but still not the science itself; because it only

proceeds so far with the analysis as is necessary to the power of judging

completely of our synthetical knowledge a priori.

              The principal thing we must attend to, in the division of the parts of

a science like this, is that no conceptions must enter it which contain aught

empirical; in other words, that the knowledge a priori must be completely

pure. Hence, although the highest principles and fundamental conceptions of

morality are certainly cognitions a priori, yet they do not belong to

transcendental philosophy; because, though they certainly do not lay the

conceptions of pain, pleasure, desires, inclinations, etc. (which are all of

empirical origin), at the foundation of its precepts, yet still into the

conception of duty — as an obstacle to be overcome, or as an incitement

which should not be made into a motive — these empirical conceptions must

necessarily enter, in the construction of a system of pure morality.

Transcendental philosophy is consequently a philosophy of the pure and

merely speculative reason. For all that is practical, so far as it contains

motives, relates to feelings, and these belong to empirical sources of

cognition.

              If we wish to divide this science from the universal point of view of

a science in general, it ought to comprehend, first, a Doctrine of the

Elements, and, secondly, a Doctrine of the Method of pure reason. Each of

these main divisions will have its subdivisions, the separate reasons for which

we cannot here particularize. Only so much seems necessary, by way of

introduction of premonition, that there are two sources of human knowledge

(which probably spring from a common, but to us unknown root), namely,

sense and understanding. By the former, objects are given to us; by the latter,

thought. So far as the faculty of sense may contain representations a priori,

which form the conditions under which objects are given, in so far it belongs

to transcendental philosophy. The transcendental doctrine of sense must form

the first part of our science of elements, because the conditions under which

alone the objects of human knowledge are given must precede those underwhich they are thought.

 

 

               I. Transcendental Doctrine of Elements.

 

 

                      First Part. Transcendental Aesthetic.

 

 

                                §§ 1. Introductory.

 

 

              In whatsoever mode, or by whatsoever means, our knowledge may

relate to objects, it is at least quite clear that the only manner in which it

immediately relates to them is by means of an intuition. To this as the

indispensable groundwork, all thought points. But an intuition can take place

only in so far as the object is given to us. This, again, is only possible, to man

at least, on condition that the object affect the mind in a certain manner. The

capacity for receiving representations (receptivity) through the mode in

which we are affected by objects, objects, is called sensibility. By means of

sensibility, therefore, objects are given to us, and it alone furnishes us with

intuitions; by the understanding they are thought, and from it arise

conceptions. But an thought must directly, or indirectly, by means of certain

signs, relate ultimately to intuitions; consequently, with us, to sensibility,

because in no other way can an object be given to us.

              The effect of an object upon the faculty of representation, so far as

we are affected by the said object, is sensation. That sort of intuition which

relates to an object by means of sensation is called an empirical intuition. The

undetermined object of an empirical intuition is called phenomenon. That

which in the phenomenon corresponds to the sensation, I term its matter; but

that which effects that the content of the phenomenon can be arranged under

certain relations, I call its form. But that in which our sensations are merely

arranged, and by which they are susceptible of assuming a certain form,

cannot be itself sensation. It is, then, the matter of all phenomena that is given

to us a posteriori; the form must lie ready a priori for them in the mind, and

consequently can be regarded separately from all sensation.              I call all representations pure, in the transcendental meaning of the

word, wherein nothing is met with that belongs to sensation. And accordingly

we find existing in the mind a priori, the pure form of sensuous intuitions in

general, in which all the manifold content of the phenomenal world is

arranged and viewed under certain relations. This pure form of sensibility I

shall call pure intuition. Thus, if I take away from our representation of a

body all that the understanding thinks as belonging to it, as substance, force,

divisibility, etc., and also whatever belongs to sensation, as impenetrability,

hardness, colour, etc.; yet there is still something left us from this empirical

intuition, namely, extension and shape. These belong to pure intuition, which

exists a priori in the mind, as a mere form of sensibility, and without any real

object of the senses or any sensation.

              The science of all the principles of sensibility a priori, I call
                            12
transcendental aesthetic. There must, then, be such a science forming the

first part of the transcendental doctrine of elements, in contradistinction to

that part which contains the principles of pure thought, and which is called

transcendental logic.

        12
               The Germans are the only people who at present use this word to

indicate what others call the critique of taste. At the foundation of this term

lies the disappointed hope, which the eminent analyst, Baumgarten,

conceived, of subjecting the criticism of the beautiful to principles of reason,

and so of elevating its rules into a science. But his endeavours were vain. For

the said rules or criteria are, in respect to their chief sources, merely

empirical, consequently never can serve as determinate laws a priori, by

which our judgement in matters of taste is to be directed. It is rather our

judgement which forms the proper test as to the correctness of the principles.

On this account it is advisable to give up the use of the term as designating

the critique of taste, and to apply it solely to that doctrine, which is true

science — the science of the laws of sensibility — and thus come nearer to

the language and the sense of the ancients in their well-known division of the

objects of cognition into aiotheta kai noeta, or to share it with speculative

philosophy, and employ it partly in a transcendental, partly in a psychological

signification.

              In the science of transcendental aesthetic accordingly, we shall first

isolate sensibility or the sensuous faculty, by separating from it all that is

annexed to its perceptions by the conceptions of understanding, so thatnothing be left but empirical intuition. In the next place we shall take away

from this intuition all that belongs to sensation, so that nothing may remain

but pure intuition, and the mere form of phenomena, which is all that the

sensibility can afford a priori. From this investigation it will be found that

there are two pure forms of sensuous intuition, as principles of knowledge a

priori, namely, space and time. To the consideration of these we shall now

proceed.                                Section I. Of Space.

 

 

              §§ 2. Metaphysical Exposition of this Conception.

 

 

              By means of the external sense (a property of the mind), we

represent to ourselves objects as without us, and these all in space. Herein

alone are their shape, dimensions, and relations to each other determined or

determinable. The internal sense, by means of which the mind contemplates

itself or its internal state, gives, indeed, no intuition of the soul as an object;

yet there is nevertheless a determinate form, under which alone the

contemplation of our internal state is possible, so that all which relates to the

inward determinations of the mind is represented in relations of time. Of time

we cannot have any external intuition, any more than we can have an internal

intuition of space. What then are time and space? Are they real existences?

Or, are they merely relations or determinations of things, such, however, as

would equally belong to these things in themselves, though they should never

become objects of intuition; or, are they such as belong only to the form of

intuition, and consequently to the subjective constitution of the mind, without

which these predicates of time and space could not be attached to any object?

In order to become informed on these points, we shall first give an exposition

of the conception of space. By exposition, I mean the clear, though not

detailed, representation of that which belongs to a conception; and an

exposition is metaphysical when it contains that which represents the

conception as given a priori.

              1. Space is not a conception which has been derived from outward

experiences. For, in order that certain sensations may relate to something

without me (that is, to something which occupies a different part of space

from that in which I am); in like manner, in order that I may represent them

not merely as without, of, and near to each other, but also in separate places,

the representation of space must already exist as a foundation. Consequently,

the representation of space cannot be borrowed from the relations of external

phenomena through experience; but, on the contrary, this external experienceis itself only possible through the said antecedent representation.

              2. Space then is a necessary representation a priori, which serves for

the foundation of all external intuitions. We never can imagine or make a

representation to ourselves of the non-existence of space, though we may

easily enough think that no objects are found in it. It must, therefore, be

considered as the condition of the possibility of phenomena, and by no means

as a determination dependent on them, and is a representation a priori, which

necessarily supplies the basis for external phenomena.

              3. Space is no discursive, or as we say, general conception of the

relations of things, but a pure intuition. For, in the first place, we can only

represent to ourselves one space, and, when we talk of divers spaces, we

mean only parts of one and the same space. Moreover, these parts cannot

antecede this one all-embracing space, as the component parts from which the

aggregate can be made up, but can be cogitated only as existing in it. Space is

essentially one, and multiplicity in it, consequently the general notion of

spaces, of this or that space, depends solely upon limitations. Hence it

follows that an a priori intuition (which is not empirical) lies at the root of all

our conceptions of space. Thus, moreover, the principles of geometry — for

example, that “in a triangle, two sides together are greater than the third,” are

never deduced from general conceptions of line and triangle, but from

intuition, and this a priori, with apodeictic certainty.

              4. Space is represented as an infinite given quantity. Now every

conception must indeed be considered as a representation which is contained

in an infinite multitude of different possible representations, which, therefore,

comprises these under itself; but no conception, as such, can be so conceived,

as if it contained within itself an infinite multitude of representations.

Nevertheless, space is so conceived of, for all parts of space are equally

capable of being produced to infinity. Consequently, the original

representation of space is an intuition a priori, and not a conception.      §§ 3. Transcendental Exposition of the Conception of Space.

 

 

              By a transcendental exposition, I mean the explanation of a

conception, as a principle, whence can be discerned the possibility of other

synthetical a priori cognitions. For this purpose, it is requisite, firstly, that

such cognitions do really flow from the given conception; and, secondly, that

the said cognitions are only possible under the presupposition of a given

mode of explaining this conception.

              Geometry is a science which determines the properties of space

synthetically, and yet a priori. What, then, must be our representation of

space, in order that such a cognition of it may be possible? It must be

originally intuition, for from a mere conception, no propositions can be

deduced which go out beyond the conception, and yet this happens in

geometry. (Introd. V.) But this intuition must be found in the mind a priori,

that is, before any perception of objects, consequently must be pure, not

empirical, intuition. For geometrical principles are always apodeictic, that is,

united with the consciousness of their necessity, as: “Space has only three

dimensions.” But propositions of this kind cannot be empirical judgements,

nor conclusions from them. (Introd. II.) Now, how can an external intuition

anterior to objects themselves, and in which our conception of objects can be

determined a priori, exist in the human mind? Obviously not otherwise than

in so far as it has its seat in the subject only, as the formal capacity of the

subject’s being affected by objects, and thereby of obtaining immediate

representation, that is, intuition; consequently, only as the form of the

external sense in general.

              Thus it is only by means of our explanation that the possibility of

geometry, as a synthetical science a priori, becomes comprehensible. Every

mode of explanation which does not show us this possibility, although in

appearance it may be similar to ours, can with the utmost certainty be

distinguished from it by these marks.            §§ 4. Conclusions from the foregoing Conceptions.

 

 

              (a) Space does Space does not represent any property of objects as

things in themselves, nor does it represent them in their relations to each

other; in other words, space does not represent to us any determination of

objects such as attaches to the objects themselves, and would remain, even

though all subjective conditions of the intuition were abstracted. For neither

absolute nor relative determinations of objects can be intuited prior to the

existence of the things to which they belong, and therefore not a priori.

              (b) Space is nothing else than the form of all phenomena of the

external sense, that is, the subjective condition of the sensibility, under which

alone external intuition is possible. Now, because the receptivity or capacity

of the subject to be affected by objects necessarily antecedes all intuitions of

these objects, it is easily understood how the form of all phenomena can be

given in the mind previous to all actual perceptions, therefore a priori, and

how it, as a pure intuition, in which all objects must be determined, can

contain principles of the relations of these objects prior to all experience.

              It is therefore from the human point of view only that we can speak

of space, extended objects, etc. If we depart from the subjective condition,

under which alone we can obtain external intuition, or, in other words, by

means of which we are affected by objects, the representation of space has no

meaning whatsoever. This predicate is only applicable to things in so far as

they appear to us, that is, are objects of sensibility. The constant form of this

receptivity, which we call sensibility, is a necessary condition of all relations

in which objects can be intuited as existing without us, and when abstraction

of these objects is made, is a pure intuition, to which we give the name of

space. It is clear that we cannot make the special conditions of sensibility into

conditions of the possibility of things, but only of the possibility of their

existence as far as they are phenomena. And so we may correctly say that

space contains all which can appear to us externally, but not all things

considered as things in themselves, be they intuited or not, or by whatsoever

subject one will. As to the intuitions of other thinking beings, we cannot

judge whether they are or are not bound by the same conditions which limitour own intuition, and which for us are universally valid. If we join the

limitation of a judgement to the conception of the subject, then the judgement

will possess unconditioned validity. For example, the proposition, “All

objects are beside each other in space,” is valid only under the limitation that

these things are taken as objects of our sensuous intuition. But if I join the

condition to the conception and say, “All things, as external phenomena, are

beside each other in space,” then the rule is valid universally, and without any

limitation. Our expositions, consequently, teach the reality (i.e., the objective

validity) of space in regard of all which can be presented to us externally as

object, and at the same time also the ideality of space in regard to objects

when they are considered by means of reason as things in themselves, that is,

without reference to the constitution of our sensibility. We maintain,

therefore, the empirical reality of space in regard to all possible external

experience, although we must admit its transcendental ideality; in other

words, that it is nothing, so soon as we withdraw the condition upon which

the possibility of all experience depends and look upon space as something

that belongs to things in themselves.

              But, with the exception of space, there is no representation,

subjective and ref erring to something external to us, which could be called

objective a priori. For there are no other subjective representations from

which we can deduce synthetical propositions a priori, as we can from the

intuition of space. (See §§ 3.) Therefore, to speak accurately, no ideality

whatever belongs to these, although they agree in this respect with the

representation of space, that they belong merely to the subjective nature of

the mode of sensuous perception; such a mode, for example, as that of sight,

of hearing, and of feeling, by means of the sensations of colour, sound, and

heat, but which, because they are only sensations and not intuitions, do not of

themselves give us the cognition of any object, least of all, an a priori

cognition. My purpose, in the above remark, is merely this: to guard any one

against illustrating the asserted ideality of space by examples quite

insufficient, for example, by colour, taste, etc.; for these must be

contemplated not as properties of things, but only as changes in the subject,

changes which may be different in different men. For, in such a case, that

which is originally a mere phenomenon, a rose, for example, is taken by the

empirical understanding for a thing in itself, though to every different eye, in

respect of its colour, it may appear different. On the contrary, the

transcendental conception of phenomena in space is a critical admonition,that, in general, nothing which is intuited in space is a thing in itself, and that

space is not a form which belongs as a property to things; but that objects are

quite unknown to us in themselves, and what we call outward objects, are

nothing else but mere representations of our sensibility, whose form is space,

but whose real correlate, the thing in itself, is not known by means of these

representations, nor ever can be, but respecting which, in experience, no

inquiry is ever made.                                Section II. Of Time.

 

 

              §§ 5 Metaphysical Exposition of this Conception.

 

 

              1. Time is not an empirical conception. For neither coexistence nor

succession would be perceived by us, if the representation of time did not

exist as a foundation a priori. Without this presupposition we could not

represent to ourselves that things exist together at one and the same time, or

at different times, that is, contemporaneously, or in succession.

              2. Time is a necessary representation, lying at the foundation of all

our intuitions. With regard to phenomena in general, we cannot think away

time from them, and represent them to ourselves as out of and unconnected

with time, but we can quite well represent to ourselves time void of

phenomena. Time is therefore given a priori. In it alone is all reality of

phenomena possible. These may all be annihilated in thought, but time itself,

as the universal condition of their possibility, cannot be so annulled.

              3. On this necessity a priori is also founded the possibility of

apodeictic principles of the relations of time, or axioms of time in general,

such as: “Time has only one dimension,” “Different times are not coexistent

but successive” (as different spaces are not successive but coexistent). These

principles cannot be derived from experience, for it would give neither strict

universality, nor apodeictic certainty. We should only be able to say, “so

common experience teaches us,” but not “it must be so.” They are valid as

rules, through which, in general, experience is possible; and they instruct us

respecting experience, and not by means of it.

              4. Time is not a discursive, or as it is called, general conception, but

a pure form of the sensuous intuition. Different times are merely parts of one

and the same time. But the representation which can only be given by a single

object is an intuition. Besides, the proposition that different times cannot be

coexistent could not be derived from a general conception. For this

proposition is synthetical, and therefore cannot spring out of conceptionsalone. It is therefore contained immediately in the intuition and representation

of time.

              5. The infinity of time signifies nothing more than that every

determined quantity of time is possible only through limitations of one time

lying at the foundation. Consequently, the original representation, time, must

be given as unlimited. But as the determinate representation of the parts of

time and of every quantity of an object can only be obtained by limitation, the

complete representation of time must not be furnished by means of

conceptions, for these contain only partial representations. Conceptions, on

the contrary, must have immediate intuition for their basis.      §§ 6 Transcendental Exposition of the Conception of Time.

 

 

              I may here refer to what is said above (§§ 5, 3), where, for or sake of

brevity, I have placed under the head of metaphysical exposition, that which

is properly transcendental. Here I shall add that the conception of change, and

with it the conception of motion, as change of place, is possible only through

and in the representation of time; that if this representation were not an

intuition (internal) a priori, no conception, of whatever kind, could render

comprehensible the possibility of change, in other words, of a conjunction of

contradictorily opposed predicates in one and the same object, for example,

the presence of a thing in a place and the non-presence of the same thing in

the same place. It is only in time that it is possible to meet with two

contradictorily opposed determinations in one thing, that is, after each other.

thus our conception of time explains the possibility of so much synthetical

knowledge a priori, as is exhibited in the general doctrine of motion, which is

not a little fruitful.                §§ 7 Conclusions from the above Conceptions.

 

 

              (a) Time is not something which subsists of itself, or which inheres

in things as an objective determination, and therefore remains, when

abstraction is made of the subjective conditions of the intuition of things. For

in the former case, it would be something real, yet without presenting to any

power of perception any real object. In the latter case, as an order or

determination inherent in things themselves, it could not be antecedent to

things, as their condition, nor discerned or intuited by means of synthetical

propositions a priori. But all this is quite possible when we regard time as

merely the subjective condition under which all our intuitions take place. For

in that case, this form of the inward intuition can be represented prior to the

objects, and consequently a priori.

              (b) Time is nothing else than the form of the internal sense, that is,

of the intuitions of self and of our internal state. For time cannot be any

determination of outward phenomena. It has to do neither with shape nor

position; on the contrary, it determines the relation of representations in our

internal state. And precisely because this internal intuition presents to us no

shape or form, we endeavour to supply this want by analogies, and represent

the course of time by a line progressing to infinity, the content of which

constitutes a series which is only of one dimension; and we conclude from

the properties of this line as to all the properties of time, with this single

exception, that the parts of the line are coexistent, whilst those of time are

successive. From this it is clear also that the representation of time is itself an

intuition, because all its relations can be expressed in an external intuition.

              (c) Time is the formal condition a priori of all phenomena

whatsoever. Space, as the pure form of external intuition, is limited as a

condition a priori to external phenomena alone. On the other hand, because

all representations, whether they have or have not external things for their

objects, still in themselves, as determinations of the mind, belong to our

internal state; and because this internal state is subject to the formal condition

of the internal intuition, that is, to time — time is a condition a priori of all

phenomena whatsoever — the immediate condition of all internal, andthereby the mediate condition of all external phenomena. If I can say a priori,

“All outward phenomena are in space, and determined a priori according to

the relations of space,” I can also, from the principle of the internal sense,

affirm universally, “All phenomena in general, that is, all objects of the

senses, are in time and stand necessarily in relations of time.”

              If we abstract our internal intuition of ourselves and all external

intuitions, possible only by virtue of this internal intuition and presented to us

by our faculty of representation, and consequently take objects as they are in

themselves, then time is nothing. It is only of objective validity in regard to

phenomena, because these are things which we regard as objects of our

senses. It no longer objective we, make abstraction of the sensuousness of our

intuition, in other words, of that mode of representation which is peculiar to

us, and speak of things in general. Time is therefore merely a subjective

condition of our (human) intuition (which is always sensuous, that is, so far

as we are affected by objects), and in itself, independently of the mind or

subject, is nothing. Nevertheless, in respect of all phenomena, consequently

of all things which come within the sphere of our experience, it is necessarily

objective. We cannot say, “All things are in time,” because in this conception

of things in general, we abstract and make no mention of any sort of intuition

of things. But this is the proper condition under which time belongs to our

representation of objects. If we add the condition to the conception, and say,

“All things, as phenomena, that is, objects of sensuous intuition, are in time,”

then the proposition has its sound objective validity and universality a priori.

              What we have now set forth teaches, therefore, the empirical reality

of time; that is, its objective validity in reference to all objects which can ever

be presented to our senses. And as our intuition is always sensuous, no object

ever can be presented to us in experience, which does not come under the

conditions of time. On the other hand, we deny to time all claim to absolute

reality; that is, we deny that it, without having regard to the form of our

sensuous intuition, absolutely inheres in things as a condition or property.

Such properties as belong to objects as things in themselves never can be

presented to us through the medium of the senses. Herein consists, therefore,

the transcendental ideality of time, according to which, if we abstract the

subjective conditions of sensuous intuition, it is nothing, and cannot be

reckoned as subsisting or inhering in objects as things in themselves,

independently of its relation to our intuition. this ideality, like that of space, isnot to be proved or illustrated by fallacious analogies with sensations, for this

reason — that in such arguments or illustrations, we make the presupposition

that the phenomenon, in which such and such predicates inhere, has objective

reality, while in this case we can only find such an objective reality as is itself

empirical, that is, regards the object as a mere phenomenon. In reference to

this subject, see the remark in Section I (§§ 4)                                  §§ 8 Elucidation.

 

 

              Against this theory, which grants empirical reality to time, but

denies to it absolute and transcendental reality, I have heard from intelligent

men an objection so unanimously urged that I conclude that it must naturally

present itself to every reader to whom these considerations are novel. It runs

thus: “Changes are real” (this the continual change in our own representations

demonstrates, even though the existence of all external phenomena, together

with their changes, is denied). Now, changes are only possible in time, and

therefore time must be something real. But there is no difficulty in answering

this. I grant the whole argument. Time, no doubt, is something real, that is, it

is the real form of our internal intuition. It therefore has subjective reality, in

reference to our internal experience, that is, I have really the representation of

time and of my determinations therein. Time, therefore, is not to be regarded

as an object, but as the mode of representation of myself as an object. But if I

could intuite myself, or be intuited by another being, without this condition of

sensibility, then those very determinations which we now represent to

ourselves as changes, would present to us a knowledge in which the

representation of time, and consequently of change, would not appear. The

empirical reality of time, therefore, remains, as the condition of all our

experience. But absolute reality, according to what has been said above,
                                                                                        13
cannot be granted it. Time is nothing but the form of our internal intuition.

If we take away from it the special condition of our sensibility, the

conception of time also vanishes; and it inheres not in the objects themselves,

but solely in the subject (or mind) which intuites them.

        13
               I can indeed say “my representations follow one another, or are

successive”; but this means only that we are conscious of them as in a

succession, that is, according to the form of the internal sense. Time,

therefore, is not a thing in itself, nor is it any objective determination

pertaining to, or inherent in things.

              But the reason why this objection is so unanimously brought against

our doctrine of time, and that too by disputants who cannot start any

intelligible arguments against the doctrine of the ideality of space, is this —they have no hope of demonstrating apodeictically the absolute reality of

space, because the doctrine of idealism is against them, according to which

the reality of external objects is not capable of any strict proof. On the other

hand, the reality of the object of our internal sense (that is, myself and my

internal state) is clear immediately through consciousness. The former —

external objects in space — might be a mere delusion, but the latter — the

object of my internal perception — is undeniably real. They do not, however,

reflect that both, without question of their reality as representations, belong

only to the genus phenomenon, which has always two aspects, the one, the

object considered as a thing in itself, without regard to the mode of intuiting

it, and the nature of which remains for this very reason problematical, the

other, the form of our intuition of the object, which must be sought not in the

object as a thing in itself, but in the subject to which it appears- which form

of intuition nevertheless belongs really and necessarily to the phenomenal

object.

              Time and space are, therefore, two sources of knowledge, from

which, a priori, various synthetical cognitions can be drawn. Of this we find a

striking example in the cognitions of space and its relations, which form the

foundation of pure mathematics. They are the two pure forms of all

intuitions, and thereby make synthetical propositions a priori possible. But

these sources of knowledge being merely conditions of our sensibility, do

therefore, and as such, strictly determine their own range and purpose, in that

they do not and cannot present objects as things in themselves, but are

applicable to them solely in so far as they are considered as sensuous

phenomena. The sphere of phenomena is the only sphere of their validity, and

if we venture out of this, no further objective use can be made of them. For

the rest, this formal reality of time and space leaves the validity of our

empirical knowledge unshaken; for our certainty in that respect is equally

firm, whether these forms necessarily inhere in the things themselves, or only

in our intuitions of them. On the other hand, those who maintain the absolute

reality of time and space, whether as essentially subsisting, or only inhering,

as modifications, in things, must find themselves at utter variance with the

principles of experience itself. For, if they decide for the first view, and make

space and time into substances, this being the side taken by mathematical

natural philosophers, they must admit two self-subsisting nonentities, infinite

and eternal, which exist (yet without there being anything real) for the

purpose of containing in themselves everything that is real. If they adopt thesecond view of inherence, which is preferred by some metaphysical natural

philosophers, and regard space and time as relations (contiguity in space or

succession in time), abstracted from experience, though represented

confusedly in this state of separation, they find themselves in that case

necessitated to deny the validity of mathematical doctrines a priori in

reference to real things (for example, in space)— at all events their apodeictic

certainty. For such certainty cannot be found in an a posteriori proposition;

and the conceptions a priori of space and time are, according to this opinion,

mere creations of the imagination, having their source really in experience,

inasmuch as, out of relations abstracted from experience, imagination has

made up something which contains, indeed, general statements of these

relations, yet of which no application can be made without the restrictions

attached thereto by nature. The former of these parties gains this advantage,

that they keep the sphere of phenomena free for mathematical science. On the

other hand, these very conditions (space and time) embarrass them greatly,

when the understanding endeavours to pass the limits of that sphere. The

latter has, indeed, this advantage, that the representations of space and time

do not come in their way when they wish to judge of objects, not as

phenomena, but merely in their relation to the understanding. Devoid,

however, of a true and objectively valid a priori intuition, they can neither

furnish any basis for the possibility of mathematical cognitions a priori, nor

bring the propositions of experience into necessary accordance with those of

mathematics. In our theory of the true nature of these two original forms of

the sensibility, both difficulties are surmounted.

              In conclusion, that transcendental aesthetic cannot contain any more

than these two elements — space and time, is sufficiently obvious from the

fact that all other conceptions appertaining to sensibility, even that of motion,

which unites in itself both elements, presuppose something empirical.

Motion, for example, presupposes the perception of something movable. But

space considered in itself contains nothing movable, consequently motion

must be something which is found in space only through experience- in other

words, an empirical datum. In like manner, transcendental aesthetic cannot

number the conception of change among its data a priori; for time itself does

not change, but only something which is in time. To acquire the conception

of change, therefore, the perception of some existing object and of the

succession of its determinations, in one word, experience, is necessary.            §§ 9 General Remarks on Transcendental Aesthetic.

 

 

              I. In order to prevent any misunderstanding, it will be requisite, in

the first place, to recapitulate, as clearly as possible, what our opinion is with

respect to the fundamental nature of our sensuous cognition in general. We

have intended, then, to say that all our intuition is nothing but the

representation of phenomena; that the things which we intuite, are not in

themselves the same as our representations of them in intuition, nor are their

relations in themselves so constituted as they appear to us; and that if we take

away the subject, or even only the subjective constitution of our senses in

general, then not only the nature and relations of objects in space and time,

but even space and time themselves disappear; and that these, as phenomena,

cannot exist in themselves, but only in us. What may be the nature of objects

considered as things in themselves and without reference to the receptivity of

our sensibility is quite unknown to us. We know nothing more than our mode

of perceiving them, which is peculiar to us, and which, though not of

necessity pertaining to every animated being, is so to the whole human race.

With this alone we have to do. Space and time are the pure forms thereof;

sensation the matter. The former alone can we cognize a priori, that is,

antecedent to all actual perception; and for this reason such cognition is

called pure intuition. The latter is that in our cognition which is called

cognition a posteriori, that is, empirical intuition. The former appertain

absolutely and necessarily to our sensibility, of whatsoever kind our

sensations may be; the latter may be of very diversified character. Supposing

that we should carry our empirical intuition even to the very highest degree of

clearness, we should not thereby advance one step nearer to a knowledge of

the constitution of objects as things in themselves. For we could only, at best,

arrive at a complete cognition of our own mode of intuition, that is of our

sensibility, and this always under the conditions originally attaching to the

subject, namely, the conditions of space and time; while the question: “What

are objects considered as things in themselves?” remains unanswerable even

after the most thorough examination of the phenomenal world.

              To say, then, that all our sensibility is nothing but the confused

representation of things containing exclusively that which belongs to them asthings in themselves, and this under an accumulation of characteristic marks

and partial representations which we cannot distinguish in consciousness, is a

falsification of the conception of sensibility and phenomenization, which

renders our whole doctrine thereof empty and useless. The difference

between a confused and a clear representation is merely logical and has

nothing to do with content. No doubt the conception of right, as employed by

a sound understanding, contains all that the most subtle investigation could

unfold from it, although, in the ordinary practical use of the word, we are not

conscious of the manifold representations comprised in the conception. But

we cannot for this reason assert that the ordinary conception is a sensuous

one, containing a mere phenomenon, for right cannot appear as a

phenomenon; but the conception of it lies in the understanding, and

represents a property (the moral property) of actions, which belongs to them

in themselves. On the other hand, the representation in intuition of a body

contains nothing which could belong to an object considered as a thing in

itself, but merely the phenomenon or appearance of something, and the mode

in which we are affected by that appearance; and this receptivity of our

faculty of cognition is called sensibility, and remains toto caelo different from

the cognition of an object in itself, even though we should examine the

content of the phenomenon to the very bottom.

              It must be admitted that the Leibnitz-Wolfian philosophy has

assigned an entirely erroneous point of view to all investigations into the

nature and origin of our cognitions, inasmuch as it regards the distinction

between the sensuous and the intellectual as merely logical, whereas it is

plainly transcendental, and concerns not merely the clearness or obscurity,

but the content and origin of both. For the faculty of sensibility not only does

not present us with an indistinct and confused cognition of objects as things

in themselves, but, in fact, gives us no knowledge of these at all. On the

contrary, so soon as we abstract in thought our own subjective nature, the

object represented, with the properties ascribed to it by sensuous intuition,

entirely disappears, because it was only this subjective nature that determined

the form of the object as a phenomenon.

              In phenomena, we commonly, indeed, distinguish that which

essentially belongs to the intuition of them, and is valid for the sensuous

faculty of every human being, from that which belongs to the same intuition

accidentally, as valid not for the sensuous faculty in general, but for aparticular state or organization of this or that sense. Accordingly, we are

accustomed to say that the former is a cognition which represents the object

itself, whilst the latter presents only a particular appearance or phenomenon

thereof. This distinction, however, is only empirical. If we stop here (as is

usual), and do not regard the empirical intuition as itself a mere phenomenon

(as we ought to do), in which nothing that can appertain to a thing in itself is

to be found, our transcendental distinction is lost, and we believe that we

cognize objects as things in themselves, although in the whole range of the

sensuous world, investigate the nature of its objects as profoundly as we may,

we have to do with nothing but phenomena. Thus, we call the rainbow a mere

appearance of phenomenon in a sunny shower, and the rain, the reality or

thing in itself; and this is right enough, if we understand the latter conception

in a merely physical sense, that is, as that which in universal experience, and

under whatever conditions of sensuous perception, is known in intuition to be

so and so determined, and not otherwise. But if we consider this empirical

datum generally, and inquire, without reference to its accordance with all our

senses, whether there can be discovered in it aught which represents an object

as a thing in itself (the raindrops of course are not such, for they are, as

phenomena, empirical objects), the question of the relation of the

representation to the object is transcendental; and not only are the raindrops

mere phenomena, but even their circular form, nay, the space itself through

which they fall, is nothing in itself, but both are mere modifications or

fundamental dispositions of our sensuous intuition, whilst the transcendental

object remains for us utterly unknown.

              The second important concern of our aesthetic is that it does not

obtain favour merely as a plausible hypothesis, but possess as undoubted a

character of certainty as can be demanded of any theory which is to serve for

an organon. In order fully to convince the reader of this certainty, we shall

select a case which will serve to make its validity apparent, and also to

illustrate what has been said in §§ 3.

              Suppose, then, that space and time are in themselves objective, and

conditions of the — possibility of objects as things in themselves. In the first

place, it is evident that both present us, with very many apodeictic and

synthetic propositions a priori, but especially space — and for this reason we

shall prefer it for investigation at present. As the propositions of geometry are

cognized synthetically a priori, and with apodeictic certainty, I inquire:Whence do you obtain propositions of this kind, and on what basis does the

understanding rest, in order to arrive at such absolutely necessary and

universally valid truths?

              There is no other way than through intuitions or conceptions, as

such; and these are given either a priori or a posteriori. The latter, namely,

empirical conceptions, together with the empirical intuition on which they are

founded, cannot afford any synthetical proposition, except such as is itself

also empirical, that is, a proposition of experience. But an empirical

proposition cannot possess the qualities of necessity and absolute

universality, which, nevertheless, are the characteristics of all geometrical

propositions. As to the first and only means to arrive at such cognitions,

namely, through mere conceptions or intuitions a priori, it is quite clear that

from mere conceptions no synthetical cognitions, but only analytical ones,

can be obtained. Take, for example, the proposition: “Two straight lines

cannot enclose a space, and with these alone no figure is possible,” and try to

deduce it from the conception of a straight line and the number two; or take

the proposition: “It is possible to construct a figure with three straight lines,”

and endeavour, in like manner, to deduce it from the mere conception of a

straight line and the number three. All your endeavours are in vain, and you

find yourself forced to have recourse to intuition, as, in fact, geometry always

does. You therefore give yourself an object in intuition. But of what kind is

this intuition? Is it a pure a priori, or is it an empirical intuition? If the latter,

then neither an universally valid, much less an apodeictic proposition can

arise from it, for experience never can give us any such proposition. You

must, therefore, give yourself an object a priori in intuition, and upon that

ground your synthetical proposition. Now if there did not exist within you a

faculty of intuition a priori; if this subjective condition were not in respect to

its form also the universal condition a priori under which alone the object of

this external intuition is itself possible; if the object (that is, the triangle) were

something in itself, without relation to you the subject; how could you affirm

that that which lies necessarily in your subjective conditions in order to

construct a triangle, must also necessarily belong to the triangle in itself? For

to your conceptions of three lines, you could not add anything new (that is,

the figure); which, therefore, must necessarily be found in the object, because

the object is given before your cognition, and not by means of it. If, therefore,

space (and time also) were not a mere form of your intuition, which contains

conditions a priori, under which alone things can become external objects foryou, and without which subjective conditions the objects are in themselves

nothing, you could not construct any synthetical proposition whatsoever

regarding external objects. It is therefore not merely possible or probable, but

indubitably certain, that space and time, as the necessary conditions of all our

external and internal experience, are merely subjective conditions of all our

intuitions, in relation to which all objects are therefore mere phenomena, and

not things in themselves, presented to us in this particular manner. And for

this reason, in respect to the form of phenomena, much may be said a priori,

whilst of the thing in itself, which may lie at the foundation of these

phenomena, it is impossible to say anything.

              II. In confirmation of this theory of the ideality of the external as

well as internal sense, consequently of all objects of sense, as mere

phenomena, we may especially remark that all in our cognition that belongs

to intuition contains nothing more than mere relations. (The feelings of pain

and pleasure, and the will, which are not cognitions, are excepted.) The

relations, to wit, of place in an intuition (extension), change of place

(motion), and laws according to which this change is determined (moving

forces). That, however, which is present in this or that place, or any operation

going on, or result taking place in the things themselves, with the exception

of change of place, is not given to us by intuition. Now by means of mere

relations, a thing cannot be known in itself; and it may therefore be fairly

concluded, that, as through the external sense nothing but mere

representations of relations are given us, the said external sense in its

representation can contain only the relation of the object to the subject, but

not the essential nature of the object as a thing in itself.

              The same is the case with the internal intuition, not only because, in

the internal intuition, the representation of the external senses constitutes the

material with which the mind is occupied; but because time, in which we

place, and which itself antecedes the consciousness of, these representations

in experience, and which, as the formal condition of the mode according to

which objects are placed in the mind, lies at the foundation of them, contains

relations of the successive, the coexistent, and of that which always must be

coexistent with succession, the permanent. Now that which, as representation,

can antecede every exercise of thought (of an object), is intuition; and when it

contains nothing but relations, it is the form of the intuition, which, as it

presents us with no representation, except in so far as something is placed inthe mind, can be nothing else than the mode in which the mind is affected by

its own activity, to wit — its presenting to itself representations, consequently

the mode in which the mind is affected by itself; that is, it can be nothing but

an internal sense in respect to its form. Everything that is represented through

the medium of sense is so far phenomenal; consequently, we must either

refuse altogether to admit an internal sense, or the subject, which is the object

of that sense, could only be represented by it as phenomenon, and not as it

would judge of itself, if its intuition were pure spontaneous activity, that is,

were intellectual. The difficulty here lies wholly in the question: How can the

subject have an internal intuition of itself? But this difficulty is common to

every theory. The consciousness of self (apperception) is the simple

representation of the “ego”; and if by means of that representation alone, all

the manifold representations in the subject were spontaneously given, then

our internal intuition would be intellectual. This consciousness in man

requires an internal perception of the manifold representations which are

previously given in the subject; and the manner in which these

representations are given in the mind without spontaneity, must, on account

of this difference (the want of spontaneity), be called sensibility. If the faculty

of self-consciousness is to apprehend what lies in the mind, it must all act that

and can in this way alone produce an intuition of self. But the form of this

intuition, which lies in the original constitution of the mind, determines, in

the representation of time, the manner in which the manifold representations

are to combine themselves in the mind; since the subject intuites itself, not as

it would represent itself immediately and spontaneously, but according to the

manner in which the mind is internally affected, consequently, as it appears,

and not as it is.

              III. When we say that the intuition of external objects, and also the

self-intuition of the subject, represent both, objects and subject, in space and

time, as they affect our senses, that is, as they appear — this is by no means

equivalent to asserting that these objects are mere illusory appearances. For

when we speak of things as phenomena, the objects, nay, even the properties

which we ascribe to them, are looked upon as really given; only that, in so far

as this or that property depends upon the mode of intuition of the subject, in

the relation of the given object to the subject, the object as phenomenon is to

be distinguished from the object as a thing in itself. Thus I do not say that

bodies seem or appear to be external to me, or that my soul seems merely to

be given in my self-consciousness, although I maintain that the properties ofspace and time, in conformity to which I set both, as the condition of their

existence, abide in my mode of intuition, and not in the objects in themselves.

It would be my own fault, if out of that which I should reckon as
                                                      14
phenomenon, I made mere illusory appearance. But this will not happen,

because of our principle of the ideality of all sensuous intuitions. On the

contrary, if we ascribe objective reality to these forms of representation, it

becomes impossible to avoid changing everything into mere appearance. For

if we regard space and time as properties, which must be found in objects as

things in themselves, as sine quibus non of the possibility of their existence,

and reflect on the absurdities in which we then find ourselves involved,

inasmuch as we are compelled to admit the existence of two infinite things,

which are nevertheless not substances, nor anything really inhering in

substances, nay, to admit that they are the necessary conditions of the

existence of all things, and moreover, that they must continue to exist,

although all existing things were annihilated- we cannot blame the good

Berkeley for degrading bodies to mere illusory appearances. Nay, even our

own existence, which would in this case depend upon the self-existent reality

of such a mere nonentity as time, would necessarily be changed with it into

mere appearance — an absurdity which no one has as yet been guilty of.

        14
               The predicates of the phenomenon can be affixed to the object

itself in relation to our sensuous faculty; for example, the red colour or the

perfume to the rose. But (illusory) appearance never can be attributed as a

predicate to an object, for this very reason, that it attributes to this object in

itself that which belongs to it only in relation to our sensuous faculty, or to

the subject in general, e.g., the two handles which were formerly ascribed to

Saturn. That which is never to be found in the object itself, but always in the

relation of the object to the subject, and which moreover is inseparable from

our representation of the object, we denominate phenomenon. Thus the

predicates of space and time are rightly attributed to objects of the senses as

such, and in this there is no illusion. On the contrary, if I ascribe redness of

the rose as a thing in itself, or to Saturn his handles, or extension to all

external objects, considered as things in themselves, without regarding the

determinate relation of these objects to the subject, and without limiting my

judgement to that relation — then, and then only, arises illusion.

              IV. In natural theology, where we think of an object — God —

which never can be an object of intuition to us, and even to himself can neverbe an object of sensuous intuition, we carefully avoid attributing to his

intuition the conditions of space and time — and intuition all his cognition

must be, and not thought, which always includes limitation. But with what

right can we do this if we make them forms of objects as things in

themselves, and such, moreover, as would continue to exist as a priori

conditions of the existence of things, even though the things themselves were

annihilated? For as conditions of all existence in general, space and time must

be conditions of the existence of the Supreme Being also. But if we do not

thus make them objective forms of all things, there is no other way left than

to make them subjective forms of our mode of intuition — external and

internal; which is called sensuous, because it is not primitive, that is, is not

such as gives in itself the existence of the object of the intuition (a mode of

intuition which, so far as we can judge, can belong only to the Creator), but is

dependent on the existence of the object, is possible, therefore, only on

condition that the representative faculty of the subject is affected by the

object.

              It is, moreover, not necessary that we should limit the mode of

intuition in space and time to the sensuous faculty of man. It may well be that

all finite thinking beings must necessarily in this respect agree with man

(though as to this we cannot decide), but sensibility does not on account of

this universality cease to be sensibility, for this very reason, that it is a

deduced (intuitus derivativus), and not an original (intuitus originarius),

consequently not an intellectual intuition, and this intuition, as such, for

reasons above mentioned, seems to belong solely to the Supreme Being, but

never to a being dependent, quoad its existence, as well as its intuition (which

its existence determines and limits relatively to given objects). This latter

remark, however, must be taken only as an illustration, and not as any proof

of the truth of our aesthetical theory.            §§ 10 Conclusion of the Transcendental Aesthetic.

 

 

              We have now completely before us one part of the solution of the

grand general problem of transcendental philosophy, namely, the question:

“How are synthetical propositions a priori possible?” That is to say, we have

shown that we are in possession of pure a priori intuitions, namely, space and

time, in which we find, when in a judgement a priori we pass out beyond the

given conception, something which is not discoverable in that conception, but

is certainly found a priori in the intuition which corresponds to the

conception, and can be united synthetically with it. But the judgements which

these pure intuitions enable us to make, never reach farther than to objects of

the senses, and are valid only for objects of possible experience.

 

 

                       Second Part. Transcendental Logic.

 

 

                  Introduction. Idea of a Transcendental Logic.

 

 

                              I. Of Logic in General.

 

 

              Our knowledge springs from two main sources in the mind, first of

which is the faculty or power of receiving representations (receptivity for

impressions); the second is the power of cognizing by means of these

representations (spontaneity in the production of conceptions). Through the

first an object is given to us; through the second, it is, in relation to the

representation (which is a mere determination of the mind), thought. Intuition

and conceptions constitute, therefore, the elements of all our knowledge, so

that neither conceptions without an intuition in some way corresponding to

them, nor intuition without conceptions, can afford us a cognition. Both are

either pure or empirical. They are. empirical, when sensation (which

presupposes the actual presence of the object) is contained in them; and pure,

when no sensation is mixed with the representation. Sensations we may call

the matter of sensuous cognition. Pure intuition consequently contains merely

the form under which something is intuited, and pure conception only the

form of the thought of an object. Only pure intuitions and pure conceptions

are possible a priori; the empirical only a posteriori.

              We apply the term sensibility to the receptivity of the mind for

impressions, in so far as it is in some way affected; and, on the other hand,

we call the faculty of spontaneously producing representations, or the

spontaneity of cognition, understanding. Our nature is so constituted that

intuition with us never can be other than sensuous, that is, it contains only the

mode in which we are affected by objects. On the other hand, the faculty of

thinking the object of sensuous intuition is the understanding. Neither of

these faculties has a preference over the other. Without the sensuous faculty

no object would be given to us, and without the understanding no objectwould be thought. Thoughts without content are void; intuitions without

conceptions, blind. Hence it is as necessary for the mind to make its

conceptions sensuous (that is, to join to them the object in intuition), as to

make its intuitions intelligible (that is, to bring them under conceptions).

Neither of these faculties can exchange its proper function. Understanding

cannot intuite, and the sensuous faculty cannot think. in no other way than

from the united operation of both, can knowledge arise. But no one ought, on

this account, to overlook the difference of the elements contributed by each;

we have rather great reason carefully to separate and distinguish them. We

therefore distinguish the science of the laws of sensibility, that is, aesthetic,

from the science of the laws of the understanding, that is, logic.

              Now, logic in its turn may be considered as twofold — namely, as

logic of the general, or of the particular use of the understanding. The first

contains the absolutely necessary laws of thought, without which no use

whatsoever of the understanding is possible, and gives laws therefore to the

understanding, without regard to the difference of objects on which it may be

employed. The logic of the particular use of the understanding contains the

laws of correct thinking upon a particular class of objects. The former may be

called elemental logic — the latter, the organon of this or that particular

science. The latter is for the most part employed in the schools, as a

propaedeutic to the sciences, although, indeed, according to the course of

human reason, it is the last thing we arrive at, when the science has been

already matured, and needs only the finishing touches towards its correction

and completion; for our knowledge of the objects of our attempted science

must be tolerably extensive and complete before we can indicate the laws by

which a science of these objects can be established.

              General logic is again either pure or applied. In the former, we

abstract all the empirical conditions under which the understanding is

exercised; for example, the influence of the senses, the play of the fantasy or

imagination, the laws of the memory, the force of habit, of inclination, etc.,

consequently also, the sources of prejudice — in a word, we abstract all

causes from which particular cognitions arise, because these causes regard

the understanding under certain circumstances of its application, and, to the

knowledge of them experience is required. Pure general logic has to do,

therefore, merely with pure a priori principles, and is a canon of

understanding and reason, but only in respect of the formal part of their use,be the content what it may, empirical or transcendental. General logic is

called applied, when it is directed to the laws of the use of the understanding,

under the subjective empirical conditions which psychology teaches us. It has

therefore empirical principles, although, at the same time, it is in so far

general, that it applies to the exercise of the understanding, without regard to

the difference of objects. On this account, moreover, it is neither a canon of

the understanding in general, nor an organon of a particular science, but

merely a cathartic of the human understanding.

              In general logic, therefore, that part which constitutes pure logic

must be carefully distinguished from that which constitutes applied (though

still general) logic. The former alone is properly science, although short and

dry, as the methodical exposition of an elemental doctrine of the

understanding ought to be. In this, therefore, logicians must always bear in

mind two rules:

              1. As general logic, it makes abstraction of all content of the

cognition of the understanding, and of the difference of objects, and has to do

with nothing but the mere form of thought.

              2. As pure logic, it has no empirical principles, and consequently

draws nothing (contrary to the common persuasion) from psychology, which

therefore has no influence on the canon of the understanding. It is a

demonstrated doctrine, and everything in it must be certain completely a

priori.

              What I called applied logic (contrary to the common acceptation of

this term, according to which it should contain certain exercises for the

scholar, for which pure logic gives the rules), is a representation of the

understanding, and of the rules of its necessary employment in concreto, that

is to say, under the accidental conditions of the subject, which may either

hinder or promote this employment, and which are all given only empirically.

Thus applied logic treats of attention, its impediments and consequences, of

the origin of error, of the state of doubt, hesitation, conviction, etc., and to it

is related pure general logic in the same way that pure morality, which

contains only the necessary moral laws of a free will, is related to practical

ethics, which considers these laws under all the impediments of feelings,

inclinations, and passions to which men are more or less subjected, and

which never can furnish us with a true and demonstrated science, because it,as well as applied logic, requires empirical and psychological principles.                          II. Of Transcendental Logic.

 

 

              General logic, as we have seen, makes abstraction of all content of

cognition, that is, of all relation of cognition to its object, and regards only

the logical form in the relation of cognitions to each other, that is, the form of

thought in general. But as we have both pure and empirical intuitions (as

transcendental aesthetic proves), in like manner a distinction might be drawn

between pure and empirical thought (of objects). In this case, there would

exist a kind of logic, in which we should not make abstraction of all content

of cognition; for or logic which should comprise merely the laws of pure

thought (of an object), would of course exclude all those cognitions which

were of empirical content. This kind of logic would also examine the origin

of our cognitions of objects, so far as that origin cannot be ascribed to the

objects themselves; while, on the contrary, general logic has nothing to do

with the origin of our cognitions, but contemplates our representations, be

they given primitively a priori in ourselves, or be they only of empirical

origin, solely according to the laws which the understanding observes in

employing them in the process of thought, in relation to each other.

Consequently, general logic treats of the form of the understanding only,

which can be applied to representations, from whatever source they may have

arisen.

              And here I shall make a remark, which the reader must bear well in

mind in the course of the following considerations, to wit, that not every

cognition a priori, but only those through which we cognize that and how

certain representations (intuitions or conceptions) are applied or are possible

only a priori; that is to say, the a priori possibility of cognition and the a

priori use of it are transcendental. Therefore neither is space, nor any a priori

geometrical determination of space, a transcendental Representation, but only

the knowledge that such a representation is not of empirical origin, and the

possibility of its relating to objects of experience, although itself a priori, can

be called transcendental. So also, the application of space to objects in

general would be transcendental; but if it be limited to objects of sense it is

empirical. Thus, the distinction of the transcendental and empirical belongs

only to the critique of cognitions, and does not concern the relation of theseto their object.

              Accordingly, in the expectation that there may perhaps be

conceptions which relate a priori to objects, not as pure or sensuous

intuitions, but merely as acts of pure thought (which are therefore

conceptions, but neither of empirical nor aesthetical origin)— in this

expectation, I say, we form to ourselves, by anticipation, the idea of a science

of pure understanding and rational cognition, by means of which we may

cogitate objects entirely a priori. A science of this kind, which should

determine the origin, the extent, and the objective validity of such cognitions,

must be called transcendental logic, because it has not, like general logic, to

do with the laws of understanding and reason in relation to empirical as well

as pure rational cognitions without distinction, but concerns itself with these

only in an a priori relation to objects.    III. Of the Division of General Logic into Analytic and Dialectic.

 

 

              The old question with which people sought to push logicians into a

corner, so that they must either have recourse to pitiful sophisms or confess

their ignorance, and consequently the vanity of their whole art, is this: “What

is truth?” The definition of the word truth, to wit, “the accordance of the

cognition with its object,” is presupposed in the question; but we desire to be

told, in the answer to it, what is the universal and secure criterion of the truth

of every cognition.

              To know what questions we may reasonably propose is in itself a

strong evidence of sagacity and intelligence. For if a question be in itself

absurd and unsusceptible of a rational answer, it is attended with the danger

— not to mention the shame that falls upon the person who proposes it — of

seducing the unguarded listener into making absurd answers, and we are

presented with the ridiculous spectacle of one (as the ancients said) “milking

the he-goat, and the other holding a sieve.”

              If truth consists in the accordance of a cognition with its object, this

object must be, ipso facto, distinguished from all others; for a cognition is

false if it does not accord with the object to which it relates, although it

contains something which may be affirmed of other objects. Now an

universal criterion of truth would be that which is valid for all cognitions,

without distinction of their objects. But it is evident that since, in the case of

such a criterion, we make abstraction of all the content of a cognition (that is,

of all relation to its object), and truth relates precisely to this content, it must

be utterly absurd to ask for a mark of the truth of this content of cognition;

and that, accordingly, a sufficient, and at the same time universal, test of truth

cannot possibly be found. As we have already termed the content of a

cognition its matter, we shall say: “Of the truth of our cognitions in respect of

their matter, no universal test can be demanded, because such a demand is

self-contradictory.”

              On the other hand, with regard to our cognition in respect of its mere

form (excluding all content), it is equally manifest that logic, in so far as it

exhibits the universal and necessary laws of the understanding, must in thesevery laws present us with criteria of truth. Whatever contradicts these rules is

false, because thereby the understanding is made to contradict its own

universal laws of thought; that is, to contradict itself. These criteria, however,

apply solely to the form of truth, that is, of thought in general, and in so far

they are perfectly accurate, yet not sufficient. For although a cognition may

be perfectly accurate as to logical form, that is, not self-contradictory, it is

notwithstanding quite possible that it may not stand in agreement with its

object. Consequently, the merely logical criterion of truth, namely, the

accordance of a cognition with the universal and formal laws of

understanding and reason, is nothing more than the conditio sine qua non, or

negative condition of all truth. Farther than this logic cannot go, and the error

which depends not on the form, but on the content of the cognition, it has no

test to discover.

              General logic, then, resolves the whole formal business of

understanding and reason into its elements, and exhibits them as principles of

all logical judging of our cognitions. This part of logic may, therefore, be

called analytic, and is at least the negative test of truth, because all cognitions

must first of an be estimated and tried according to these laws before we

proceed to investigate them in respect of their content, in order to discover

whether they contain positive truth in regard to their object. Because,

however, the mere form of a cognition, accurately as it may accord with

logical laws, is insufficient to supply us with material (objective) truth, no

one, by means of logic alone, can venture to predicate anything of or decide

concerning objects, unless he has obtained, independently of logic, well-

grounded information about them, in order afterwards to examine, according

to logical laws, into the use and connection, in a cohering whole, of that

information, or, what is still better, merely to test it by them.

Notwithstanding, there lies so seductive a charm in the possession of a

specious art like this — an art which gives to all our cognitions the form of

the understanding, although with respect to the content thereof we may be

sadly deficient — that general logic, which is merely a canon of judgement,

has been employed as an organon for the actual production, or rather for the

semblance of production, of objective assertions, and has thus been grossly

misapplied. Now general logic, in its assumed character of organon, is called

dialectic.

              Different as are the significations in which the ancients used thisterm for a science or an art, we may safely infer, from their actual

employment of it, that with them it was nothing else than a logic of illusion

— a sophistical art for giving ignorance, nay, even intentional sophistries, the

colouring of truth, in which the thoroughness of procedure which logic

requires was imitated, and their topic employed to cloak the empty

pretensions. Now it may be taken as a safe and useful warning, that general

logic, considered as an organon, must always be a logic of illusion, that is, be

dialectical, for, as it teaches us nothing whatever respecting the content of our

cognitions, but merely the formal conditions of their accordance with the

understanding, which do not relate to and are quite indifferent in respect of

objects, any attempt to employ it as an instrument (organon) in order to

extend and enlarge the range of our knowledge must end in mere prating; any

one being able to maintain or oppose, with some appearance of truth, any

single assertion whatever.

              Such instruction is quite unbecoming the dignity of philosophy. For

these reasons we have chosen to denominate this part of logic dialectic, in the

sense of a critique of dialectical illusion, and we wish the term to be so

understood in this place.    IV. Of the Division of Transcendental Logic into Transcendental

                              Analytic and Dialectic.

 

 

              In transcendental logic we isolate the understanding (as in

transcendental aesthetic the sensibility) and select from our cognition merely

that part of thought which has its origin in the understanding alone. The

exercise of this pure cognition, however, depends upon this as its condition,

that objects to which it may be applied be given to us in intuition, for without

intuition the whole of our cognition is without objects, and is therefore quite

void. That part of transcendental logic, then, which treats of the elements of

pure cognition of the understanding, and of the principles without which no

object at all can be thought, is transcendental analytic, and at the same time a

logic of truth. For no cognition can contradict it, without losing at the same

time all content, that is, losing all reference to an object, and therefore all

truth. But because we are very easily seduced into employing these pure

cognitions and principles of the understanding by themselves, and that even

beyond the boundaries of experience, which yet is the only source whence we

can obtain matter (objects) on which those pure conceptions may be

employed — understanding runs the risk of making, by means of empty

sophisms, a material and objective use of the mere formal principles of the

pure understanding, and of passing judgements on objects without distinction

— objects which are not given to us, nay, perhaps cannot be given to us in

any way. Now, as it ought properly to be only a canon for judging of the

empirical use of the understanding, this kind of logic is misused when we

seek to employ it as an organon of the universal and unlimited exercise of the

understanding, and attempt with the pure understanding alone to judge

synthetically, affirm, and determine respecting objects in general. In this case

the exercise of the pure understanding becomes dialectical. The second part

of our transcendental logic must therefore be a critique of dialectical illusion,

and this critique we shall term transcendental dialectic- not meaning it as an

art of producing dogmatically such illusion (an art which is unfortunately too

current among the practitioners of metaphysical juggling), but as a critique of

understanding and reason in regard to their hyperphysical use. This critique

will expose the groundless nature of the pretensions of these two faculties,and invalidate their claims to the discovery and enlargement of our cognitions

merely by means of transcendental principles, and show that the proper

employment of these faculties is to test the judgements made by the pure

understanding, and to guard it from sophistical delusion.

 

 

   Transcendental Logic.

                                    First Division.

                              Transcendental Analytic.

 

 

                                          §§ 1.

 

 

              Transcendental analytic is the dissection of the whole of our a priori

knowledge into the elements of the pure cognition of the understanding. In

order to effect our purpose, it is necessary: (1) That the conceptions be pure

and not empirical; (2) That they belong not to intuition and sensibility, but to

thought and understanding; (3) That they be elementary conceptions, and as

such, quite different from deduced or compound conceptions; (4) That our

table of these elementary conceptions be complete, and fill up the whole

sphere of the pure understanding. Now this completeness of a science cannot

be accepted with confidence on the guarantee of a mere estimate of its

existence in an aggregate formed only by means of repeated experiments and

attempts. The completeness which we require is possible only by means of an

idea of the totality of the a priori cognition of the understanding, and through

the thereby determined division of the conceptions which form the said

whole; consequently, only by means of their connection in a system. Pure

understanding distinguishes itself not merely from everything empirical, but

also completely from all sensibility. It is a unity self-subsistent, self-

sufficient, and not to be enlarged by any additions from without. Hence the

sum of its cognition constitutes a system to be determined by and comprised

under an idea; and the completeness and articulation of this system can at the

same time serve as a test of the correctness and genuineness of all the parts of

cognition that belong to it. The whole of this part of transcendental logic

consists of two books, of which the one contains the conceptions, and the

other the principles of pure understanding.

 

 

                         Book I. – Analytic of Conceptions.

 

 

                                          §§ 2

 

 

              By the term Analytic of Conceptions, I do not understand the

analysis of these, or the usual process in philosophical investigations of

dissecting the conceptions which present themselves, according to their

content, and so making them clear; but I mean the hitherto little attempted

dissection of the faculty of understanding itself, in order to investigate the

possibility of conceptions a priori, by looking for them in the understanding

alone, as their birthplace, and analysing the pure use of this faculty. For this

is the proper duty of a transcendental philosophy; what remains is the logical

treatment of the conceptions in philosophy in general. We shall therefore

follow up the pure conceptions even to their germs and beginnings in the

human understanding, in which they lie, until they are developed on

occasions presented by experience, and, freed by the same understanding

from the empirical conditions attaching to them, are set forth in their

unalloyed purity.

 

 

   Chapter I. Of the Transcendental Clue to the Discovery of all Pure

                        Conceptions of the Understanding.

 

 

                                  Introductory. §§ 3

 

 

              When we call into play a faculty of cognition, different conceptions

manifest themselves according to the different circumstances, and make

known this faculty, and assemble themselves into a more or less extensive

collection, according to the time or penetration that has been applied to the

consideration of them. Where this process, conducted as it is mechanically,

so to speak, will end, cannot be determined with certainty. Besides, the

conceptions which we discover in this haphazard manner present themselves

by no means in order and systematic unity, but are at last coupled together

only according to resemblances to each other, and arranged in series,

according to the quantity of their content, from the simpler to the more

complex — series which are anything but systematic, though not altogether

without a certain kind of method in their construction.

              Transcendental philosophy has the advantage, and moreover the

duty, of searching for its conceptions according to a principle; because these

conceptions spring pure and unmixed out of the understanding as an absolute

unity, and therefore must be connected with each other according to one

conception or idea. A connection of this kind, however, furnishes us with a

ready prepared rule, by which its proper place may be assigned to every pure

conception of the understanding, and the completeness of the system of all be

determined a priori — both which would otherwise have been dependent on

mere choice or chance.    Section I. Of defined above Use of understanding in General. §§ 4

 

 

              The understanding was defined above only negatively, as a non-

sensuous faculty of cognition. Now, independently of sensibility, we cannot

possibly have any intuition; consequently, the understanding is no faculty of

intuition. But besides intuition there is no other mode of cognition, except

through conceptions; consequently, the cognition of every, at least of every

human, understanding is a cognition through conceptions — not intuitive, but

discursive. All intuitions, as sensuous, depend on affections; conceptions,

therefore, upon functions. By the word function I understand the unity of the

act of arranging diverse representations under one common representation.

Conceptions, then, are based on the spontaneity of thought, as sensuous

intuitions are on the receptivity of impressions. Now, the understanding

cannot make any other use of these conceptions than to judge by means of

them. As no representation, except an intuition, relates immediately to its

object, a conception never relates immediately to an object, but only to some

other representation thereof, be that an intuition or itself a conception. A

judgement, therefore, is the mediate cognition of an object, consequently the

representation of a representation of it. In every judgement there is a

conception which applies to, and is valid for many other conceptions, and

which among these comprehends also a given representation, this last being

immediately connected with an object. For example, in the judgement- “All

bodies are divisible,” our conception of divisible applies to various other

conceptions; among these, however, it is here particularly applied to the

conception of body, and this conception of body relates to certain phenomena

which occur to us. These objects, therefore, are mediately represented by the

conception of divisibility. All judgements, accordingly, are functions of unity

in our representations, inasmuch as, instead of an immediate, a higher

representation, which comprises this and various others, is used for our

cognition of the object, and thereby many possible cognitions are collected

into one. But we can reduce all acts of the understanding to judgements, so

that understanding may be represented as the faculty of judging. For it is,

according to what has been said above, a faculty of thought. Now thought is

cognition by means of conceptions. But conceptions, as predicates of possiblejudgements, relate to some representation of a yet undetermined object. Thus

the conception of body indicates something — for example, metal — which

can be cognized by means of that conception. It is therefore a conception, for

the reason alone that other representations are contained under it, by means of

which it can relate to objects. It is therefore the predicate to a possible

judgement; for example: “Every metal is a body.” All the functions of the

understanding therefore can be discovered, when we can completely exhibit

the functions of unity in judgements. And that this may be effected very

easily, the following section will show.Section II. Of the Logical Function of the Understanding in Judgements.

                                          §§ 5

 

 

              If we abstract all the content of a judgement, and consider only the

intellectual form thereof, we find that the function of thought in a judgement

can be brought under four heads, of which each contains three momenta.

These may be conveniently represented in the following table:

  1 Quantity of judgements Universal Particular Singular 2 3 Quality Relation

Affirmative Categorical Negative Hypothetical Infinite Disjunctive 4

Modality Problematical Assertorical Apodeictical                As this division

appears to differ in some, though not essential points, from the usual

technique of logicians, the following observations, for the prevention of

otherwise possible misunderstanding, will not be without their use.

              1. Logicians say, with justice, that in the use of judgements in

syllogisms, singular judgements may be treated like universal ones. For,

precisely because a singular judgement has no extent at all, its predicate

cannot refer to a part of that which is contained in the conception of the

subject and be excluded from the rest. The predicate is valid for the whole

conception just as if it were a general conception, and had extent, to the

whole of which the predicate applied. On the other hand, let us compare a

singular with a general judgement, merely as a cognition, in regard to

quantity. The singular judgement relates to the general one, as unity to

infinity, and is therefore in itself essentially different. Thus, if we estimate a

singular judgement (judicium singulare) not merely according to its intrinsic

validity as a judgement, but also as a cognition generally, according to its

quantity in comparison with that of other cognitions, it is then entirely

different from a general judgement (judicium commune), and in a complete

table of the momenta of thought deserves a separate place — though, indeed,

this would not be necessary in a logic limited merely to the consideration of

the use of judgements in reference to each other.

              2. In like manner, in transcendental logic, infinite must be

distinguished from affirmative judgements, although in general logic they are

rightly enough classed under affirmative. General logic abstracts all contentof the predicate (though it be negative), and only considers whether the said

predicate be affirmed or denied of the subject. But transcendental logic

considers also the worth or content of this logical affirmation — an

affirmation by means of a merely negative predicate, and inquires how much

the sum total of our cognition gains by this affirmation. For example, if I say

of the soul, “It is not mortal”— by this negative judgement I should at least

ward off error. Now, by the proposition, “The soul is not mortal,” I have, in

respect of the logical form, really affirmed, inasmuch as I thereby place the

soul in the unlimited sphere of immortal beings. Now, because of the whole

sphere of possible existences, the mortal occupies one part, and the immortal

the other, neither more nor less is affirmed by the proposition than that the

soul is one among the infinite multitude of things which remain over, when I

take away the whole mortal part. But by this proceeding we accomplish only

this much, that the infinite sphere of all possible existences is in so far limited

that the mortal is excluded from it, and the soul is placed in the remaining

part of the extent of this sphere. But this part remains, notwithstanding this

exception, infinite, and more and more parts may be taken away from the

whole sphere, without in the slightest degree thereby augmenting or

affirmatively determining our conception of the soul. These judgements,

therefore, infinite in respect of their logical extent, are, in respect of the

content of their cognition, merely limitative; and are consequently entitled to

a place in our transcendental table of all the momenta of thought in

judgements, because the function of the understanding exercised by them

may perhaps be of importance in the field of its pure a priori cognition.

              3. All relations of thought in judgements are those (a) of the

predicate to the subject; (b) of the principle to its consequence; (c) of the

divided cognition and all the members of the division to each other. In the

first of these three classes, we consider only two conceptions; in the second,

two judgements; in the third, several judgements in relation to each other.

The hypothetical proposition, “If perfect justice exists, the obstinately wicked

are punished,” contains properly the relation to each other of two

propositions, namely, “Perfect justice exists,” and “The obstinately wicked

are punished.” Whether these propositions are in themselves true is a

question not here decided. Nothing is cogitated by means of this judgement

except a certain consequence. Finally, the disjunctive judgement contains a

relation of two or more propositions to each other — a relation not of

consequence, but of logical opposition, in so far as the sphere of the oneproposition excludes that of the other. But it contains at the same time a

relation of community, in so far as all the propositions taken together fill up

the sphere of the cognition. The disjunctive judgement contains, therefore,

the relation of the parts of the whole sphere of a cognition, since the sphere of

each part is a complemental part of the sphere of the other, each contributing

to form the sum total of the divided cognition. Take, for example, the

proposition, “The world exists either through blind chance, or through

internal necessity, or through an external cause.” Each of these propositions

embraces a part of the sphere of our possible cognition as to the existence of

a world; all of them taken together, the whole sphere. To take the cognition

out of one of these spheres, is equivalent to placing it in one of the others;

and, on the other hand, to place it in one sphere is equivalent to taking it out

of the rest. There is, therefore, in a disjunctive judgement a certain

community of cognitions, which consists in this, that they mutually exclude

each other, yet thereby determine, as a whole, the true cognition, inasmuch

as, taken together, they make up the complete content of a particular given

cognition. And this is all that I find necessary, for the sake of what follows, to

remark in this place.

              4. The modality of judgements is a quite peculiar function, with this

distinguishing characteristic, that it contributes nothing to the content of a

judgement (for besides quantity, quality, and relation, there is nothing more

that constitutes the content of a judgement), but concerns itself only with the

value of the copula in relation to thought in general. Problematical

judgements are those in which the affirmation or negation is accepted as

merely possible (ad libitum). In the assertorical, we regard the proposition as
                                                                  15
real (true); in the apodeictical, we look on it as necessary. Thus the two

judgements (antecedens et consequens), the relation of which constitutes a

hypothetical judgement, likewise those (the members of the division) in

whose reciprocity the disjunctive consists, are only problematical. In the

example above given the proposition, “There exists perfect justice,” is not

stated assertorically, but as an ad libitum judgement, which someone may

choose to adopt, and the consequence alone is assertorical. Hence such

judgements may be obviously false, and yet, taken problematically, be

conditions of our cognition of the truth. Thus the proposition, “The world

exists only by blind chance,” is in the disjunctive judgement of problematical

import only: that is to say, one may accept it for the moment, and it helps us

(like the indication of the wrong road among all the roads that one can take)to find out the true proposition. The problematical proposition is, therefore,

that which expresses only logical possibility (which is not objective); that is,

it expresses a free choice to admit the validity of such a proposition — a

merely arbitrary reception of it into the understanding. The assertorical

speaks of logical reality or truth; as, for example, in a hypothetical syllogism,

the antecedens presents itself in a problematical form in the major, in an

assertorical form in the minor, and it shows that the proposition is in harmony

with the laws of the understanding. The apodeictical proposition cogitates the

assertorical as determined by these very laws of the understanding,

consequently as affirming a priori, and in this manner it expresses logical

necessity. Now because all is here gradually incorporated with the

understanding — inasmuch as in the first place we judge problematically;

then accept assertorically our judgement as true; lastly, affirm it as

inseparably united with the understanding, that is, as necessary and

apodeictical- we may safely reckon these three functions of modality as so

many momenta of thought.

        15
               Just as if thought were in the first instance a function of the

understanding; in the second, of judgement; in the third, of reason. A remark

which will be explained in the sequel.      Section III. Of the Pure Conceptions of the Understanding, or

                                    Categories. §§ 6

 

 

              General logic, as has been repeatedly said, makes abstraction of all

content of cognition, and expects to receive representations from some other

quarter, in order, by means of analysis, to convert them into conceptions. On

the contrary, transcendental logic has lying before it the manifold content of a

priori sensibility, which transcendental aesthetic presents to it in order to give

matter to the pure conceptions of the understanding, without which

transcendental logic would have no content, and be therefore utterly void.

Now space and time contain an infinite diversity of determinations of pure a

priori intuition, but are nevertheless the condition of the mind’s receptivity,

under which alone it can obtain representations of objects, and which,

consequently, must always affect the conception of these objects. But the

spontaneity of thought requires that this diversity be examined after a certain

manner, received into the mind, and connected, in order afterwards to form a

cognition out of it. This Process I call synthesis.

              By the word synthesis, in its most general signification, I understand

the process of joining different representations to each other and of

comprehending their diversity in one cognition. This synthesis is pure when

the diversity is not given empirically but a priori (as that in space and time).

Our representations must be given previously to any analysis of them; and no

conceptions can arise, quoad their content, analytically. But the synthesis of a

diversity (be it given a priori or empirically) is the first requisite for the

production of a cognition, which in its beginning, indeed, may be crude and

confused, and therefore in need of analysis — still, synthesis is that by which

alone the elements of our cognitions are collected and united into a certain

content, consequently it is the first thing on which we must fix our attention,

if we wish to investigate the origin of our knowledge.

              Synthesis, generally speaking, is, as we shall afterwards see, the

mere operation of the imagination — a blind but indispensable function of

the soul, without which we should have no cognition whatever, but of the

working of which we are seldom even conscious. But to reduce this synthesisto conceptions is a function of the understanding, by means of which we

attain to cognition, in the proper meaning of the term.

              Pure synthesis, represented generally, gives us the pure conception

of the understanding. But by this pure synthesis, I mean that which rests upon

a basis of a priori synthetical unity. Thus, our numeration (and this is more

observable in large numbers) is a synthesis according to conceptions, because

it takes place according to a common basis of unity (for example, the

decade). By means of this conception, therefore, the unity in the synthesis of

the manifold becomes necessary.

              By means of analysis different representations are brought under one

conception — an operation of which general logic treats. On the other hand,

the duty of transcendental logic is to reduce to conceptions, not

representations, but the pure synthesis of representations. The first thing

which must be given to us for the sake of the a priori cognition of all objects,

is the diversity of the pure intuition; the synthesis of this diversity by means

of the imagination is the second; but this gives, as yet, no cognition. The

conceptions which give unity to this pure synthesis, and which consist solely

in the representation of this necessary synthetical unity, furnish the third

requisite for the cognition of an object, and these conceptions are given by

the understanding.

              The same function which gives unity to the different representation

in a judgement, gives also unity to the mere synthesis of different

representations in an intuition; and this unity we call the pure conception of

the understanding. Thus, the same understanding, and by the same

operations, whereby in conceptions, by means of analytical unity, it produced

the logical form of a judgement, introduces, by means of the synthetical unity

of the manifold in intuition, a transcendental content into its representations,

on which account they are called pure conceptions of the understanding, and

they apply a priori to objects, a result not within the power of general logic.

              In this manner, there arise exactly so many pure conceptions of the

understanding, applying a priori to objects of intuition in general, as there are

logical functions in all possible judgements. For there is no other function or

faculty existing in the understanding besides those enumerated in that table.

These conceptions we shall, with Aristotle, call categories, our purpose being

originally identical with his, notwithstanding the great difference in theexecution.

  TABLE OF THE CATEGORIES 1 2 Of Quantity Of Quality Unity Reality

Plurality Negation Totality Limitation 3 Of Relation Of Inherence and

Subsistence (substantia et accidens) Of Causality and Dependence (cause and

effect) Of Community (reciprocity between the agent and patient) 4 Of

Modality Possibility - Impossibility Existence - Non-existence Necessity -

Contingence                This, then, is a catalogue of all the originally pure

conceptions of the synthesis which the understanding contains a priori, and

these conceptions alone entitle it to be called a pure understanding; inasmuch

as only by them it can render the manifold of intuition conceivable, in other

words, think an object of intuition. This division is made systematically from

a common principle, namely the faculty of judgement (which is just the same

as the power of thought), and has not arisen rhapsodically from a search at

haphazard after pure conceptions, respecting the full number of which we

never could be certain, inasmuch as we employ induction alone in our search,

without considering that in this way we can never understand wherefore

precisely these conceptions, and none others, abide in the pure understanding.

It was a design worthy of an acute thinker like Aristotle, to search for these

fundamental conceptions. Destitute, however, of any guiding principle, he

picked them up just as they occurred to him, and at first hunted out ten, which

he called categories (predicaments). Afterwards be believed that he had

discovered five others, which were added under the name of post

predicaments. But his catalogue still remained defective. Besides, there are to

be found among them some of the modes of pure sensibility (quando, ubi,

situs, also prius, simul), and likewise an empirical conception (motus)—

which can by no means belong to this genealogical register of the pure

understanding. Moreover, there are deduced conceptions (actio, passio)

enumerated among the original conceptions, and, of the latter, some are

entirely wanting.

              With regard to these, it is to be remarked, that the categories, as the

true primitive conceptions of the pure understanding, have also their pure

deduced conceptions, which, in a complete system of transcendental

philosophy, must by no means be passed over; though in a merely critical

essay we must be contented with the simple mention of the fact.

              Let it be allowed me to call these pure, but deduced conceptions of

the understanding, the predicables of the pure understanding, incontradistinction to predicaments. If we are in possession of the original and

primitive, the deduced and subsidiary conceptions can easily be added, and

the genealogical tree of the understanding completely delineated. As my

present aim is not to set forth a complete system, but merely the principles of

one, I reserve this task for another time. It may be easily executed by any one

who will refer to the ontological manuals, and subordinate to the category of

causality, for example, the predicables of force, action, passion; to that of

community, those of presence and resistance; to the categories of modality,

those of origination, extinction, change; and so with the rest. The categories

combined with the modes of pure sensibility, or with one another, afford a

great number of deduced a priori conceptions; a complete enumeration of

which would be a useful and not unpleasant, but in this place a perfectly

dispensable, occupation.

              I purposely omit the definitions of the categories in this treatise. I

shall analyse these conceptions only so far as is necessary for the doctrine of

method, which is to form a part of this critique. In a system of pure reason,

definitions of them would be with justice demanded of me, but to give them

here would only bide from our view the main aim of our investigation, at the

same time raising doubts and objections, the consideration of which, without

injustice to our main purpose, may be very well postponed till another

opportunity. Meanwhile, it ought to be sufficiently clear, from the little we

have already said on this subject, that the formation of a complete vocabulary

of pure conceptions, accompanied by all the requisite explanations, is not

only a possible, but an easy undertaking. The compartments already exist; it

is only necessary to fill them up; and a systematic topic like the present,

indicates with perfect precision the proper place to which each conception

belongs, while it readily points out any that have not yet been filled up.

                                          §§ 7

 

 

              Our table of the categories suggests considerations of some

importance, which may perhaps have significant results in regard to the

scientific form of all rational cognitions. For, that this table is useful in the

theoretical part of philosophy, nay, indispensable for the sketching of the

complete plan of a science, so far as that science rests upon conceptions a

priori, and for dividing it mathematically, according to fixed principles, ismost manifest from the fact that it contains all the elementary conceptions of

the understanding, nay, even the form of a system of these in the

understanding itself, and consequently indicates all the momenta, and also the

internal arrangement of a projected speculative science, as I have elsewhere
      16
shown. Here follow some of these observations.

        16
               In the Metaphysical Principles of Natural Science.

              I. This table, which contains four classes of conceptions of the

understanding, may, in the first instance, be divided into two classes, the first

of which relates to objects of intuition — pure as well as empirical; the

second, to the existence of these objects, either in relation to one another, or

to the understanding.

              The former of these classes of categories I would entitle the

mathematical, and the latter the dynamical categories. The former, as we see,

has no correlates; these are only to be found in the second class. This

difference must have a ground in the nature of the human understanding.

              II. The number of the categories in each class is always the same,

namely, three — a fact which also demands some consideration, because in

all other cases division a priori through conceptions is necessarily dichotomy.

It is to be added, that the third category in each triad always arises from the

combination of the second with the first.

              Thus totality is nothing else but plurality contemplated as unity;

limitation is merely reality conjoined with negation; community is the

causality of a substance, reciprocally determining, and determined by other

substances; and finally, necessity is nothing but existence, which is given

through the possibility itself. Let it not be supposed, however, that the third

category is merely a deduced, and not a primitive conception of the pure

understanding. For the conjunction of the first and second, in order to

produce the third conception, requires a particular function of the

understanding, which is by no means identical with those which are exercised

in the first and second. Thus, the conception of a number (which belongs to

the category of totality) is not always possible, where the conceptions of

multitude and unity exist (for example, in the representation of the infinite).

Or, if I conjoin the conception of a cause with that of a substance, it does not

follow that the conception of influence, that is, how one substance can be the

cause of something in another substance, will be understood from that. Thusit is evident that a particular act of the understanding is here necessary; and so

in the other instances.

              III. With respect to one category, namely, that of community, which

is found in the third class, it is not so easy as with the others to detect its

accordance with the form of the disjunctive judgement which corresponds to

it in the table of the logical functions.

              In order to assure ourselves of this accordance, we must observe that

in every disjunctive judgement, the sphere of the judgement (that is, the

complex of all that is contained in it) is represented as a whole divided into

parts; and, since one part cannot be contained in the other, they are cogitated

as co-ordinated with, not subordinated to each other, so that they do not

determine each other unilaterally, as in a linear series, but reciprocally, as in

an aggregate —(if one member of the division is posited, all the rest are

excluded; and conversely).

              Now a like connection is cogitated in a whole of things; for one

thing is not subordinated, as effect, to another as cause of its existence, but,

on the contrary, is co-ordinated contemporaneously and reciprocally, as a

cause in relation to the determination of the others (for example, in a body —

the parts of which mutually attract and repel each other). And this is an

entirely different kind of connection from that which we find in the mere

relation of the cause to the effect (the principle to the consequence), for in

such a connection the consequence does not in its turn determine the

principle, and therefore does not constitute, with the latter, a whole — just as

the Creator does not with the world make up a whole. The process of

understanding by which it represents to itself the sphere of a divided

conception, is employed also when we think of a thing as divisible; and in the

same manner as the members of the division in the former exclude one

another, and yet are connected in one sphere, so the understanding represents

to itself the parts of the latter, as having — each of them — an existence (as

substances), independently of the others, and yet as united in one whole.

                                          §§ 8

 

 

              In the transcendental philosophy of the ancients there exists one

more leading division, which contains pure conceptions of the understanding,and which, although not numbered among the categories, ought, according to

them, as conceptions a priori, to be valid of objects. But in this case they

would augment the number of the categories; which cannot be. These are set

forth in the proposition, so renowned among the schoolmen —“Quodlibet ens

est UNUM, VERUM, BONUM.” Now, though the inferences from this

principle were mere tautological propositions, and though it is allowed only

by courtesy to retain a place in modern metaphysics, yet a thought which

maintained itself for such a length of time, however empty it seems to be,

deserves an investigation of its origin, and justifies the conjecture that it must

be grounded in some law of the understanding, which, as is often the case,

has only been erroneously interpreted. These pretended transcendental

predicates are, in fact, nothing but logical requisites and criteria of all

cognition of objects, and they employ, as the basis for this cognition, the

categories of quantity, namely, unity, plurality, and totality. But these, which

must be taken as material conditions, that is, as belonging to the possibility of

things themselves, they employed merely in a formal signification, as

belonging to the logical requisites of all cognition, and yet most unguardedly

changed these criteria of thought into properties of objects, as things in

themselves. Now, in every cognition of an object, there is unity of

conception, which may be called qualitative unity, so far as by this term we

understand only the unity in our connection of the manifold; for example,

unity of the theme in a play, an oration, or a story. Secondly, there is truth in

respect of the deductions from it. The more true deductions we have from a

given conception, the more criteria of its objective reality. This we might call

the qualitative plurality of characteristic marks, which belong to a conception

as to a common foundation, but are not cogitated as a quantity in it. Thirdly,

there is perfection — which consists in this, that the plurality falls back upon

the unity of the conception, and accords completely with that conception and

with no other. This we may denominate qualitative completeness. Hence it is

evident that these logical criteria of the possibility of cognition are merely the

three categories of quantity modified and transformed to suit an unauthorized

manner of applying them. That is to say, the three categories, in which the

unity in the production of the quantum must be homogeneous throughout, are

transformed solely with a view to the connection of heterogeneous parts of

cognition in one act of consciousness, by means of the quality of the

cognition, which is the principle of that connection. Thus the criterion of the

possibility of a conception (not of its object) is the definition of it, in whichthe unity of the conception, the truth of all that may be immediately deduced

from it, and finally, the completeness of what has been thus deduced,

constitute the requisites for the reproduction of the whole conception. Thus

also, the criterion or test of an hypothesis is the intelligibility of the received

principle of explanation, or its unity (without help from any subsidiary

hypothesis)— the truth of our deductions from it (consistency with each other

and with experience)— and lastly, the completeness of the principle of the

explanation of these deductions, which refer to neither more nor less than

what was admitted in the hypothesis, restoring analytically and a posteriori,

what was cogitated synthetically and a priori. By the conceptions, therefore,

of unity, truth, and perfection, we have made no addition to the

transcendental table of the categories, which is complete without them. We

have, on the contrary, merely employed the three categories of quantity,

setting aside their application to objects of experience, as general logical laws

of the consistency of cognition with itself.        Chapter II Of the Deduction of the Pure Conceptions of the

                                    Understanding.

 

 

Section I Of the Principles of a Transcendental Deduction in general. §§

                                            9

 

 

              Teachers of jurisprudence, when speaking of rights and claims,

distinguish in a cause the question of right (quid juris) from the question of

fact (quid facti), and while they demand proof of both, they give to the proof

of the former, which goes to establish right or claim in law, the name of

deduction. Now we make use of a great number of empirical conceptions,

without opposition from any one; and consider ourselves, even without any

attempt at deduction, justified in attaching to them a sense, and a

supposititious signification, because we have always experience at hand to

demonstrate their objective reality. There exist also, however, usurped

conceptions, such as fortune, fate, which circulate with almost universal

indulgence, and yet are occasionally challenged by the question, “quid juris?”

In such cases, we have great difficulty in discovering any deduction for these

terms, inasmuch as we cannot produce any manifest ground of right, either

from experience or from reason, on which the claim to employ them can be

founded.

              Among the many conceptions, which make up the very variegated

web of human cognition, some are destined for pure use a priori, independent

of all experience; and their title to be so employed always requires a

deduction, inasmuch as, to justify such use of them, proofs from experience

are not sufficient; but it is necessary to know how these conceptions can

apply to objects without being derived from experience. I term, therefore, an

examination of the manner in which conceptions can apply a priori to objects,

the transcendental deduction of conceptions, and I distinguish it from the

empirical deduction, which indicates the mode in which conception is

obtained through experience and reflection thereon; consequently, does not

concern itself with the right, but only with the fact of our obtainingconceptions in such and such a manner. We have already seen that we are in

possession of two perfectly different kinds of conceptions, which

nevertheless agree with each other in this, that they both apply to objects

completely a priori. These are the conceptions of space and time as forms of

sensibility, and the categories as pure conceptions of the understanding. To

attempt an empirical deduction of either of these classes would be labour in

vain, because the distinguishing characteristic of their nature consists in this,

that they apply to their objects, without having borrowed anything from

experience towards the representation of them. Consequently, if a deduction

of these conceptions is necessary, it must always be transcendental.

              Meanwhile, with respect to these conceptions, as with respect to all

our cognition, we certainly may discover in experience, if not the principle of

their possibility, yet the occasioning causes of their production. It will be

found that the impressions of sense give the first occasion for bringing into

action the whole faculty of cognition, and for the production of experience,

which contains two very dissimilar elements, namely, a matter for cognition,

given by the senses, and a certain form for the arrangement of this matter,

arising out of the inner fountain of pure intuition and thought; and these, on

occasion given by sensuous impressions, are called into exercise and produce

conceptions. Such an investigation into the first efforts of our faculty of

cognition to mount from particular perceptions to general conceptions is

undoubtedly of great utility; and we have to thank the celebrated Locke for

having first opened the way for this inquiry. But a deduction of the pure a

priori conceptions of course never can be made in this way, seeing that, in

regard to their future employment, which must be entirely independent of

experience, they must have a far different certificate of birth to show from

that of a descent from experience. This attempted physiological derivation,

which cannot properly be called deduction, because it relates merely to a

quaestio facti, I shall entitle an explanation of the possession of a pure

cognition. It is therefore manifest that there can only be a transcendental

deduction of these conceptions and by no means an empirical one; also, that

all attempts at an empirical deduction, in regard to pure a priori conceptions,

are vain, and can only be made by one who does not understand the

altogether peculiar nature of these cognitions.

              But although it is admitted that the only possible deduction of pure a

priori cognition is a transcendental deduction, it is not, for that reason,perfectly manifest that such a deduction is absolutely necessary. We have

already traced to their sources the conceptions of space and time, by means of

a transcendental deduction, and we have explained and determined their

objective validity a priori. Geometry, nevertheless, advances steadily and

securely in the province of pure a priori cognitions, without needing to ask

from philosophy any certificate as to the pure and legitimate origin of its

fundamental conception of space. But the use of the conception in this

science extends only to the external world of sense, the pure form of the

intuition of which is space; and in this world, therefore, all geometrical

cognition, because it is founded upon a priori intuition, possesses immediate

evidence, and the objects of this cognition are given a priori (as regards their

form) in intuition by and through the cognition itself. With the pure

conceptions of understanding, on the contrary, commences the absolute

necessity of seeking a transcendental deduction, not only of these conceptions

themselves, but likewise of space, because, inasmuch as they make

affirmations concerning objects not by means of the predicates of intuition

and sensibility, but of pure thought a priori, they apply to objects without any

of the conditions of sensibility. Besides, not being founded on experience,

they are not presented with any object in a priori intuition upon which,

antecedently to experience, they might base their synthesis. Hence results, not

only doubt as to the objective validity and proper limits of their use, but that

even our conception of space is rendered equivocal; inasmuch as we are very

ready with the aid of the categories, to carry the use of this conception

beyond the conditions of sensuous intuition — and, for this reason, we have

already found a transcendental deduction of it needful. The reader, then, must

be quite convinced of the absolute necessity of a transcendental deduction,

before taking a single step in the field of pure reason; because otherwise he

goes to work blindly, and after he has wondered about in all directions,

returns to the state of utter ignorance from which he started. He ought,

moreover, clearly to recognize beforehand the unavoidable difficulties in his

undertaking, so that he may not afterwards complain of the obscurity in

which the subject itself is deeply involved, or become too soon impatient of

the obstacles in his path; because we have a choice of only two things —

either at once to give up all pretensions to knowledge beyond the limits of

possible experience, or to bring this critical investigation to completion.

              We have been able, with very little trouble, to make it

comprehensible how the conceptions of space and time, although a prioricognitions, must necessarily apply to external objects, and render a

synthetical cognition of these possible, independently of all experience. For

inasmuch as only by means of such pure form of sensibility an object can

appear to us, that is, be an object of empirical intuition, space and time are

pure intuitions, which contain a priori the condition of the possibility of

objects as phenomena, and an a priori synthesis in these intuitions possesses

objective validity.

              On the other hand, the categories of the understanding do not

represent the conditions under which objects are given to us in intuition;

objects can consequently appear to us without necessarily connecting

themselves with these, and consequently without any necessity binding on the

understanding to contain a priori the conditions of these objects. Thus we find

ourselves involved in a difficulty which did not present itself in the sphere of

sensibility, that is to say, we cannot discover how the subjective conditions of

thought can have objective validity, in other words, can become conditions of

the possibility of all cognition of objects; for phenomena may certainly be

given to us in intuition without any help from the functions of the

understanding. Let us take, for example, the conception of cause, which

indicates a peculiar kind of synthesis, namely, that with something, A,

something entirely different, B, is connected according to a law. It is not a

priori manifest why phenomena should contain anything of this kind (we are

of course debarred from appealing for proof to experience, for the objective

validity of this conception must be demonstrated a priori), and it hence

remains doubtful a priori, whether such a conception be not quite void and

without any corresponding object among phenomena. For that objects of

sensuous intuition must correspond to the formal conditions of sensibility

existing a priori in the mind is quite evident, from the fact that without these

they could not be objects for us; but that they must also correspond to the

conditions which understanding requires for the synthetical unity of thought

is an assertion, the grounds for which are not so easily to be discovered. For

phenomena might be so constituted as not to correspond to the conditions of

the unity of thought; and all things might lie in such confusion that, for

example, nothing could be met with in the sphere of phenomena to suggest a

law of synthesis, and so correspond to the conception of cause and effect; so

that this conception would be quite void, null, and without significance.

Phenomena would nevertheless continue to present objects to our intuition;

for mere intuition does not in any respect stand in need of the functions ofthought.

              If we thought to free ourselves from the labour of these

investigations by saying: “Experience is constantly offering us examples of

the relation of cause and effect in phenomena, and presents us with abundant

opportunity of abstracting the conception of cause, and so at the same time of

corroborating the objective validity of this conception”; we should in this

case be overlooking the fact, that the conception of cause cannot arise in this

way at all; that, on the contrary, it must either have an a priori basis in the,

understanding, or be rejected as a mere chimera. For this conception demands

that something, A, should be of such a nature that something else, B, should

follow from it necessarily, and according to an absolutely universal law. We

may certainly collect from phenomena a law, according to which this or that

usually happens, but the element of necessity is not to be found in it. Hence it

is evident that to the synthesis of cause and effect belongs a dignity, which is

utterly wanting in any empirical synthesis; for it is no mere mechanical

synthesis, by means of addition, but a dynamical one; that is to say, the effect

is not to be cogitated as merely annexed to the cause, but as posited by and

through the cause, and resulting from it. The strict universality of this law

never can be a characteristic of empirical laws, which obtain through

induction only a comparative universality, that is, an extended range of

practical application. But the pure conceptions of the understanding would

entirely lose all their peculiar character, if we treated them merely as the

productions of experience.  Transition to the Transcendental Deduction of the Categories. §§ 10

 

 

              There are only two possible ways in which synthetical representation

and its objects can coincide with and relate necessarily to each other, and, as

it were, meet together. Either the object alone makes the representation

possible, or the representation alone makes the object possible. In the former

case, the relation between them is only empirical, and an a priori

representation is impossible. And this is the case with phenomena, as regards

that in them which is referable to mere sensation. In the latter case —

although representation alone (for of its causality, by means of the will, we

do not here speak) does not produce the object as to its existence, it must

nevertheless be a priori determinative in regard to the object, if it is only by

means of the representation that we can cognize anything as an object. Now

there are only two conditions of the possibility of a cognition of objects;

firstly, intuition, by means of which the object, though only as phenomenon,

is given; secondly, conception, by means of which the object which

corresponds to this intuition is thought. But it is evident from what has been

said on aesthetic that the first condition, under which alone objects can be

intuited, must in fact exist, as a formal basis for them, a priori in the mind.

With this formal condition of sensibility, therefore, all phenomena

necessarily correspond, because it is only through it that they can be

phenomena at all; that is, can be empirically intuited and given. Now the

question is whether there do not exist, a priori in the mind, conceptions of

understanding also, as conditions under which alone something, if not

intuited, is yet thought as object. If this question be answered in the

affirmative, it follows that all empirical cognition of objects is necessarily

conformable to such conceptions, since, if they are not presupposed, it is

impossible that anything can be an object of experience. Now all experience

contains, besides the intuition of the senses through which an object is given,

a conception also of an object that is given in intuition. Accordingly,

conceptions of objects in general must lie as a priori conditions at the

foundation of all empirical cognition; and consequently, the objective validity

of the categories, as a priori conceptions, will rest upon this, that experience

(as far as regards the form of thought) is possible only by their means. For inthat case they apply necessarily and a priori to objects of experience, because

only through them can an object of experience be thought.

              The whole aim of the transcendental deduction of all a priori

conceptions is to show that these conceptions are a priori conditions of the

possibility of all experience. Conceptions which afford us the objective

foundation of the possibility of experience are for that very reason necessary.

But the analysis of the experiences in which they are met with is not

deduction, but only an illustration of them, because from experience they

could never derive the attribute of necessity. Without their original

applicability and relation to all possible experience, in which all objects of

cognition present themselves, the relation of the categories to objects, of

whatever nature, would be quite incomprehensible.

              The celebrated Locke, for want of due reflection on these points, and

because he met with pure conceptions of the understanding in experience,

sought also to deduce them from experience, and yet proceeded so

inconsequently as to attempt, with their aid, to arrive it cognitions which lie

far beyond the limits of all experience. David Hume perceived that, to render

this possible, it was necessary that the conceptions should have an a priori

origin. But as he could not explain how it was possible that conceptions

which are not connected with each other in the understanding must

nevertheless be thought as necessarily connected in the object — and it never

occurred to him that the understanding itself might, perhaps, by means of

these conceptions, be the author of the experience in which its objects were

presented to it — he was forced to drive these conceptions from experience,

that is, from a subjective necessity arising from repeated association of

experiences erroneously considered to be objective- in one word, from habit.

But he proceeded with perfect consequence and declared it to be impossible,

with such conceptions and the principles arising from them, to overstep the

limits of experience. The empirical derivation, however, which both of these

philosophers attributed to these conceptions, cannot possibly be reconciled

with the fact that we do possess scientific a priori cognitions, namely, those

of pure mathematics and general physics.

              The former of these two celebrated men opened a wide door to

extravagance —(for if reason has once undoubted right on its side, it will not

allow itself to be confined to set limits, by vague recommendations of

moderation); the latter gave himself up entirely to scepticism — a naturalconsequence, after having discovered, as he thought, that the faculty of

cognition was not trustworthy. We now intend to make a trial whether it be

not possible safely to conduct reason between these two rocks, to assign her

determinate limits, and yet leave open for her the entire sphere of her

legitimate activity.

              I shall merely premise an explanation of what the categories are.

They are conceptions of an object in general, by means of which its intuition

is contemplated as determined in relation to one of the logical functions of

judgement. The following will make this plain. The function of the

categorical judgement is that of the relation of subject to predicate; for

example, in the proposition: “All bodies are divisible.” But in regard to the

merely logical use of the understanding, it still remains undetermined to

which Of these two conceptions belongs the function Of subject and to which

that of predicate. For we could also say: “Some divisible is a body.” But the

category of substance, when the conception of a body is brought under it,

determines that; and its empirical intuition in experience must be

contemplated always as subject and never as mere predicate. And so with all

the other categories.  Section II Transcendental Deduction of the pure Conceptions of the

                                Understanding. §§ 11

 

 

              Of the Possibility of a Conjunction of the manifold representations

given by Sense.

              The manifold content in our representations can be given in an

intuition which is merely sensuous — in other words, is nothing but

susceptibility; and the form of this intuition can exist a priori in our faculty of

representation, without being anything else but the mode in which the subject

is affected. But the conjunction (conjunctio) of a manifold in intuition never

can be given us by the senses; it cannot therefore be contained in the pure

form of sensuous intuition, for it is a spontaneous act of the faculty of

representation. And as we must, to distinguish it from sensibility, entitle this

faculty understanding; so all conjunction whether conscious or unconscious,

be it of the manifold in intuition, sensuous or non-sensuous, or of several

conceptions — is an act of the understanding. To this act we shall give the

general appellation of synthesis, thereby to indicate, at the same time, that we

cannot represent anything as conjoined in the object without having

previously conjoined it ourselves. Of all mental notions, that of conjunction is

the only one which cannot be given through objects, but can be originated

only by the subject itself, because it is an act of its purely spontaneous

activity. The reader will easily enough perceive that the possibility of

conjunction must be grounded in the very nature of this act, and that it must

be equally valid for all conjunction, and that analysis, which appears to be its

contrary, must, nevertheless, always presuppose it; for where the

understanding has not previously conjoined, it cannot dissect or analyse,

because only as conjoined by it, must that which is to be analysed have been

given to our faculty of representation.

              But the conception of conjunction includes, besides the conception

of the manifold and of the synthesis of it, that of the unity of it also.
                                                                                      17
Conjunction is the representation of the synthetical unity of the manifold.

This idea of unity, therefore, cannot arise out of that of conjunction; much

rather does that idea, by combining itself with the representation of themanifold, render the conception of conjunction possible. This unity, which a

priori precedes all conceptions of conjunction, is not the category of unity (§§

6); for all the categories are based upon logical functions of judgement, and

in these functions we already have conjunction, and consequently unity of

given conceptions. It is therefore evident that the category of unity

presupposes conjunction. We must therefore look still higher for this unity

(as qualitative, §§ 8), in that, namely, which contains the ground of the unity

of diverse conceptions in judgements, the ground, consequently, of the

possibility of the existence of the understanding, even in regard to its logical

use.

        17
               Whether the representations are in themselves identical, and

consequently whether one can be thought analytically by means of and

through the other, is a question which we need not at present consider. Our

Consciousness of the one, when we speak of the manifold, is always

distinguishable from our consciousness of the other; and it is only respecting

the synthesis of this (possible) consciousness that we here treat.        Of the Originally Synthetical Unity of Apperception. §§ 12

 

 

              The “I think” must accompany all my representations, for otherwise

something would be represented in me which could not be thought; in other

words, the representation would either be impossible, or at least be, in

relation to me, nothing. That representation which can be given previously to

all thought is called intuition. All the diversity or manifold content of

intuition, has, therefore, a necessary relation to the ‘I think,” in the subject in

which this diversity is found. But this representation, “I think,” is an act of

spontaneity; that is to say, it cannot be regarded as belonging to mere

sensibility. I call it pure apperception, in order to distinguish it from

empirical; or primitive apperception, because it is self-consciousness which,

whilst it gives birth to the representation” I think,” must necessarily be

capable of accompanying all our representations. It is in all acts of

consciousness one and the same, and unaccompanied by it, no representation

can exist for me. The unity of this apperception I call the transcendental unity

of self-consciousness, in order to indicate the possibility of a priori cognition

arising from it. For the manifold representations which are given in an

intuition would not all of them be my representations, if they did not all

belong to one self-consciousness, that is, as my representations (even

although I am not conscious of them as such), they must conform to the

condition under which alone they can exist together in a common self-

consciousness, because otherwise they would not all without exception

belong to me. From this primitive conjunction follow many important results.

              For example, this universal identity of the apperception of the

manifold given in intuition contains a synthesis of representations and is

possible only by means of the consciousness of this synthesis. For the

empirical consciousness which accompanies different representations is in

itself fragmentary and disunited, and without relation to the identity of the

subject. This relation, then, does not exist because I accompany every

representation with consciousness, but because I join one representation to

another, and am conscious of the synthesis of them. Consequently, only

because I can connect a variety of given representations in one

consciousness, is it possible that I can represent to myself the identity ofconsciousness in these representations; in other words, the analytical unity of

apperception is possible only under the presupposition of a synthetical
    18
unity. The thought, “These representations given in intuition belong all of

them to me,” is accordingly just the same as, “I unite them in one self-

consciousness, or can at least so unite them”; and although this thought is not

itself the consciousness of the synthesis of representations, it presupposes the

possibility of it; that is to say, for the reason alone that I can comprehend the

variety of my representations in one consciousness, do I call them my

representations, for otherwise I must have as many-coloured and various a

self as are the representations of which I am conscious. Synthetical unity of

the manifold in intuitions, as given a priori, is therefore the foundation of the

identity of apperception itself, which antecedes a priori all determinate

thought. But the conjunction of representations into a conception is not to be

found in objects themselves, nor can it be, as it were, borrowed from them

and taken up into the understanding by perception, but it is on the contrary an

operation of the understanding itself, which is nothing more than the faculty

of conjoining a priori and of bringing the variety of given representations

under the unity of apperception. This principle is the highest in all human

cognition.

        18
               All general conceptions — as such — depend, for their existence,

on the analytical unity of consciousness. For example, when I think of red in

general, I thereby think to myself a property which (as a characteristic mark)

can be discovered somewhere, or can be united with other representations;

consequently, it is only by means of a forethought possible synthetical unity

that I can think to myself the analytical. A representation which is cogitated

as common to different representations, is regarded as belonging to such as,

besides this common representation, contain something different;

consequently it must be previously thought in synthetical unity with other

although only possible representations, before I can think in it the analytical

unity of consciousness which makes it a conceptas communis. And thus the

synthetical unity of apperception is the highest point with which we must

connect every operation of the understanding, even the whole of logic, and

after it our transcendental philosophy; indeed, this faculty is the

understanding itself.

              This fundamental principle of the necessary unity of apperception is

indeed an identical, and therefore analytical, proposition; but it neverthelessexplains the necessity for a synthesis of the manifold given in an intuition,

without which the identity of self-consciousness would be incogitable. For

the ego, as a simple representation, presents us with no manifold content;

only in intuition, which is quite different from the representation ego, can it

be given us, and by means of conjunction it is cogitated in one self-

consciousness. An understanding, in which all the manifold should be given

by means of consciousness itself, would be intuitive; our understanding can

only think and must look for its intuition to sense. I am, therefore, conscious

of my identical self, in relation to all the variety of representations given to

me in an intuition, because I call all of them my representations. In other

words, I am conscious myself of a necessary a priori synthesis of my

representations, which is called the original synthetical unity of apperception,

under which rank all the representations presented to me, but that only by

means of a synthesis.

   The Principle of the Synthetical Unity of Apperception is the highest

            Principle of all exercise of the Understanding. §§ 13

 

 

              The supreme principle of the possibility of all intuition in relation to

sensibility was, according to our transcendental aesthetic, that all the

manifold in intuition be subject to the formal conditions of space and time.

The supreme principle of the possibility of it in relation to the understanding

is that all the manifold in it be subject to conditions of the originally
                                      19
synthetical unity or apperception. To the former of these two principles are

subject all the various representations of intuition, in so far as they are given

to us; to the latter, in so far as they must be capable of conjunction in one

consciousness; for without this nothing can be thought or cognized, because

the given representations would not have in common the act Of the

apperception “I think” and therefore could not be connected in one self-

consciousness.

        19
               Space and time, and all portions thereof, are intuitions;

consequently are, with a manifold for their content, single representations.

(See the Transcendental Aesthetic.) Consequently, they are not pure

conceptions, by means of which the same consciousness is found in a great

number of representations; but, on the contrary, they are many

representations contained in one, the consciousness of which is, so to speak,

compounded. The unity of consciousness is nevertheless synthetical and,

therefore, primitive. From this peculiar character of consciousness follow

many important consequences. (See §§ 21.)

              Understanding is, to speak generally, the faculty Of cognitions.

These consist in the determined relation of given representation to an object.

But an object is that, in the conception of which the manifold in a given

intuition is united. Now all union of representations requires unity of

consciousness in the synthesis of them. Consequently, it is the unity of

consciousness alone that constitutes the possibility of representations relating

to an object, and therefore of their objective validity, and of their becoming

cognitions, and consequently, the possibility of the existence of the

understanding itself.              The first pure cognition of understanding, then, upon which is

founded all its other exercise, and which is at the same time perfectly

independent of all conditions of mere sensuous intuition, is the principle of

the original synthetical unity of apperception. Thus the mere form of external

sensuous intuition, namely, space, affords us, per se, no cognition; it merely

contributes the manifold in a priori intuition to a possible cognition. But, in

order to cognize something in space (for example, a line), I must draw it, and

thus produce synthetically a determined conjunction of the given manifold, so

that the unity of this act is at the same time the unity of consciousness (in the

conception of a line), and by this means alone is an object (a determinate

space) cognized. The synthetical unity of consciousness is, therefore, an

objective condition of all cognition, which I do not merely require in order to

cognize an object, but to which every intuition must necessarily be subject, in

order to become an object for me; because in any other way, and without this

synthesis, the manifold in intuition could not be united in one consciousness.

              This proposition is, as already said, itself analytical, although it

constitutes the synthetical unity, the condition of all thought; for it states

nothing more than that all my representations in any given intuition must be

subject to the condition which alone enables me to connect them, as my

representation with the identical self, and so to unite them synthetically in

one apperception, by means of the general expression, “I think.”

              But this principle is not to be regarded as a principle for every

possible understanding, but only for the understanding by means of whose

pure apperception in the thought I am, no manifold content is given. The

understanding or mind which contained the manifold in intuition, in and

through the act itself of its own self-consciousness, in other words, an

understanding by and in the representation of which the objects of the

representation should at the same time exist, would not require a special act

of synthesis of the manifold as the condition of the unity of its consciousness,

an act of which the human understanding, which thinks only and cannot

intuite, has absolute need. But this principle is the first principle of all the

operations of our understanding, so that we cannot form the least conception

of any other possible understanding, either of one such as should be itself

intuition, or possess a sensuous intuition, but with forms different from those

of space and time.            What Objective Unity of Self-consciousness is. §§ 14

 

 

              It is by means of the transcendental unity of apperception that all the

manifold, given in an intuition is united into a conception of the object. On

this account it is called objective, and must be distinguished from the

subjective unity of consciousness, which is a determination of the internal

sense, by means of which the said manifold in intuition is given empirically

to be so united. Whether I can be empirically conscious of the manifold as

coexistent or as successive, depends upon circumstances, or empirical

conditions. Hence the empirical unity of consciousness by means of

association of representations, itself relates to a phenomenal world and is

wholly contingent. On the contrary, the pure form of intuition in time, merely

as an intuition, which contains a given manifold, is subject to the original

unity of consciousness, and that solely by means of the necessary relation of

the manifold in intuition to the “I think,” consequently by means of the pure

synthesis of the understanding, which lies a priori at the foundation of all

empirical synthesis. The transcendental unity of apperception is alone

objectively valid; the empirical which we do not consider in this essay, and

which is merely a unity deduced from the former under given conditions in

concreto, possesses only subjective validity. One person connects the notion

conveyed in a word with one thing, another with another thing; and the unity

of consciousness in that which is empirical, is, in relation to that which is

given by experience, not necessarily and universally valid.The Logical Form of all Judgements consists in the Objective Unity of

        Apperception of the Conceptions contained therein. §§ 15

 

 

              I could never satisfy myself with the definition which logicians give

of a judgement. It is, according to them, the representation of a relation

between two conceptions. I shall not dwell here on the faultiness of this

definition, in that it suits only for categorical and not for hypothetical or

disjunctive judgements, these latter containing a relation not of conceptions

but of judgements themselves- a blunder from which many evil results have
          20
followed. It is more important for our present purpose to observe, that this

definition does not determine in what the said relation consists.

        20
               The tedious doctrine of the four syllogistic figures concerns only

categorical syllogisms; and although it is nothing more than an artifice by

surreptitiously introducing immediate conclusions (consequentiae

immediatae) among the premises of a pure syllogism, to give ism’ give rise to

an appearance of more modes of drawing a conclusion than that in the first

figure, the artifice would not have had much success, had not its authors

succeeded in bringing categorical judgements into exclusive respect, as those

to which all others must be referred — a doctrine, however, which, according

to §§ 5, is utterly false.

              But if I investigate more closely the relation of given cognitions in

every judgement, and distinguish it, as belonging to the understanding, from

the relation which is produced according to laws of the reproductive

imagination (which has only subjective validity), I find that judgement is

nothing but the mode of bringing given cognitions under the objective unit of

apperception. This is plain from our use of the term of relation is in

judgements, in order to distinguish the objective unity of given

representations from the subjective unity. For this term indicates the relation

of these representations to the original apperception, and also their necessary

unity, even although the judgement is empirical, therefore contingent, as in

the judgement: “All bodies are heavy.” I do not mean by this, that these

representations do necessarily belong to each other in empirical intuition, but

that by means of the necessary unity of appreciation they belong to each otherin the synthesis of intuitions, that is to say, they belong to each other

according to principles of the objective determination of all our

representations, in so far as cognition can arise from them, these principles

being all deduced from the main principle of the transcendental unity of

apperception. In this way alone can there arise from this relation a judgement,

that is, a relation which has objective validity, and is perfectly distinct from

that relation of the very same representations which has only subjective

validity — a relation, to wit, which is produced according to laws of

association. According to these laws, I could only say: “When I hold in my

hand or carry a body, I feel an impression of weight”; but I could not say: “It,

the body, is heavy”; for this is tantamount to saying both these

representations are conjoined in the object, that is, without distinction as to

the condition of the subject, and do not merely stand together in my

perception, however frequently the perceptive act may be repeated.  All Sensuous Intuitions are subject to the Categories, as Conditions

under which alone the manifold Content of them can be united in one

                                Consciousness. §§ 16

 

 

              The manifold content given in a sensuous intuition comes

necessarily under the original synthetical unity of apperception, because

thereby alone is the unity of intuition possible (§§ 13). But that act of the

understanding, by which the manifold content of given representations

(whether intuitions or conceptions) is brought under one apperception, is the

logical function of judgements (§§ 15). All the manifold, therefore, in so far

as it is given in one empirical intuition, is determined in relation to one of the

logical functions of judgement, by means of which it is brought into union in

one consciousness. Now the categories are nothing else than these functions

of judgement so far as the manifold in a given intuition is determined in

relation to them (§§ 9). Consequently, the manifold in a given intuition is

necessarily subject to the categories of the understanding.                                  Observation. §§ 17

 

 

              The manifold in an intuition, which I call mine, is represented by

means of the synthesis of the understanding, as belonging to the necessary
                                                                                      21
unity of self-consciousness, and this takes place by means of the category.

The category indicates accordingly that the empirical consciousness of a

given manifold in an intuition is subject to a pure self-consciousness a priori,

in the same manner as an empirical intuition is subject to a pure sensuous

intuition, which is also a priori. In the above proposition, then, lies the

beginning of a deduction of the pure conceptions of the understanding. Now,

as the categories have their origin in the understanding alone, independently

of sensibility, I must in my deduction make abstraction of the mode in which

the manifold of an empirical intuition is given, in order to fix my attention

exclusively on the unity which is brought by the understanding into the

intuition by means of the category. In what follows (§§ 22), it will be shown,

from the mode in which the empirical intuition is given in the faculty of

sensibility, that the unity which belongs to it is no other than that which the

category (according to §§ 16) imposes on the manifold in a given intuition,

and thus, its a priori validity in regard to all objects of sense being

established, the purpose of our deduction will be fully attained.

        21
               The proof of this rests on the represented unity of intuition, by

means of which an object is given, and which always includes in itself a

synthesis of the manifold to be intuited, and also the relation of this latter to

unity of apperception.

              But there is one thing in the above demonstration of which I could

not make abstraction, namely, that the manifold to be intuited must be given

previously to the synthesis of the understanding, and independently of it.

How this takes place remains here undetermined. For if I cogitate an

understanding which was itself intuitive (as, for example, a divine

understanding which should not represent given objects, but by whose

representation the objects themselves should be given or produced), the

categories would possess no significance in relation to such a faculty of

cognition. They are merely rules for an understanding, whose whole powerconsists in thought, that is, in the act of submitting the synthesis of the

manifold which is presented to it in intuition from a very different quarter, to

the unity of apperception; a faculty, therefore, which cognizes nothing per se,

but only connects and arranges the material of cognition, the intuition,

namely, which must be presented to it by means of the object. But to show

reasons for this peculiar character of our understandings, that it produces

unity of apperception a priori only by means of categories, and a certain kind

and number thereof, is as impossible as to explain why we are endowed with

precisely so many functions of judgement and no more, or why time and

space are the only forms of our intuition.    In Cognition, its Application to Objects of Experience is the only

                      legitimate use of the Category. §§ 18

 

 

              To think an object and to cognize an object are by no means the

same thing. In cognition there are two elements: firstly, the conception,

whereby an object is cogitated (the category); and, secondly, the intuition,

whereby the object is given. For supposing that to the conception a

corresponding intuition could not be given, it would still be a thought as

regards its form, but without any object, and no cognition of anything would

be possible by means of it, inasmuch as, so far as I knew, there existed and

could exist nothing to which my thought could be applied. Now all intuition

possible to us is sensuous; consequently, our thought of an object by means

of a pure conception of the understanding, can become cognition for us only

in so far as this conception is applied to objects of the senses. Sensuous

intuition is either pure intuition (space and time) or empirical intuition — of

that which is immediately represented in space and time by means of

sensation as real. Through the determination of pure intuition we obtain a

priori cognitions of objects, as in mathematics, but only as regards their form

as phenomena; whether there can exist things which must be intuited in this

form is not thereby established. All mathematical conceptions, therefore, are

not per se cognition, except in so far as we presuppose that there exist things

which can only be represented conformably to the form of our pure sensuous

intuition. But things in space and time are given only in so far as they are

perceptions (representations accompanied with sensation), therefore only by

empirical representation. Consequently the pure conceptions of the

understanding, even when they are applied to intuitions a priori (as in

mathematics), produce cognition only in so far as these (and therefore the

conceptions of the understanding by means of them) can be applied to

empirical intuitions. Consequently the categories do not, even by means of

pure intuition afford us any cognition of things; they can only do so in so far

as they can be applied to empirical intuition. That is to say, the, categories

serve only to render empirical cognition possible. But this is what we call

experience. Consequently, in cognition, their application to objects of

experience is the only legitimate use of the categories.                                          §§ 19

 

 

              The foregoing proposition is of the utmost importance, for it

determines the limits of the exercise of the pure conceptions of the

understanding in regard to objects, just as transcendental aesthetic determined

the limits of the exercise of the pure form of our sensuous intuition. Space

and time, as conditions of the possibility of the presentation of objects to us,

are valid no further than for objects of sense, consequently, only for

experience. Beyond these limits they represent to us nothing, for they belong

only to sense, and have no reality apart from it. The pure conceptions of the

understanding are free from this limitation, and extend to objects of intuition

in general, be the intuition like or unlike to ours, provided only it be

sensuous, and not intellectual. But this extension of conceptions beyond the

range of our intuition is of no advantage; for they are then mere empty

conceptions of objects, as to the possibility or impossibility of the existence

of which they furnish us with no means of discovery. They are mere forms of

thought, without objective reality, because we have no intuition to which the

synthetical unity of apperception, which alone the categories contain, could

be applied, for the purpose of determining an object. Our sensuous and

empirical intuition can alone give them significance and meaning.

              If, then, we suppose an object of a non-sensuous intuition to be

given we can in that case represent it by all those predicates which are

implied in the presupposition that nothing appertaining to sensuous intuition

belongs to it; for example, that it is not extended, or in space; that its duration

is not time; that in it no change (the effect of the determinations in time) is to

be met with, and so on. But it is no proper knowledge if I merely indicate

what the intuition of the object is not, without being able to say what is

contained in it, for I have not shown the possibility of an object to which my

pure conception of understanding could be applicable, because I have not

been able to furnish any intuition corresponding to it, but am only able to say

that our intuition is not valid for it. But the most important point is this, that

to a something of this kind not one category can be found applicable. Take,

for example, the conception of substance, that is, something that can exist as

subject, but never as mere predicate; in regard to this conception I am quiteignorant whether there can really be anything to correspond to such a

determination of thought, if empirical intuition did not afford me the occasion

for its application. But of this more in the sequel.

 Of the Application of the Categories to Objects of the Senses in general.

                                          §§ 20

 

 

              The pure conceptions of the understanding apply to objects of

intuition in general, through the understanding alone, whether the intuition be

our own or some other, provided only it be sensuous, but are, for this very

reason, mere forms of thought, by means of which alone no determined

object can be cognized. The synthesis or conjunction of the manifold in these

conceptions relates, we have said, only to the unity of apperception, and is for

this reason the ground of the possibility of a priori cognition, in so far as this

cognition is dependent on the understanding. This synthesis is, therefore, not

merely transcendental, but also purely intellectual. But because a certain form

of sensuous intuition exists in the mind a priori which rests on the receptivity

of the representative faculty (sensibility), the understanding, as a spontaneity,

is able to determine the internal sense by means of the diversity of given

representations, conformably to the synthetical unity of apperception, and

thus to cogitate the synthetical unity of the apperception of the manifold of

sensuous intuition a priori, as the condition to which must necessarily be

submitted all objects of human intuition. And in this manner the categories as

mere forms of thought receive objective reality, that is, application to objects

which are given to us in intuition, but that only as phenomena, for it is only

of phenomena that we are capable of a priori intuition.

              This synthesis of the manifold of sensuous intuition, which is

possible and necessary a priori, may be called figurative (synthesis speciosa),

in contradistinction to that which is cogitated in the mere category in regard

to the manifold of an intuition in general, and is called connection or

conjunction of the understanding (synthesis intellectualis). Both are

transcendental, not merely because they themselves precede a priori all

experience, but also because they form the basis for the possibility of other

cognition a priori.

              But the figurative synthesis, when it has relation only to the

originally synthetical unity of apperception, that is to the transcendental unity

cogitated in the categories, must, to be distinguished from the purelyintellectual conjunction, be entitled the transcendental synthesis of

imagination. Imagination is the faculty of representing an object even without

its presence in intuition. Now, as all our intuition is sensuous, imagination, by

reason of the subjective condition under which alone it can give a

corresponding intuition to the conceptions of the understanding, belongs to

sensibility. But in so far as the synthesis of the imagination is an act of

spontaneity, which is determinative, and not, like sense, merely determinable,

and which is consequently able to determine sense a priori, according to its

form, conformably to the unity of apperception, in so far is the imagination a

faculty of determining sensibility a priori, and its synthesis of intuitions

according to the categories must be the transcendental synthesis of the

imagination. It is an operation of the understanding on sensibility, and the

first application of the understanding to objects of possible intuition, and at

the same time the basis for the exercise of the other functions of that faculty.

As figurative, it is distinguished from the merely intellectual synthesis, which

is produced by the understanding alone, without the aid of imagination. Now,

in so far as imagination is spontaneity, I sometimes call it also the productive

imagination, and distinguish it from the reproductive, the synthesis of which

is subject entirely to empirical laws, those of association, namely, and which,

therefore, contributes nothing to the explanation of the possibility of a priori

cognition, and for this reason belongs not to transcendental philosophy, but to

psychology.

              We have now arrived at the proper place for explaining the paradox

which must have struck every one in our exposition of the internal sense (§§

6), namely — how this sense represents us to our own consciousness, only as

we appear to ourselves, not as we are in ourselves, because, to wit, we intuite

ourselves only as we are inwardly affected. Now this appears to be

contradictory, inasmuch as we thus stand in a passive relation to ourselves;

and therefore in the systems of psychology, the internal sense is commonly

held to be one with the faculty of apperception, while we, on the contrary,

carefully distinguish them.

              That which determines the internal sense is the understanding, and

its original power of conjoining the manifold of intuition, that is, of bringing

this under an apperception (upon which rests the possibility of the

understanding itself). Now, as the human understanding is not in itself a

faculty of intuition, and is unable to exercise such a power, in order toconjoin, as it were, the manifold of its own intuition, the synthesis of

understanding is, considered per se, nothing but the unity of action, of which,

as such, it is self-conscious, even apart from sensibility, by which, moreover,

it is able to determine our internal sense in respect of the manifold which may

be presented to it according to the form of sensuous intuition. Thus, under the

name of a transcendental synthesis of imagination, the understanding

exercises an activity upon the passive subject, whose faculty it is; and so we

are right in saying that the internal sense is affected thereby. Apperception

and its synthetical unity are by no means one and the same with the internal

sense. The former, as the source of all our synthetical conjunction, applies,

under the name of the categories, to the manifold of intuition in general, prior

to all sensuous intuition of objects. The internal sense, on the contrary,

contains merely the form of intuition, but without any synthetical conjunction

of the manifold therein, and consequently does not contain any determined

intuition, which is possible only through consciousness of the determination

of the manifold by the transcendental act of the imagination (synthetical

influence of the understanding on the internal sense), which I have named

figurative synthesis.

              This we can indeed always perceive in ourselves. We cannot cogitate

a geometrical line without drawing it in thought, nor a circle without

describing it, nor represent the three dimensions of space without drawing

three lines from the same point perpendicular to one another. We cannot even

cogitate time, unless, in drawing a straight line (which is to serve as the

external figurative representation of time), we fix our attention on the act of

the synthesis of the manifold, whereby we determine successively the internal

sense, and thus attend also to the succession of this determination. Motion as
                                                                  22
an act of the subject (not as a determination of an object), consequently the

synthesis of the manifold in space, if we make abstraction of space and attend

merely to the act by which we determine the internal sense according to its

form, is that which produces the conception of succession. The

understanding, therefore, does by no means find in the internal sense any

such synthesis of the manifold, but produces it, in that it affects this sense. At

the same time, how “I who think” is distinct from the “I” which intuites itself

(other modes of intuition being cogitable as at least possible), and yet one and

the same with this latter as the same subject; how, therefore, I am able to say:

“I, as an intelligence and thinking subject, cognize myself as an object

thought, so far as I am, moreover, given to myself in intuition — only, likeother phenomena, not as I am in myself, and as considered by the

understanding, but merely as I appear”— is a question that has in it neither

more nor less difficulty than the question —“How can I be an object to

myself?” or this —“How I can be an object of my own intuition and internal

perceptions?” But that such must be the fact, if we admit that space is merely

a pure form of the phenomena of external sense, can be clearly proved by the

consideration that we cannot represent time, which is not an object of

external intuition, in any other way than under the image of a line, which we

draw in thought, a mode of representation without which we could not

cognize the unity of its dimension, and also that we are necessitated to take

our determination of periods of time, or of points of time, for all our internal

perceptions from the changes which we perceive in outward things. It follows

that we must arrange the determinations of the internal sense, as phenomena

in time, exactly in the same manner as we arrange those of the external senses

in space. And consequently, if we grant, respecting this latter, that by means

of them we know objects only in so far as we are affected externally, we must

also confess, with regard to the internal sense, that by means of it we intuite

ourselves only as we are internally affected by ourselves; in other words, as

regards internal intuition, we cognize our own subject only as phenomenon,
                          232
and not as it is in itself. 

        22
               Motion of an object in space does not belong to a pure science,

consequently not to geometry; because, that a thing is movable cannot be

known a priori, but only from experience. But motion, considered as the

description of a space, is a pure act of the successive synthesis of the

manifold in external intuition by means of productive imagination, and

belongs not only to geometry, but even to transcendental philosophy.

        232
                I do not see why so much difficulty should be found in admitting

that our internal sense is affected by ourselves. Every act of attention

exemplifies it. In such an act the understanding determines the internal sense

by the synthetical conjunction which it cogitates, conformably to the internal

intuition which corresponds to the manifold in the synthesis of the

understanding. How much the mind is usually affected thereby every one will

be able to perceive in himself.

                                          §§ 21

  

              On the other hand, in the transcendental synthesis of the manifold

content of representations, consequently in the synthetical unity of

apperception, I am conscious of myself, not as I appear to myself, nor as I am

in myself, but only that “I am.” This representation is a thought, not an

intuition. Now, as in order to cognize ourselves, in addition to the act of

thinking, which subjects the manifold of every possible intuition to the unity

of apperception, there is necessary a determinate mode of intuition, whereby

this manifold is given; although my own existence is certainly not mere
                                                                                      24
phenomenon (much less mere illusion), the determination of my existence

Can only take place conformably to the form of the internal sense, according

to the particular mode in which the manifold which I conjoin is given in

internal intuition, and I have therefore no knowledge of myself as I am, but

merely as I appear to myself. The consciousness of self is thus very far from

a knowledge of self, in which I do not use the categories, whereby I cogitate

an object, by means of the conjunction of the manifold in one apperception.

In the same way as I require, for the sake of the cognition of an object distinct

from myself, not only the thought of an object in general (in the category),

but also an intuition by which to determine that general conception, in the

same way do I require, in order to the cognition of myself, not only the

consciousness of myself or the thought that I think myself, but in addition an

intuition of the manifold in myself, by which to determine this thought. It is

true that I exist as an intelligence which is conscious only of its faculty of

conjunction or synthesis, but subjected in relation to the manifold which this

intelligence has to conjoin to a limitative conjunction called the internal

sense. My intelligence (that is, I) can render that conjunction or synthesis

perceptible only according to the relations of time, which are quite beyond

the proper sphere of the conceptions of the understanding and consequently

cognize itself in respect to an intuition (which cannot possibly be intellectual,

nor given by the understanding), only as it appears to itself, and not as it

would cognize itself, if its intuition were intellectual.

        24
               The “I think” expresses the act of determining my own existence.

My existence is thus already given by the act of consciousness; but the mode

in which I must determine my existence, that is, the mode in which I must

place the manifold belonging to my existence, is not thereby given. For this

purpose intuition of self is required, and this intuition possesses a form given

a priori, namely, time, which is sensuous, and belongs to our receptivity ofthe determinable. Now, as I do not possess another intuition of self which

gives the determining in me (of the spontaneity of which I am conscious),

prior to the act of determination, in the same manner as time gives the

determinable, it is clear that I am unable to determine my own existence as

that of a spontaneous being, but I am only able to represent to myself the

spontaneity of my thought, that is, of my determination, and my existence

remains ever determinable in a purely sensuous manner, that is to say, like

the existence of a phenomenon. But it is because of this spontaneity that I call

myself an intelligence.    Transcendental Deduction of the universally possible employment in

    experience of the Pure Conceptions of the Understanding. §§ 22

 

 

              In the metaphysical deduction, the a priori origin of categories was

proved by their complete accordance with the general logical of thought; in

the transcendental deduction was exhibited the possibility of the categories as

a priori cognitions of objects of an intuition in general (§§ 16 and 17).At

present we are about to explain the possibility of cognizing, a priori, by

means of the categories, all objects which can possibly be presented to our

senses, not, indeed, according to the form of their intuition, but according to

the laws of their conjunction or synthesis, and thus, as it were, of prescribing

laws to nature and even of rendering nature possible. For if the categories

were inadequate to this task, it would not be evident to us why everything

that is presented to our senses must be subject to those laws which have an a

priori origin in the understanding itself.

              I premise that by the term synthesis of apprehension I understand the

combination of the manifold in an empirical intuition, whereby perception,

that is, empirical consciousness of the intuition (as phenomenon), is possible.

              We have a priori forms of the external and internal sensuous

intuition in the representations of space and time, and to these must the

synthesis of apprehension of the manifold in a phenomenon be always

comformable, because the synthesis itself can only take place according to

these forms. But space and time are not merely forms of sensuous intuition,

but intuitions themselves (which contain a manifold), and therefore contain a
                                                              25
priori the determination of the unity of this manifold. (See the Transcendent

Aesthetic.) Therefore is unity of the synthesis of the manifold without or

within us, consequently also a conjunction to which all that is to be

represented as determined in space or time must correspond, given a priori

along with (not in) these intuitions, as the condition of the synthesis of all

apprehension of them. But this synthetical unity can be no other than that of

the conjunction of the manifold of a given intuition in general, in a primitive

act of consciousness, according to the categories, but applied to our sensuous

intuition. Consequently all synthesis, whereby alone is even perceptionpossible, is subject to the categories. And, as experience is cognition by

means of conjoined perceptions, the categories are conditions of the

possibility of experience and are therefore valid a priori for all objects of

experience.

        25
               Space represented as an object (as geometry really requires it to

be) contains more than the mere form of the intuition; namely, a combination

of the manifold given according to the form of sensibility into a

representation that can be intuited; so that the form of the intuition gives us

merely the manifold, but the formal intuition gives unity of representation. In

the aesthetic, I regarded this unity as belonging entirely to sensibility, for the

purpose of indicating that it antecedes all conceptions, although it

presupposes a synthesis which does not belong to sense, through which alone,

however, all our conceptions of space and time are possible. For as by means

of this unity alone (the understanding determining the sensibility) space and

time are given as intuitions, it follows that the unity of this intuition a priori

belongs to space and time, and not to the conception of the understanding (§§

20).

              When, then, for example, I make the empirical intuition of a house

by apprehension of the manifold contained therein into a perception, the

necessary unity of space and of my external sensuous intuition lies at the

foundation of this act, and I, as it were, draw the form of the house

conformably to this synthetical unity of the manifold in space. But this very

synthetical unity remains, even when I abstract the form of space, and has its

seat in the understanding, and is in fact the category of the synthesis of the

homogeneous in an intuition; that is to say, the category of quantity, to which

the aforesaid synthesis of apprehension, that is, the perception, must be
                            26
completely conformable.

        26
               In this manner it is proved, that the synthesis of apprehension,

which is empirical, must necessarily be conformable to the synthesis of

apperception, which is intellectual, and contained a priori in the category. It is

one and the same spontaneity which at one time, under the name of

imagination, at another under that of understanding, produces conjunction in

the manifold of intuition.

              To take another example, when I perceive the freezing of water, I

apprehend two states (fluidity and solidity), which, as such, stand towardeach other mutually in a relation of time. But in the time, which I place as an

internal intuition, at the foundation of this phenomenon, I represent to myself

synthetical unity of the manifold, without which the aforesaid relation could

not be given in an intuition as determined (in regard to the succession of

time). Now this synthetical unity, as the a priori condition under which I

conjoin the manifold of an intuition, is, if I make abstraction of the permanent

form of my internal intuition (that is to say, of time), the category of cause,

by means of which, when applied to my sensibility, I determine everything

that occurs according to relations of time. Consequently apprehension in such

an event, and the event itself, as far as regards the possibility of its

perception, stands under the conception of the relation of cause and effect:

and so in all other cases.

              Categories are conceptions which prescribe laws a priori to

phenomena, consequently to nature as the complex of all phenomena (natura

materialiter spectata). And now the question arises- inasmuch as these

categories are not derived from nature, and do not regulate themselves

according to her as their model (for in that case they would be empirical)—

how it is conceivable that nature must regulate herself according to them, in

other words, how the categories can determine a priori the synthesis of the

manifold of nature, and yet not derive their origin from her. The following is

the solution of this enigma.

              It is not in the least more difficult to conceive how the laws of the

phenomena of nature must harmonize with the understanding and with its a

priori form — that is, its faculty of conjoining the manifold- than it is to

understand how the phenomena themselves must correspond with the a priori

form of our sensuous intuition. For laws do not exist in the phenomena any

more than the phenomena exist as things in themselves. Laws do not exist

except by relation to the subject in which the phenomena inhere, in so far as

it possesses understanding, just as phenomena have no existence except by

relation to the same existing subject in so far as it has senses. To things as

things in themselves, conformability to law must necessarily belong

independently of an understanding to cognize them. But phenomena are only

representations of things which are utterly unknown in respect to what they

are in themselves. But as mere representations, they stand under no law of

conjunction except that which the conjoining faculty prescribes. Now that

which conjoins the manifold of sensuous intuition is imagination, a mentalact to which understanding contributes unity of intellectual synthesis, and

sensibility, manifoldness of apprehension. Now as all possible perception

depends on the synthesis of apprehension, and this empirical synthesis itself

on the transcendental, consequently on the categories, it is evident that all

possible perceptions, and therefore everything that can attain to empirical

consciousness, that is, all phenomena of nature, must, as regards their

conjunction, be subject to the categories. And nature (considered merely as

nature in general) is dependent on them. as the original ground of her

necessary conformability to law (as natura formaliter spectata). But the pure

faculty (of the understanding) of prescribing laws a priori to phenomena by

means of mere categories, is not competent to enounce other or more laws

than those on which a nature in general, as a conformability to law of

phenomena of space and time, depends. Particular laws, inasmuch as they

concern empirically determined phenomena, cannot be entirely deduced from

pure laws, although they all stand under them. Experience must be

superadded in order to know these particular laws; but in regard to experience

in general, and everything that can be cognized as an object thereof, these a

priori laws are our only rule and guide.Result of this Deduction of the Conceptions of the Understanding. §§ 23

 

 

              We cannot think any object except by means of the categories; we

cannot cognize any thought except by means of intuitions corresponding to

these conceptions. Now all our intuitions are sensuous, and our cognition, in

so far as the object of it is given, is empirical. But empirical cognition is

experience; consequently no a priori cognition is possible for us, except of
                                  27
objects of possible experience.

        27
               Lest my readers should stumble at this assertion, and the

conclusions that may be too rashly drawn from it, I must remind them that the

categories in the act of thought are by no means limited by the conditions of

our sensuous intuition, but have an unbounded sphere of action. It is only the

cognition of the object of thought, the determining of the object, which

requires intuition. In the absence of intuition, our thought of an object may

still have true and useful consequences in regard to the exercise of reason by

the subject. But as this exercise of reason is not always directed on the

determination of the object, in other words, on cognition thereof, but also on

the determination of the subject and its volition, I do not intend to treat of it

in this place.

              But this cognition, which is limited to objects of experience, is not

for that reason derived entirely, from, experience, but — and this is asserted

of the pure intuitions and the pure conceptions of the understanding — there

are, unquestionably, elements of cognition, which exist in the mind a priori.

Now there are only two ways in which a necessary harmony of experience

with the conceptions of its objects can be cogitated. Either experience makes

these conceptions possible, or the conceptions make experience possible. The

former of these statements will not bold good with respect to the categories

(nor in regard to pure sensuous intuition), for they are a priori conceptions,

and therefore independent of experience. The assertion of an empirical origin

would attribute to them a sort of generatio aequivoca. Consequently, nothing

remains but to adopt the second alternative (which presents us with a system,

as it were, of the epigenesis of pure reason), namely, that on the part of the

understanding the categories do contain the grounds of the possibility of allexperience. But with respect to the questions how they make experience

possible, and what are the principles of the possibility thereof with which

they present us in their application to phenomena, the following section on

the transcendental exercise of the faculty of judgement will inform the reader.

              It is quite possible that someone may propose a species of

preformation-system of pure reason — a middle way between the two — to

wit, that the categories are neither innate and first a priori principles of

cognition, nor derived from experience, but are merely subjective aptitudes

for thought implanted in us contemporaneously with our existence, which

were so ordered and disposed by our Creator, that their exercise perfectly

harmonizes with the laws of nature which regulate experience. Now, not to

mention that with such an hypothesis it is impossible to say at what point we

must stop in the employment of predetermined aptitudes, the fact that the

categories would in this case entirely lose that character of necessity which is

essentially involved in the very conception of them, is a conclusive objection

to it. The conception of cause, for example, which expresses the necessity of

an effect under a presupposed condition, would be false, if it rested only upon

such an arbitrary subjective necessity of uniting certain empirical

representations according to such a rule of relation. I could not then say

—“The effect is connected with its cause in the object (that is, necessarily),”

but only, “I am so constituted that I can think this representation as so

connected, and not otherwise.” Now this is just what the sceptic wants. For in

this case, all our knowledge, depending on the supposed objective validity of

our judgement, is nothing but mere illusion; nor would there be wanting

people who would deny any such subjective necessity in respect to

themselves, though they must feel it. At all events, we could not dispute with

any one on that which merely depends on the manner in which his subject is

organized.

                        Short view of the above Deduction.

 

              The foregoing deduction is an exposition of the pure conceptions of

the understanding (and with them of all theoretical a priori cognition), as

principles of the possibility of experience, but of experience as the

determination of all phenomena in space and time in general — of

experience, finally, from the principle of the original synthetical unity of

apperception, as the form of the understanding in relation to time and spaceas original forms of sensibility.

              I consider the division by paragraphs to be necessary only up to this

point, because we had to treat of the elementary conceptions. As we now

proceed to the exposition of the employment of these, I shall not designate

the chapters in this manner any further.

 

 

                         Book II. – Analytic of Principles.

 

 

              General logic is constructed upon a plan which coincides exactly

with the division of the higher faculties of cognition. These are,

understanding, judgement, and reason. This science, accordingly, treats in its

analytic of conceptions, judgements, and conclusions in exact

correspondence with the functions and order of those mental powers which

we include generally under the generic denomination of understanding.

              As this merely formal logic makes abstraction of all content of

cognition, whether pure or empirical, and occupies itself with the mere form

of thought (discursive cognition), it must contain in its analytic a canon for

reason. For the form of reason has its law, which, without taking into

consideration the particular nature of the cognition about which it is

employed, can be discovered a priori, by the simple analysis of the action of

reason into its momenta.

              Transcendental logic, limited as it is to a determinate content, that of

pure a priori cognitions, to wit, cannot imitate general logic in this division.

For it is evident that the transcendental employment of reason is not

objectively valid, and therefore does not belong to the logic of truth (that is,

to analytic), but as a logic of illusion, occupies a particular department in the

scholastic system under the name of transcendental dialectic.

              Understanding and judgement accordingly possess in transcendental

logic a canon of objectively valid, and therefore true exercise, and are

comprehended in the analytical department of that logic. But reason, in her

endeavours to arrive by a priori means at some true statement concerning

objects and to extend cognition beyond the bounds of possible experience, is

altogether dialectic, and her illusory assertions cannot be constructed into a

canon such as an analytic ought to contain.

              Accordingly, the analytic of principles will be merely a canon for the

faculty of judgement, for the instruction of this faculty in its application to

phenomena of the pure conceptions of the understanding, which contain the

necessary condition for the establishment of a priori laws. On this account,

although the subject of the following chapters is the especial principles ofunderstanding, I shall make use of the term Doctrine of the faculty of

judgement, in order to define more particularly my present purpose.

 

 

 

  Introduction. Of the Transcendental Faculty of judgement in General.

 

 

              If understanding in general be defined as the faculty of laws or rules,

the faculty of judgement may be termed the faculty of subsumption under

these rules; that is, of distinguishing whether this or that does or does not

stand under a given rule (casus datae legis). General logic contains no

directions or precepts for the faculty of judgement, nor can it contain any

such. For as it makes abstraction of all content of cognition, no duty is left for

it, except that of exposing analytically the mere form of cognition in

conceptions, judgements, and conclusions, and of thereby establishing formal

rules for all exercise of the understanding. Now if this logic wished to give

some general direction how we should subsume under these rules, that is,

how we should distinguish whether this or that did or did not stand under

them, this again could not be done otherwise than by means of a rule. But this

rule, precisely because it is a rule, requires for itself direction from the faculty

of judgement. Thus, it is evident that the understanding is capable of being

instructed by rules, but that the judgement is a peculiar talent, which does

not, and cannot require tuition, but only exercise. This faculty is therefore the

specific quality of the so-called mother wit, the want of which no scholastic

discipline can compensate.

              For although education may furnish, and, as it were, engraft upon a

limited understanding rules borrowed from other minds, yet the power of

employing these rules correctly must belong to the pupil himself; and no rule

which we can prescribe to him with this purpose is, in the absence or
                                                            28
deficiency of this gift of nature, secure from misuse. A physician therefore,

a judge or a statesman, may have in his head many admirable pathological,

juridical, or political rules, in a degree that may enable him to be a profound

teacher in his particular science, and yet in the application of these rules hemay very possibly blunder — either because he is wanting in natural

judgement (though not in understanding) and, whilst he can comprehend the

general in abstracto, cannot distinguish whether a particular case in concreto

ought to rank under the former; or because his faculty of judgement bas not

been sufficiently exercised by examples and real practice. Indeed, the grand

and only use of examples, is to sharpen the judgement. For as regards the

correctness and precision of the insight of the understanding, examples are

commonly injurious rather than otherwise, because, as casus in terminis they

seldom adequately fulfil the conditions of the rule. Besides, they often

weaken the power of our understanding to apprehend rules or laws in their

universality, independently of particular circumstances of experience; and

hence, accustom us to employ them more as formulae than as principles.

Examples are thus the go-cart of the judgement, which he who is naturally

deficient in that faculty cannot afford to dispense with.

        28
               Deficiency in judgement is properly that which is called stupidity;

and for such a failing we know no remedy. A dull or narrow-minded person,

to whom nothing is wanting but a proper degree of understanding, may be

improved by tuition, even so far as to deserve the epithet of learned. But as

such persons frequently labour under a deficiency in the faculty of

judgement, it is not uncommon to find men extremely learned who in the

application of their science betray a lamentable degree this irremediable

want.

              But although general logic cannot give directions to the faculty of

judgement, the case is very different as regards transcendental logic,

insomuch that it appears to be the especial duty of the latter to secure and

direct, by means of determinate rules, the faculty of judgement in the

employment of the pure understanding. For, as a doctrine, that is, as an

endeavour to enlarge the sphere of the understanding in regard to pure a

priori cognitions, philosophy is worse than useless, since from all the

attempts hitherto made, little or no ground has been gained. But, as a critique,

in order to guard against the mistakes of the faculty of judgement (lapsus

judicii) in the employment of the few pure conceptions of the understanding

which we possess, although its use is in this case purely negative, philosophy

is called upon to apply all its acuteness and penetration.

              But transcendental philosophy has this peculiarity, that besides

indicating the rule, or rather the general condition for rules, which is given inthe pure conception of the understanding, it can, at the same time, indicate a

priori the case to which the rule must be applied. The cause of the superiority

which, in this respect, transcendental philosophy possesses above all other

sciences except mathematics, lies in this: it treats of conceptions which must

relate a priori to their objects, whose objective validity consequently cannot

be demonstrated a posteriori, and is, at the same time, under the obligation of

presenting in general but sufficient tests, the conditions under which objects

can be given in harmony with those conceptions; otherwise they would be

mere logical forms, without content, and not pure conceptions of the

understanding.

              Our transcendental doctrine of the faculty of judgement will contain

two chapters. The first will treat of the sensuous condition under which alone

pure conceptions of the understanding can be employed- that is, of the

schematism of the pure understanding. The second will treat of those

synthetical judgements which are derived a priori from pure conceptions of

the understanding under those conditions, and which lie a priori at the

foundation of all other cognitions, that is to say, it will treat of the principles

of the pure understanding.

 

 

   Transcendental Doctrine of the Faculty of Judgement Or, Analytic of

                                        Principles.

 

 

      Chapter I. Of the Schematism at of the Pure Conceptions of the

                                    Understanding.

 

 

              In all subsumptions of an object under a conception, the

representation of the object must be homogeneous with the conception; in

other words, the conception must contain that which is represented in the

object to be subsumed under it. For this is the meaning of the expression: “An

object is contained under a conception.” Thus the empirical conception of a

plate is homogeneous with the pure geometrical conception of a circle,

inasmuch as the roundness which is cogitated in the former is intuited in the

latter.

              But pure conceptions of the understanding, when compared with

empirical intuitions, or even with sensuous intuitions in general, are quite

heterogeneous, and never can be discovered in any intuition. How then is the

subsumption of the latter under the former, and consequently the application

of the categories to phenomena, possible?— For it is impossible to say, for

example: “Causality can be intuited through the senses and is contained in the

phenomenon.”— This natural and important question forms the real cause of

the necessity of a transcendental doctrine of the faculty of judgement, with

the purpose, to wit, of showing how pure conceptions of the understanding

can be applied to phenomena. In all other sciences, where the conceptions by

which the object is thought in the general are not so different and

heterogeneous from those which represent the object in concreto — as it is

given, it is quite unnecessary to institute any special inquiries concerning the

application of the former to the latter.

              Now it is quite clear that there must be some third thing, which on

the one side is homogeneous with the category, and with the phenomenon on

the other, and so makes the application of the former to the latter possible.

This mediating representation must be pure (without any empirical content),and yet must on the one side be intellectual, on the other sensuous. Such a

representation is the transcendental schema.

              The conception of the understanding contains pure synthetical unity

of the manifold in general. Time, as the formal condition of the manifold of

the internal sense, consequently of the conjunction of all representations,

contains a priori a manifold in the pure intuition. Now a transcendental

determination of time is so far homogeneous with the category, which

constitutes the unity thereof, that it is universal and rests upon a rule a priori.

On the other hand, it is so far homogeneous with the phenomenon, inasmuch

as time is contained in every empirical representation of the manifold. Thus

an application of the category to phenomena becomes possible, by means of

the transcendental determination of time, which, as the schema of the

conceptions of the understanding, mediates the subsumption of the latter

under the former.

              After what has been proved in our deduction of the categories, no

one, it is to be hoped, can hesitate as to the proper decision of the question,

whether the employment of these pure conceptions of the understanding

ought to be merely empirical or also transcendental; in other words, whether

the categories, as conditions of a possible experience, relate a priori solely to

phenomena, or whether, as conditions of the possibility of things in general,

their application can be extended to objects as things in themselves. For we

have there seen that conceptions are quite impossible, and utterly without

signification, unless either to them, or at least to the elements of which they

consist, an object be given; and that, consequently, they cannot possibly

apply to objects as things in themselves without regard to the question

whether and how these may be given to us; and, further, that the only manner

in which objects can be given to us is by means of the modification of our

sensibility; and, finally, that pure a priori conceptions, in addition to the

function of the understanding in the category, must contain a priori formal

conditions of sensibility (of the internal sense, namely), which again contain

the general condition under which alone the category can be applied to any

object. This formal and pure condition of sensibility, to which the conception

of the understanding is restricted in its employment, we shall name the

schema of the conception of the understanding, and the procedure of the

understanding with these schemata we shall call the schematism of the pure

understanding.              The schema is, in itself, always a mere product of the imagination.

But, as the synthesis of imagination has for its aim no single intuition, but

merely unity in the determination of sensibility, the schema is clearly

distinguishable from the image. Thus, if I place five points one after

another.... this is an image of the number five. On the other hand, if I only

think a number in general, which may be either five or a hundred, this

thought is rather the representation of a method of representing in an image a

sum (e.g., a thousand) in conformity with a conception, than the image itself,

an image which I should find some little difficulty in reviewing, and

comparing with the conception. Now this representation of a general

procedure of the imagination to present its image to a conception, I call the

schema of this conception.

              In truth, it is not images of objects, but schemata, which lie at the

foundation of our pure sensuous conceptions. No image could ever be

adequate to our conception of a triangle in general. For the generalness of the

conception it never could attain to, as this includes under itself all triangles,

whether right-angled, acute-angled, etc., whilst the image would always be

limited to a single part of this sphere. The schema of the triangle can exist

nowhere else than in thought, and it indicates a rule of the synthesis of the

imagination in regard to pure figures in space. Still less is an object of

experience, or an image of the object, ever to the empirical conception. On

the contrary, the conception always relates immediately to the schema of the

imagination, as a rule for the determination of our intuition, in conformity

with a certain general conception. The conception of a dog indicates a rule,

according to which my imagination can delineate the figure of a four-footed

animal in general, without being limited to any particular individual form

which experience presents to me, or indeed to any possible image that I can

represent to myself in concreto. This schematism of our understanding in

regard to phenomena and their mere form, is an art, hidden in the depths of

the human soul, whose true modes of action we shall only with difficulty

discover and unveil. Thus much only can we say: “The image is a product of

the empirical faculty of the productive imagination — the schema of

sensuous conceptions (of figures in space, for example) is a product, and, as

it were, a monogram of the pure imagination a priori, whereby and according

to which images first become possible, which, however, can be connected

with the conception only mediately by means of the schema which they

indicate, and are in themselves never fully adequate to it.” On the other hand,the schema of a pure conception of the understanding is something that

cannot be reduced into any image — it is nothing else than the pure synthesis

expressed by the category, conformably, to a rule of unity according to

conceptions. It is a transcendental product of the imagination, a product

which concerns the determination of the internal sense, according to

conditions of its form (time) in respect to all representations, in so far as these

representations must be conjoined a priori in one conception, conformably to

the unity of apperception.

              Without entering upon a dry and tedious analysis of the essential

requisites of transcendental schemata of the pure conceptions of the

understanding, we shall rather proceed at once to give an explanation of them

according to the order of the categories, and in connection therewith.

              For the external sense the pure image of all quantities (quantorum) is

space; the pure image of all objects of sense in general, is time. But the pure

schema of quantity (quantitatis) as a conception of the understanding, is

number, a representation which comprehends the successive addition of one

to one (homogeneous quantities). Thus, number is nothing else than the unity

of the synthesis of the manifold in a homogeneous intuition, by means of my

generating time itself in my apprehension of the intuition.

              Reality, in the pure conception of the understanding, is that which

corresponds to a sensation in general; that, consequently, the conception of

which indicates a being (in time). Negation is that the conception of which

represents a not-being (in time). The opposition of these two consists

therefore in the difference of one and the same time, as a time filled or a time

empty. Now as time is only the form of intuition, consequently of objects as

phenomena, that which in objects corresponds to sensation is the

transcendental matter of all objects as things in themselves (Sachheit, reality).

Now every sensation has a degree or quantity by which it can fill time, that is

to say, the internal sense in respect of the representation of an object, more or

less, until it vanishes into nothing (= 0 = negatio). Thus there is a relation and

connection between reality and negation, or rather a transition from the

former to the latter, which makes every reality representable to us as a

quantum; and the schema of a reality as the quantity of something in so far as

it fills time, is exactly this continuous and uniform generation of the reality in

time, as we descend in time from the sensation which has a certain degree,

down to the vanishing thereof, or gradually ascend from negation to thequantity thereof.

              The schema of substance is the permanence of the real in time; that

is, the representation of it as a substratum of the empirical determination of

time; a substratum which therefore remains, whilst all else changes. (Time

passes not, but in it passes the existence of the changeable. To time,

therefore, which is itself unchangeable and permanent, corresponds that

which in the phenomenon is unchangeable in existence, that is, substance,

and it is only by it that the succession and coexistence of phenomena can be

determined in regard to time.)

              The schema of cause and of the causality of a thing is the real which,

when posited, is always followed by something else. It consists, therefore, in

the succession of the manifold, in so far as that succession is subjected to a

rule.

              The schema of community (reciprocity of action and reaction), or the

reciprocal causality of substances in respect of their accidents, is the

coexistence of the determinations of the one with those of the other,

according to a general rule.

              The schema of possibility is the accordance of the synthesis of

different representations with the conditions of time in general (as, for

example, opposites cannot exist together at the same time in the same thing,

but only after each other), and is therefore the determination of the

representation of a thing at any time.

              The schema of reality is existence in a determined time.

              The schema of necessity is the existence of an object in all time.

              It is clear, from all this, that the schema of the category of quantity

contains and represents the generation (synthesis) of time itself, in the

successive apprehension of an object; the schema of quality the synthesis of

sensation with the representation of time, or the filling up of time; the schema

of relation the relation of perceptions to each other in all time (that is,

according to a rule of the determination of time): and finally, the schema of

modality and its categories, time itself, as the correlative of the determination

of an object — whether it does belong to time, and how. The schemata,

therefore, are nothing but a priori determinations of time according to rules,

and these, in regard to all possible objects, following the arrangement of thecategories, relate to the series in time, the content in time, the order in time,

and finally, to the complex or totality in time.

              Hence it is apparent that the schematism of the understanding, by

means of the transcendental synthesis of the imagination, amounts to nothing

else than the unity of the manifold of intuition in the internal sense, and thus

indirectly to the unity of apperception, as a function corresponding to the

internal sense (a receptivity). Thus, the schemata of the pure conceptions of

the understanding are the true and only conditions whereby our

understanding receives an application to objects, and consequently

significance. Finally, therefore, the categories are only capable of empirical

use, inasmuch as they serve merely to subject phenomena to the universal

rules of synthesis, by means of an a priori necessary unity (on account of the

necessary union of all consciousness in one original apperception); and so to

render them susceptible of a complete connection in one experience. But

within this whole of possible experience lie all our cognitions, and in the

universal relation to this experience consists transcendental truth, which

antecedes all empirical truth, and renders the latter possible.

              It is, however, evident at first sight, that although the schemata of

sensibility are the sole agents in realizing the categories, they do,

nevertheless, also restrict them, that is, they limit the categories by conditions

which lie beyond the sphere of understanding- namely, in sensibility. Hence

the schema is properly only the phenomenon, or the sensuous conception of

an object in harmony with the category. (Numerus est quantitas

phaenomenon — sensatio realitas phaenomenon; constans et perdurabile

rerum substantia phaenomenon- aeternitas, necessitas, phaenomena, etc.)

Now, if we remove a restrictive condition, we thereby amplify, it appears, the

formerly limited conception. In this way, the categories in their pure

signification, free from all conditions of sensibility, ought to be valid of

things as they are, and not, as the schemata represent them, merely as they

appear; and consequently the categories must have a significance far more

extended, and wholly independent of all schemata. In truth, there does always

remain to the pure conceptions of the understanding, after abstracting every

sensuous condition, a value and significance, which is, however, merely

logical. But in this case, no object is given them, and therefore they have no

meaning sufficient to afford us a conception of an object. The notion of

substance, for example, if we leave out the sensuous determination ofpermanence, would mean nothing more than a something which can be

cogitated as subject, without the possibility of becoming a predicate to

anything else. Of this representation I can make nothing, inasmuch as it does

not indicate to me what determinations the thing possesses which must thus

be valid as premier subject. Consequently, the categories, without schemata

are merely functions of the understanding for the production of conceptions,

but do not represent any object. This significance they derive from

sensibility, which at the same time realizes the understanding and restricts it.

 

 

       Chapter II. System of all Principles of the Pure Understanding.

 

 

              In the foregoing chapter we have merely considered the general

conditions under which alone the transcendental faculty of judgement is

justified in using the pure conceptions of the understanding for synthetical

judgements. Our duty at present is to exhibit in systematic connection those

judgements which the understanding really produces a priori. For this

purpose, our table of the categories will certainly afford us the natural and

safe guidance. For it is precisely the categories whose application to possible

experience must constitute all pure a priori cognition of the understanding;

and the relation of which to sensibility will, on that very account, present us

with a complete and systematic catalogue of all the transcendental principles

of the use of the understanding.

              Principles a priori are so called, not merely because they contain in

themselves the grounds of other judgements, but also because they

themselves are not grounded in higher and more general cognitions. This

peculiarity, however, does not raise them altogether above the need of a

proof. For although there could be found no higher cognition, and therefore

no objective proof, and although such a principle rather serves as the

foundation for all cognition of the object, this by no means hinders us from

drawing a proof from the subjective sources of the possibility of the cognition

of an object. Such a proof is necessary, moreover, because without it the

principle might be liable to the imputation of being a mere gratuitous

assertion.

              In the second place, we shall limit our investigations to those

principles which relate to the categories. For as to the principles of

transcendental aesthetic, according to which space and time are the

conditions of the possibility of things as phenomena, as also the restriction of

these principles, namely, that they cannot be applied to objects as things in

themselves — these, of course, do not fall within the scope of our present

inquiry. In like manner, the principles of mathematical science form no part

of this system, because they are all drawn from intuition, and not from the

pure conception of the understanding. The possibility of these principles,however, will necessarily be considered here, inasmuch as they are

synthetical judgements a priori, not indeed for the purpose of proving their

accuracy and apodeictic certainty, which is unnecessary, but merely to render

conceivable and deduce the possibility of such evident a priori cognitions.

              But we shall have also to speak of the principle of analytical

judgements, in opposition to synthetical judgements, which is the proper

subject of our inquiries, because this very opposition will free the theory of

the latter from all ambiguity, and place it clearly before our eyes in its true

nature.

             System of the Principles of the Pure Understanding.

 

 

    Section I. Of the Supreme Principle of all Analytical Judgements.

 

 

              Whatever may be the content of our cognition, and in whatever

manner our cognition may be related to its object, the universal, although

only negative conditions of all our judgements is that they do not contradict

themselves; otherwise these judgements are in themselves (even without

respect to the object) nothing. But although there may exist no contradiction

in our judgement, it may nevertheless connect conceptions in such a manner

that they do not correspond to the object, or without any grounds either a

priori or a posteriori for arriving at such a judgement, and thus, without being

self-contradictory, a judgement may nevertheless be either false or

groundless.

              Now, the proposition: “No subject can have a predicate that

contradicts it,” is called the principle of contradiction, and is a universal but

purely negative criterion of all truth. But it belongs to logic alone, because it

is valid of cognitions, merely as cognitions and without respect to their

content, and declares that the contradiction entirely nullifies them. We can

also, however, make a positive use of this principle, that is, not merely to

banish falsehood and error (in so far as it rests upon contradiction), but also

for the cognition of truth. For if the judgement is analytical, be it affirmative

or negative, its truth must always be recognizable by means of the principle

of contradiction. For the contrary of that which lies and is cogitated as

conception in the cognition of the object will be always properly negatived,

but the conception itself must always be affirmed of the object, inasmuch as

the contrary thereof would be in contradiction to the object.

              We must therefore hold the principle of contradiction to be the

universal and fully sufficient Principle of all analytical cognition. But as a

sufficient criterion of truth, it has no further utility or authority. For the fact

that no cognition can be at variance with this principle without nullifying

itself, constitutes this principle the sine qua non, but not the determiningground of the truth of our cognition. As our business at present is properly

with the synthetical part of our knowledge only, we shall always be on our

guard not to transgress this inviolable principle; but at the same time not to

expect from it any direct assistance in the establishment of the truth of any

synthetical proposition.

              There exists, however, a formula of this celebrated principle — a

principle merely formal and entirely without content — which contains a

synthesis that has been inadvertently and quite unnecessarily mixed up with

it. It is this: “It is impossible for a thing to be and not to be at the same time.”

Not to mention the superfluousness of the addition of the word impossible to

indicate the apodeictic certainty, which ought to be self-evident from the

proposition itself, the proposition is affected by the condition of time, and as

it were says: “A thing = A, which is something = B, cannot at the same time

be non-B.” But both, B as well as non-B, may quite well exist in succession.

For example, a man who is young cannot at the same time be old; but the

same man can very well be at one time young, and at another not young, that

is, old. Now the principle of contradiction as a merely logical proposition

must not by any means limit its application merely to relations of time, and

consequently a formula like the preceding is quite foreign to its true purpose.

The misunderstanding arises in this way. We first of all separate a predicate

of a thing from the conception of the thing, and afterwards connect with this

predicate its opposite, and hence do not establish any contradiction with the

subject, but only with its predicate, which has been conjoined with the

subject synthetically- a contradiction, moreover, which obtains only when the

first and second predicate are affirmed in the same time. If I say: “A man who

is ignorant is not learned,” the condition “at the same time” must be added,

for he who is at one time ignorant, may at another be learned. But if I say:

“No ignorant man is a learned man,” the proposition is analytical, because the

characteristic ignorance is now a constituent part of the conception of the

subject; and in this case the negative proposition is evident immediately from

the proposition of contradiction, without the necessity of adding the condition

“the same time.” This is the reason why I have altered the formula of this

principle — an alteration which shows very clearly the nature of an analytical

proposition.  Section II. Of the Supreme Principle of all Synthetical Judgements.

 

 

              The explanation of the possibility of synthetical judgements is a task

with which general logic has nothing to do; indeed she needs not even be

acquainted with its name. But in transcendental logic it is the most important

matter to be dealt with — indeed the only one, if the question is of the

possibility of synthetical judgements a priori, the conditions and extent of

their validity. For when this question is fully decided, it can reach its aim

with perfect ease, the determination, to wit, of the extent and limits of the

pure understanding.

              In an analytical judgement I do not go beyond the given conception,

in order to arrive at some decision respecting it. If the judgement is

affirmative, I predicate of the conception only that which was already

cogitated in it; if negative, I merely exclude from the conception its contrary.

But in synthetical judgements, I must go beyond the given conception, in

order to cogitate, in relation with it, something quite different from that which

was cogitated in it, a relation which is consequently never one either of

identity or contradiction, and by means of which the truth or error of the

judgement cannot be discerned merely from the judgement itself.

              Granted, then, that we must go out beyond a given conception, in

order to compare it synthetically with another, a third thing is necessary, in

which alone the synthesis of two conceptions can originate. Now what is this

tertium quid that is to be the medium of all synthetical judgements? It is only

a complex in which all our representations are contained, the internal sense to

wit, and its form a priori, time.

              The synthesis of our representations rests upon the imagination; their

synthetical unity (which is requisite to a judgement), upon the unity of

apperception. In this, therefore, is to be sought the possibility of synthetical

judgements, and as all three contain the sources of a priori representations,

the possibility of pure synthetical judgements also; nay, they are necessary

upon these grounds, if we are to possess a knowledge of objects, which rests

solely upon the synthesis of representations.              If a cognition is to have objective reality, that is, to relate to an

object, and possess sense and meaning in respect to it, it is necessary that the

object be given in some way or another. Without this, our conceptions are

empty, and we may indeed have thought by means of them, but by such

thinking we have not, in fact, cognized anything, we have merely played with

representation. To give an object, if this expression be understood in the

sense of “to present” the object, not mediately but immediately in intuition,

means nothing else than to apply the representation of it to experience, be

that experience real or only possible. Space and time themselves, pure as

these conceptions are from all that is empirical, and certain as it is that they

are represented fully a priori in the mind, would be completely without

objective validity, and without sense and significance, if their necessary use

in the objects of experience were not shown. Nay, the representation of them

is a mere schema, that always relates to the reproductive imagination, which

calls up the objects of experience, without which they have no meaning. And

so it is with all conceptions without distinction.

              The possibility of experience is, then, that which gives objective

reality to all our a priori cognitions. Now experience depends upon the

synthetical unity of phenomena, that is, upon a synthesis according to

conceptions of the object of phenomena in general, a synthesis without which

experience never could become knowledge, but would be merely a rhapsody

of perceptions, never fitting together into any connected text, according to

rules of a thoroughly united (possible) consciousness, and therefore never

subjected to the transcendental and necessary unity of apperception.

Experience has therefore for a foundation, a priori principles of its form, that

is to say, general rules of unity in the synthesis of phenomena, the objective

reality of which rules, as necessary conditions even of the possibility of

experience can which rules, as necessary conditions — even of the possibility

of experience — can always be shown in experience. But apart from this

relation, a priori synthetical propositions are absolutely impossible, because

they have no third term, that is, no pure object, in which the synthetical unity

can exhibit the objective reality of its conceptions.

              Although, then, respecting space, or the forms which productive

imagination describes therein, we do cognize much a priori in synthetical

judgements, and are really in no need of experience for this purpose, such

knowledge would nevertheless amount to nothing but a busy trifling with amere chimera, were not space to be considered as the condition of the

phenomena which constitute the material of external experience. Hence those

pure synthetical judgements do relate, though but mediately, to possible

experience, or rather to the possibility of experience, and upon that alone is

founded the objective validity of their synthesis.

              While then, on the one hand, experience, as empirical synthesis, is

the only possible mode of cognition which gives reality to all other synthesis;

on the other hand, this latter synthesis, as cognition a priori, possesses truth,

that is, accordance with its object, only in so far as it contains nothing more

than what is necessary to the synthetical unity of experience.

              Accordingly, the supreme principle of all synthetical judgements is:

“Every object is subject to the necessary conditions of the synthetical unity of

the manifold of intuition in a possible experience.”

              A priori synthetical judgements are possible when we apply the

formal conditions of the a priori intuition, the synthesis of the imagination,

and the necessary unity of that synthesis in a transcendental apperception, to

a possible cognition of experience, and say: “The conditions of the possibility

of experience in general are at the same time conditions of the possibility of

the objects of experience, and have, for that reason, objective validity in an a

priori synthetical judgement.”

Section III. Systematic Representation of all Synthetical Principles of the

                                Pure Understanding.

 

 

              That principles exist at all is to be ascribed solely to the pure

understanding, which is not only the faculty of rules in regard to that which

happens, but is even the source of principles according to which everything

that can be presented to us as an object is necessarily subject to rules, because

without such rules we never could attain to cognition of an object. Even the

laws of nature, if they are contemplated as principles of the empirical use of

the understanding, possess also a characteristic of necessity, and we may

therefore at least expect them to be determined upon grounds which are valid

a priori and antecedent to all experience. But all laws of nature, without

distinction, are subject to higher principles of the understanding, inasmuch as

the former are merely applications of the latter to particular cases ofexperience. These higher principles alone therefore give the conception,

which contains the necessary condition, and, as it were, the exponent of a

rule; experience, on the other hand, gives the case which comes under the

rule.

              There is no danger of our mistaking merely empirical principles for

principles of the pure understanding, or conversely; for the character of

necessity, according to conceptions which distinguish the latter, and the

absence of this in every empirical proposition, how extensively valid soever

it may be, is a perfect safeguard against confounding them. There are,

however, pure principles a priori, which nevertheless I should not ascribe to

the pure understanding — for this reason, that they are not derived from pure

conceptions, but (although by the mediation of the understanding) from pure

intuitions. But understanding is the faculty of conceptions. Such principles

mathematical science possesses, but their application to experience,

consequently their objective validity, nay the possibility of such a priori

synthetical cognitions (the deduction thereof) rests entirely upon the pure

understanding.

              On this account, I shall not reckon among my principles those of

mathematics; though I shall include those upon the possibility and objective

validity a priori, of principles of the mathematical science, which,

consequently, are to be looked upon as the principle of these, and which

proceed from conceptions to intuition, and not from intuition to conceptions.

              In the application of the pure conceptions of the understanding to

possible experience, the employment of their synthesis is either mathematical

or dynamical, for it is directed partly on the intuition alone, partly on the

existence of a phenomenon. But the a priori conditions of intuition are in

relation to a possible experience absolutely necessary, those of the existence

of objects of a possible empirical intuition are in themselves contingent.

Hence the principles of the mathematical use of the categories will possess a

character of absolute necessity, that is, will be apodeictic; those, on the other

hand, of the dynamical use, the character of an a priori necessity indeed, but

only under the condition of empirical thought in an experience, therefore only

mediately and indirectly. Consequently they will not possess that immediate

evidence which is peculiar to the former, although their application to

experience does not, for that reason, lose its truth and certitude. But of this

point we shall be better able to judge at the conclusion of this system ofprinciples.

              The table of the categories is naturally our guide to the table of

principles, because these are nothing else than rules for the objective

employment of the former. Accordingly, all principles of the pure

understanding are:

  1 Axioms of Intuition 2 3 Anticipations Analogies of Perception of

Experience 4 Postulates of Empirical Thought in general                These

appellations I have chosen advisedly, in order that we might not lose sight of

the distinctions in respect of the evidence and the employment of these

principles. It will, however, soon appear that — a fact which concerns both

the evidence of these principles, and the a priori determination of phenomena

— according to the categories of quantity and quality (if we attend merely to

the form of these), the principles of these categories are distinguishable from

those of the two others, in as much as the former are possessed of an

intuitive, but the latter of a merely discursive, though in both instances a

complete, certitude. I shall therefore call the former mathematical, and the
                              29
latter dynamical principles. It must be observed, however, that by these

terms I mean just as little in the one case the principles of mathematics as

those of general (physical) dynamics in the other. I have here in view merely

the principles of the pure understanding, in their application to the internal

sense (without distinction of the representations given therein), by means of

which the sciences of mathematics and dynamics become possible.

Accordingly, I have named these principles rather with reference to their

application than their content; and I shall now proceed to consider them in the

order in which they stand in the table.

        29
               All combination (conjunctio) is either composition (compositio) or

connection (nexus). The former is the synthesis of a manifold, the parts of

which do not necessarily belong to each other. For example, the two triangles

into which a square is divided by a diagonal, do not necessarily belong to

each other, and of this kind is the synthesis of the homogeneous in everything

that can be mathematically considered. This synthesis can be divided into

those of aggregation and coalition, the former of which is applied to

extensive, the latter to intensive quantities. The second sort of combination

(nexus) is the synthesis of a manifold, in so far as its parts do belong

necessarily to each other; for example, the accident to a substance, or the

effect to the cause. Consequently it is a synthesis of that which thoughheterogeneous, is represented as connected a priori. This combination — not

an arbitrary one — I entitle dynamical because it concerns the connection of

the existence of the manifold. This, again, may be divided into the physical

synthesis, of the phenomena divided among each other, and the metaphysical

synthesis, or the connection of phenomena a priori in the faculty of cognition.

                              1. Axioms of Intuition.

 

              The principle of these is: All Intuitions are Extensive Quantities.

              PROOF.

              All phenomena contain, as regards their form, an intuition in space

and time, which lies a priori at the foundation of all without exception.

Phenomena, therefore, cannot be apprehended, that is, received into empirical

consciousness otherwise than through the synthesis of a manifold, through

which the representations of a determinate space or time are generated; that is

to say, through the composition of the homogeneous and the consciousness of

the synthetical unity of this manifold (homogeneous). Now the consciousness

of a homogeneous manifold in intuition, in so far as thereby the

representation of an object is rendered possible, is the conception of a

quantity (quanti). Consequently, even the perception of an object as

phenomenon is possible only through the same synthetical unity of the

manifold of the given sensuous intuition, through which the unity of the

composition of the homogeneous manifold in the conception of a quantity is

cogitated; that is to say, all phenomena are quantities, and extensive

quantities, because as intuitions in space or time they must be represented by

means of the same synthesis through which space and time themselves are

determined.

              An extensive quantity I call that wherein the representation of the

parts renders possible (and therefore necessarily antecedes) the representation

of the whole. I cannot represent to myself any line, however small, without

drawing it in thought, that is, without generating from a point all its parts one

after another, and in this way alone producing this intuition. Precisely the

same is the case with every, even the smallest, portion of time. I cogitate

therein only the successive progress from one moment to another, and hence,

by means of the different portions of time and the addition of them, a

determinate quantity of time is produced. As the pure intuition in allphenomena is either time or space, so is every phenomenon in its character of

intuition an extensive quantity, inasmuch as it can only be cognized in our

apprehension by successive synthesis (from part to part). All phenomena are,

accordingly, to be considered as aggregates, that is, as a collection of

previously given parts; which is not the case with every sort of quantities, but

only with those which are represented and apprehended by us as extensive.

              On this successive synthesis of the productive imagination, in the

generation of figures, is founded the mathematics of extension, or geometry,

with its axioms, which express the conditions of sensuous intuition a priori,

under which alone the schema of a pure conception of external intuition can

exist; for example, “be tween two points only one straight line is possible,”

“two straight lines cannot enclose a space,” etc. These are the axioms which

properly relate only to quantities (quanta) as such.

              But, as regards the quantity of a thing (quantitas), that is to say, the

answer to the question: “How large is this or that object?” although, in

respect to this question, we have various propositions synthetical and

immediately certain (indemonstrabilia); we have, in the proper sense of the

term, no axioms. For example, the propositions: “If equals be added to

equals, the wholes are equal”; “If equals be taken from equals, the remainders

are equal”; are analytical, because I am immediately conscious of the identity

of the production of the one quantity with the production of the other;

whereas axioms must be a priori synthetical propositions. On the other hand,

the self-evident propositions as to the relation of numbers, are certainly

synthetical but not universal, like those of geometry, and for this reason

cannot be called axioms, but numerical formulae. That 7 + 5 = 12 is not an

analytical proposition. For neither in the representation of seven, nor of five,

nor of the composition of the two numbers, do I cogitate the number twelve.

(Whether I cogitate the number in the addition of both, is not at present the

question; for in the case of an analytical proposition, the only point is

whether I really cogitate the predicate in the representation of the subject.)

But although the proposition is synthetical, it is nevertheless only a singular

proposition. In so far as regard is here had merely to the synthesis of the

homogeneous (the units), it cannot take place except in one manner, although

our use of these numbers is afterwards general. If I say: “A triangle can be

constructed with three lines, any two of which taken together are greater than

the third,” I exercise merely the pure function of the productive imagination,which may draw the lines longer or shorter and construct the angles at its

pleasure. On the contrary, the number seven is possible only in one manner,

and so is likewise the number twelve, which results from the synthesis of

seven and five. Such propositions, then, cannot be termed axioms (for in that

case we should have an infinity of these), but numerical formulae.

              This transcendental principle of the mathematics of phenomena

greatly enlarges our a priori cognition. For it is by this principle alone that

pure mathematics is rendered applicable in all its precision to objects of

experience, and without it the validity of this application would not be so

self-evident; on the contrary, contradictions and confusions have often arisen

on this very point. Phenomena are not things in themselves. Empirical

intuition is possible only through pure intuition (of space and time);

consequently, what geometry affirms of the latter, is indisputably valid of the

former. All evasions, such as the statement that objects of sense do not

conform to the rules of construction in space (for example, to the rule of the

infinite divisibility of lines or angles), must fall to the ground. For, if these

objections hold good, we deny to space, and with it to all mathematics,

objective validity, and no longer know wherefore, and how far, mathematics

can be applied to phenomena. The synthesis of spaces and times as the

essential form of all intuition, is that which renders possible the apprehension

of a phenomenon, and therefore every external experience, consequently all

cognition of the objects of experience; and whatever mathematics in its pure

use proves of the former, must necessarily hold good of the latter. All

objections are but the chicaneries of an ill-instructed reason, which

erroneously thinks to liberate the objects of sense from the formal conditions

of our sensibility, and represents these, although mere phenomena, as things

in themselves, presented as such to our understanding. But in this case, no a

priori synthetical cognition of them could be possible, consequently not

through pure conceptions of space and the science which determines these

conceptions, that is to say, geometry, would itself be impossible.

                          2. Anticipations of Perception.

 

              The principle of these is: In all phenomena the Real, that which is an

object of sensation, has Intensive Quantity, that is, has a Degree.

              PROOF.              Perception is empirical consciousness, that is to say, a consciousness

which contains an element of sensation. Phenomena as objects of perception

are not pure, that is, merely formal intuitions, like space and time, for they

cannot be perceived in themselves. They contain, then, over and above the

intuition, the materials for an object (through which is represented something

existing in space or time), that is to say, they contain the real of sensation, as

a representation merely subjective, which gives us merely the consciousness

that the subject is affected, and which we refer to some external object. Now,

a gradual transition from empirical consciousness to pure consciousness is

possible, inasmuch as the real in this consciousness entirely vanishes, and

there remains a merely formal consciousness (a priori) of the manifold in

time and space; consequently there is possible a synthesis also of the

production of the quantity of a sensation from its commencement, that is,

from the pure intuition = 0 onwards up to a certain quantity of the sensation.

Now as sensation in itself is not an objective representation, and in it is to be

found neither the intuition of space nor of time, it cannot possess any

extensive quantity, and yet there does belong to it a quantity (and that by

means of its apprehension, in which empirical consciousness can within a

certain time rise from nothing = 0 up to its given amount), consequently an

intensive quantity. And thus we must ascribe intensive quantity, that is, a

degree of influence on sense to all objects of perception, in so far as this

perception contains sensation.

              All cognition, by means of which I am enabled to cognize and

determine a priori what belongs to empirical cognition, may be called an

anticipation; and without doubt this is the sense in which Epicurus employed

his expression prholepsis. But as there is in phenomena something which is

never cognized a priori, which on this account constitutes the proper

difference between pure and empirical cognition, that is to say, sensation (as

the matter of perception), it follows, that sensation is just that element in

cognition which cannot be at all anticipated. On the other hand, we might

very well term the pure determinations in space and time, as well in regard to

figure as to quantity, anticipations of phenomena, because they represent a

priori that which may always be given a posteriori in experience. But suppose

that in every sensation, as sensation in general, without any particular

sensation being thought of, there existed something which could be cognized

a priori, this would deserve to be called anticipation in a special sense —

special, because it may seem surprising to forestall experience, in that whichconcerns the matter of experience, and which we can only derive from itself.

Yet such really is the case here.

              Apprehension, by means of sensation alone, fills only one moment,

that is, if I do not take into consideration a succession of many sensations. As

that in the phenomenon, the apprehension of which is not a successive

synthesis advancing from parts to an entire representation, sensation has

therefore no extensive quantity; the want of sensation in a moment of time

would represent it as empty, consequently = O. That which in the empirical

intuition corresponds to sensation is reality (realitas phaenomenon); that

which corresponds to the absence of it, negation = O. Now every sensation is

capable of a diminution, so that it can decrease, and thus gradually disappear.

Therefore, between reality in a phenomenon and negation, there exists a

continuous concatenation of many possible intermediate sensations, the

difference of which from each other is always smaller than that between the

given sensation and zero, or complete negation. That is to say, the real in a

phenomenon has always a quantity, which however is not discoverable in

apprehension, inasmuch as apprehension take place by means of mere

sensation in one instant, and not by the successive synthesis of many

sensations, and therefore does not progress from parts to the whole.

Consequently, it has a quantity, but not an extensive quantity.

              Now that quantity which is apprehended only as unity, and in which

plurality can be represented only by approximation to negation = O, I term

intensive quantity. Consequently, reality in a phenomenon has intensive

quantity, that is, a degree. if we consider this reality as cause (be it of

sensation or of another reality in the phenomenon, for example, a change), we

call the degree of reality in its character of cause a momentum, for example,

the momentum of weight; and for this reason, that the degree only indicates

that quantity the apprehension of which is not successive, but instantaneous.

This, however, I touch upon only in passing, for with causality I have at

present nothing to do.

              Accordingly, every sensation, consequently every reality in

phenomena, however small it may be, has a degree, that is, an intensive

quantity, which may always be lessened, and between reality and negation

there exists a continuous connection of possible realities, and possible smaller

perceptions. Every colour- for example, red — has a degree, which, be it ever

so small, is never the smallest, and so is it always with heat, the momentumof weight, etc.

              This property of quantities, according to which no part of them is the

smallest possible (no part simple), is called their continuity. Space and time

are quanta continua, because no part of them can be given, without enclosing

it within boundaries (points and moments), consequently, this given part is

itself a space or a time. Space, therefore, consists only of spaces, and time of

times. Points and moments are only boundaries, that is, the mere places or

positions of their limitation. But places always presuppose intuitions which

are to limit or determine them; and we cannot conceive either space or time

composed of constituent parts which are given before space or time. Such

quantities may also be called flowing, because synthesis (of the productive

imagination) in the production of these quantities is a progression in time, the

continuity of which we are accustomed to indicate by the expression flowing.

              All phenomena, then, are continuous quantities, in respect both to

intuition and mere perception (sensation, and with it reality). In the former

case they are extensive quantities; in the latter, intensive. When the synthesis

of the manifold of a phenomenon is interrupted, there results merely an

aggregate of several phenomena, and not properly a phenomenon as a

quantity, which is not produced by the mere continuation of the productive

synthesis of a certain kind, but by the repetition of a synthesis always

ceasing. For example, if I call thirteen dollars a sum or quantity of money, I

employ the term quite correctly, inasmuch as I understand by thirteen dollars

the value of a mark in standard silver, which is, to be sure, a continuous

quantity, in which no part is the smallest, but every part might constitute a

piece of money, which would contain material for still smaller pieces. If,

however, by the words thirteen dollars I understand so many coins (be their

value in silver what it may), it would be quite erroneous to use the expression

a quantity of dollars; on the contrary, I must call them aggregate, that is, a

number of coins. And as in every number we must have unity as the

foundation, so a phenomenon taken as unity is a quantity, and as such always

a continuous quantity (quantum continuum).

              Now, seeing all phenomena, whether considered as extensive or

intensive, are continuous quantities, the proposition: “All change (transition

of a thing from one state into another) is continuous,” might be proved here

easily, and with mathematical evidence, were it not that the causality of a

change lies, entirely beyond the bounds of a transcendental philosophy, andpresupposes empirical principles. For of the possibility of a cause which

changes the condition of things, that is, which determines them to the

contrary to a certain given state, the understanding gives us a priori no

knowledge; not merely because it has no insight into the possibility of it (for

such insight is absent in several a priori cognitions), but because the notion of

change concerns only certain determinations of phenomena, which

experience alone can acquaint us with, while their cause lies in the

unchangeable. But seeing that we have nothing which we could here employ

but the pure fundamental conceptions of all possible experience, among

which of course nothing empirical can be admitted, we dare not, without

injuring the unity of our system, anticipate general physical science, which is

built upon certain fundamental experiences.

              Nevertheless, we are in no want of proofs of the great influence

which the principle above developed exercises in the anticipation of

perceptions, and even in supplying the want of them, so far as to shield us

against the false conclusions which otherwise we might rashly draw.

              If all reality in perception has a degree, between which and negation

there is an endless sequence of ever smaller degrees, and if, nevertheless,

every sense must have a determinate degree of receptivity for sensations; no

perception, and consequently no experience is possible, which can prove,

either immediately or mediately, an entire absence of all reality in a

phenomenon; in other words, it is impossible ever to draw from experience a

proof of the existence of empty space or of empty time. For in the first place,

an entire absence of reality in a sensuous intuition cannot of course be an

object of perception; secondly, such absence cannot be deduced from the

contemplation of any single phenomenon, and the difference of the degrees in

its reality; nor ought it ever to be admitted in explanation of any

phenomenon. For if even the complete intuition of a determinate space or

time is thoroughly real, that is, if no part thereof is empty, yet because every

reality has its degree, which, with the extensive quantity of the phenomenon

unchanged, can diminish through endless gradations down to nothing (the

void), there must be infinitely graduated degrees, with which space or time is

filled, and the intensive quantity in different phenomena may be smaller or

greater, although the extensive quantity of the intuition remains equal and

unaltered.

              We shall give an example of this. Almost all natural philosophers,remarking a great difference in the quantity of the matter of different kinds in

bodies with the same volume (partly on account of the momentum of gravity

or weight, partly on account of the momentum of resistance to other bodies in

motion), conclude unanimously that this volume (extensive quantity of the

phenomenon) must be void in all bodies, although in different proportion. But

who would suspect that these for the most part mathematical and mechanical

inquirers into nature should ground this conclusion solely on a metaphysical

hypothesis — a sort of hypothesis which they profess to disparage and avoid?

Yet this they do, in assuming that the real in space (I must not here call it

impenetrability or weight, because these are empirical conceptions) is always

identical, and can only be distinguished according to its extensive quantity,

that is, multiplicity. Now to this presupposition, for which they can have no

ground in experience, and which consequently is merely metaphysical, I

oppose a transcendental demonstration, which it is true will not explain the

difference in the filling up of spaces, but which nevertheless completely does

away with the supposed necessity of the above-mentioned presupposition that

we cannot explain the said difference otherwise than by the hypothesis of

empty spaces. This demonstration, moreover, has the merit of setting the

understanding at liberty to conceive this distinction in a different manner, if

the explanation of the fact requires any such hypothesis. For we perceive that

although two equal spaces may be completely filled by matters altogether

different, so that in neither of them is there left a single point wherein matter

is not present, nevertheless, every reality has its degree (of resistance or of

weight), which, without diminution of the extensive quantity, can become

less and less ad infinitum, before it passes into nothingness and disappears.

Thus an expansion which fills a space — for example, caloric, or any other

reality in the phenomenal world — can decrease in its degrees to infinity, yet

without leaving the smallest part of the space empty; on the contrary, filling it

with those lesser degrees as completely as another phenomenon could with

greater. My intention here is by no means to maintain that this is really the

case with the difference of matters, in regard to their specific gravity; I wish

only to prove, from a principle of the pure understanding, that the nature of

our perceptions makes such a mode of explanation possible, and that it is

erroneous to regard the real in a phenomenon as equal quoad its degree, and

different only quoad its aggregation and extensive quantity, and this, too, on

the pretended authority of an a priori principle of the understanding.

              Nevertheless, this principle of the anticipation of perception mustsomewhat startle an inquirer whom initiation into transcendental philosophy

has rendered cautious. We must naturally entertain some doubt whether or

not the understanding can enounce any such synthetical proposition as that

respecting the degree of all reality in phenomena, and consequently the

possibility of the internal difference of sensation itself — abstraction being

made of its empirical quality. Thus it is a question not unworthy of solution:

“How the understanding can pronounce synthetically and a priori respecting

phenomena, and thus anticipate these, even in that which is peculiarly and

merely empirical, that, namely, which concerns sensation itself?”

              The quality of sensation is in all cases merely empirical, and cannot

be represented a priori (for example, colours, taste, etc.). But the real — that

which corresponds to sensation — in opposition to negation = O, only

represents something the conception of which in itself contains a being (ein

seyn), and signifies nothing but the synthesis in an empirical consciousness.

That is to say, the empirical consciousness in the internal sense can be raised

from 0 to every higher degree, so that the very same extensive quantity of

intuition, an illuminated surface, for example, excites as great a sensation as

an aggregate of many other surfaces less illuminated. We can therefore make

complete abstraction of the extensive quantity of a phenomenon, and

represent to ourselves in the mere sensation in a certain momentum, a

synthesis of homogeneous ascension from 0 up to the given empirical

consciousness, All sensations therefore as such are given only a posteriori,

but this property thereof, namely, that they have a degree, can be known a

priori. It is worthy of remark, that in respect to quantities in general, we can

cognize a priori only a single quality, namely, continuity; but in respect to all

quality (the real in phenomena), we cannot cognize a priori anything more

than the intensive quantity thereof, namely, that they have a degree. All else

is left to experience.

                            3. Analogies of Experience.

 

              The principle of these is: Experience is possible only through the

representation of a necessary connection of Perceptions.

              PROOF.

              Experience is an empirical cognition; that is to say, a cognition

which determines an object by means of perceptions. It is therefore asynthesis of perceptions, a synthesis which is not itself contained in

perception, but which contains the synthetical unity of the manifold of

perception in a consciousness; and this unity constitutes the essential of our

cognition of objects of the senses, that is, of experience (not merely of

intuition or sensation). Now in experience our perceptions come together

contingently, so that no character of necessity in their connection appears, or

can appear from the perceptions themselves, because apprehension is only a

placing together of the manifold of empirical intuition, and no representation

of a necessity in the connected existence of the phenomena which

apprehension brings together, is to be discovered therein. But as experience is

a cognition of objects by means of perceptions, it follows that the relation of

the existence of the existence of the manifold must be represented in

experience not as it is put together in time, but as it is objectively in time.

And as time itself cannot be perceived, the determination of the existence of

objects in time can only take place by means of their connection in time in

general, consequently only by means of a priori connecting conceptions. Now

as these conceptions always possess the character of necessity, experience is

possible only by means of a representation of the necessary connection of

perception.

              The three modi of time are permanence, succession, and coexistence.

Accordingly, there are three rules of all relations of time in phenomena,

according to which the existence of every phenomenon is determined in

respect of the unity of all time, and these antecede all experience and render it

possible.

              The general principle of all three analogies rests on the necessary

unity of apperception in relation to all possible empirical consciousness

(perception) at every time, consequently, as this unity lies a priori at the

foundation of all mental operations, the principle rests on the synthetical

unity of all phenomena according to their relation in time. For the original

apperception relates to our internal sense (the complex of all representations),

and indeed relates a priori to its form, that is to say, the relation of the

manifold empirical consciousness in time. Now this manifold must be

combined in original apperception according to relations of time — a

necessity imposed by the a priori transcendental unity of apperception, to

which is subjected all that can belong to my (i.e., my own) cognition, and

therefore all that can become an object for me. This synthetical and a prioridetermined unity in relation of perceptions in time is therefore the rule: “All

empirical determinations of time must be subject to rules of the general

determination of time”; and the analogies of experience, of which we are now

about to treat, must be rules of this nature.

              These principles have this peculiarity, that they do not concern

phenomena, and the synthesis of the empirical intuition thereof, but merely

the existence of phenomena and their relation to each other in regard to this

existence. Now the mode in which we apprehend a thing in a phenomenon

can be determined a priori in such a manner that the rule of its synthesis can

give, that is to say, can produce this a priori intuition in every empirical

example. But the existence of phenomena cannot be known a priori, and

although we could arrive by this path at a conclusion of the fact of some

existence, we could not cognize that existence determinately, that is to say,

we should be incapable of anticipating in what respect the empirical intuition

of it would be distinguishable from that of others.

              The two principles above mentioned, which I called mathematical, in

consideration of the fact of their authorizing the application of mathematic

phenomena, relate to these phenomena only in regard to their possibility, and

instruct us how phenomena, as far as regards their intuition or the real in their

perception, can be generated according to the rules of a mathematical

synthesis. Consequently, numerical quantities, and with them the

determination of a phenomenon as a quantity, can be employed in the one

case as well as in the other. Thus, for example, out of 200,000 illuminations

by the moon, I might compose and give a priori, that is construct, the degree

of our sensations of the sunlight. We may therefore entitle these two

principles constitutive.

              The case is very different with those principles whose province it is

to subject the existence of phenomena to rules a priori. For as existence does

not admit of being constructed, it is clear that they must only concern the

relations of existence and be merely regulative principles. In this case,

therefore, neither axioms nor anticipations are to be thought of. Thus, if a

perception is given us, in a certain relation of time to other (although

undetermined) perceptions, we cannot then say a priori, what and how great

(in quantity) the other perception necessarily connected with the former is,

but only how it is connected, quoad its existence, in this given modus of time.

Analogies in philosophy mean something very different from that which theyrepresent in mathematics. In the latter they are formulae, which enounce the

equality of two relations of quantity, and are always constitutive, so that if

two terms of the proportion are given, the third is also given, that is, can be

constructed by the aid of these formulae. But in philosophy, analogy is not

the equality of two quantitative but of two qualitative relations. In this case,

from three given terms, I can give a priori and cognize the relation to a fourth

member, but not this fourth term itself, although I certainly possess a rule to

guide me in the search for this fourth term in experience, and a mark to assist

me in discovering it. An analogy of experience is therefore only a rule

according to which unity of experience must arise out of perceptions in

respect to objects (phenomena) not as a constitutive, but merely as a

regulative principle. The same holds good also of the postulates of empirical

thought in general, which relate to the synthesis of mere intuition (which

concerns the form of phenomena), the synthesis of perception (which

concerns the matter of phenomena), and the synthesis of experience (which

concerns the relation of these perceptions). For they are only regulative

principles, and clearly distinguishable from the mathematical, which are

constitutive, not indeed in regard to the certainty which both possess a priori,

but in the mode of evidence thereof, consequently also in the manner of

demonstration.

              But what has been observed of all synthetical propositions, and must

be particularly remarked in this place, is this, that these analogies possess

significance and validity, not as principles of the transcendental, but only as

principles of the empirical use of the understanding, and their truth can

therefore be proved only as such, and that consequently the phenomena must

not be subjoined directly under the categories, but only under their schemata.

For if the objects to which those principles must be applied were things in

themselves, it would be quite impossible to cognize aught concerning them

synthetically a priori. But they are nothing but phenomena; a complete

knowledge of which — a knowledge to which all principles a priori must at

last relate — is the only possible experience. It follows that these principles

can have nothing else for their aim than the conditions of the empirical

cognition in the unity of synthesis of phenomena. But this synthesis is

cogitated only in the schema of the pure conception of the understanding, of

whose unity, as that of a synthesis in general, the category contains the

function unrestricted by any sensuous condition. These principles will

therefore authorize us to connect phenomena according to an analogy, withthe logical and universal unity of conceptions, and consequently to employ

the categories in the principles themselves; but in the application of them to

experience, we shall use only their schemata, as the key to their proper

application, instead of the categories, or rather the latter as restricting

conditions, under the title of “formulae” of the former.

              A. FIRST ANALOGY.

              Principle of the Permanence of Substance.

              In all changes of phenomena, substance is permanent, and the

quantum thereof in nature is neither increased nor diminished.

              PROOF.

              All phenomena exist in time, wherein alone as substratum, that is, as

the permanent form of the internal intuition, coexistence and succession can

be represented. Consequently time, in which all changes of phenomena must

be cogitated, remains and changes not, because it is that in which succession

and coexistence can be represented only as determinations thereof. Now, time

in itself cannot be an object of perception. It follows that in objects of

perception, that is, in phenomena, there must be found a substratum which

represents time in general, and in which all change or coexistence can be

perceived by means of the relation of phenomena to it. But the substratum of

all reality, that is, of all that pertains to the existence of things, is substance;

all that pertains to existence can be cogitated only as a determination of

substance. Consequently, the permanent, in relation to which alone can all

relations of time in phenomena be determined, is substance in the world of

phenomena, that is, the real in phenomena, that which, as the substratum of

all change, remains ever the same. Accordingly, as this cannot change in

existence, its quantity in nature can neither be increased nor diminished.

              Our apprehension of the manifold in a phenomenon is always

successive, is Consequently always changing. By it alone we could,

therefore, never determine whether this manifold, as an object of experience,

is coexistent or successive, unless it had for a foundation something fixed and

permanent, of the existence of which all succession and coexistence are

nothing but so many modes (modi of time). Only in the permanent, then, are

relations of time possible (for simultaneity and succession are the only

relations in time); that is to say, the permanent is the substratum of ourempirical representation of time itself, in which alone all determination of

time is possible. Permanence is, in fact, just another expression for time, as

the abiding correlate of all existence of phenomena, and of all change, and of

all coexistence. For change does not affect time itself, but only the

phenomena in time (just as coexistence cannot be regarded as a modus of

time itself, seeing that in time no parts are coexistent, but all successive). If

we were to attribute succession to time itself, we should be obliged to

cogitate another time, in which this succession would be possible. It is only

by means of the permanent that existence in different parts of the successive

series of time receives a quantity, which we entitle duration. For in mere

succession, existence is perpetually vanishing and recommencing, and

therefore never has even the least quantity. Without the permanent, then, no

relation in time is possible. Now, time in itself is not an object of perception;

consequently the permanent in phenomena must be regarded as the

substratum of all determination of time, and consequently also as the

condition of the possibility of all synthetical unity of perceptions, that is, of

experience; and all existence and all change in time can only be regarded as a

mode in the existence of that which abides unchangeably. Therefore, in all

phenomena, the permanent is the object in itself, that is, the substance

(phenomenon); but all that changes or can change belongs only to the mode

of the existence of this substance or substances, consequently to its

determinations.

              I find that in all ages not only the philosopher, but even the common

understanding, has preposited this permanence as a substratum of all change

in phenomena; indeed, I am compelled to believe that they will always accept

this as an indubitable fact. Only the philosopher expresses himself in a more

precise and definite manner, when he says: “In all changes in the world, the

substance remains, and the accidents alone are changeable.” But of this

decidedly synthetical proposition, I nowhere meet with even an attempt at

proof; nay, it very rarely has the good fortune to stand, as it deserves to do, at

the head of the pure and entirely a priori laws of nature. In truth, the

statement that substance is permanent, is tautological. For this very

permanence is the ground on which we apply the category of substance to the

phenomenon; and we should have been obliged to prove that in all

phenomena there is something permanent, of the existence of which the

changeable is nothing but a determination. But because a proof of this nature

cannot be dogmatical, that is, cannot be drawn from conceptions, inasmuchas it concerns a synthetical proposition a priori, and as philosophers never

reflected that such propositions are valid only in relation to possible

experience, and therefore cannot be proved except by means of a deduction

of the possibility of experience, it is no wonder that while it has served as the

foundation of all experience (for we feel the need of it in empirical

cognition), it has never been supported by proof.

              A philosopher was asked: “What is the weight of smoke?” He

answered: “Subtract from the weight of the burnt wood the weight of the

remaining ashes, and you will have the weight of the smoke.” Thus he

presumed it to be incontrovertible that even in fire the matter (substance)

does not perish, but that only the form of it undergoes a change. In like

manner was the saying: “From nothing comes nothing,” only another

inference from the principle or permanence, or rather of the ever-abiding

existence of the true subject in phenomena. For if that in the phenomenon

which we call substance is to be the proper substratum of all determination of

time, it follows that all existence in past as well as in future time, must be

determinable by means of it alone. Hence we are entitled to apply the term

substance to a phenomenon, only because we suppose its existence in all

time, a notion which the word permanence does not fully express, as it seems

rather to be referable to future time. However, the internal necessity

perpetually to be, is inseparably connected with the necessity always to have

been, and so the expression may stand as it is. “Gigni de nihilo nihil; in
                              30
nihilum nil posse reverti,” are two propositions which the ancients never

parted, and which people nowadays sometimes mistakenly disjoin, because

they imagine that the propositions apply to objects as things in themselves,

and that the former might be inimical to the dependence (even in respect of

its substance also) of the world upon a supreme cause. But this apprehension

is entirely needless, for the question in this case is only of phenomena in the

sphere of experience, the unity of which never could be possible, if we

admitted the possibility that new things (in respect of their substance) should

arise. For in that case, we should lose altogether that which alone can

represent the unity of time, to wit, the identity of the substratum, as that

through which alone all change possesses complete and thorough unity. This

permanence is, however, nothing but the manner in which we represent to

ourselves the existence of things in the phenomenal world.

        30
               [Persius, Satirae, iii.83-84. “Nothing can be produced fromnothing; nothing can be returned into nothing.”]

              The determinations of a substance, which are only particular modes

of its existence, are called accidents. They are always real, because they

concern the existence of substance (negations are only determinations, which

express the non-existence of something in the substance). Now, if to this real

in the substance we ascribe a particular existence (for example, to motion as

an accident of matter), this existence is called inherence, in contradistinction

to the existence of substance, which we call subsistence. But hence arise

many misconceptions, and it would be a more accurate and just mode of

expression to designate the accident only as the mode in which the existence

of a substance is positively determined. Meanwhile, by reason of the

conditions of the logical exercise of our understanding, it is impossible to

avoid separating, as it were, that which in the existence of a substance is

subject to change, whilst the substance remains, and regarding it in relation to

that which is properly permanent and radical. On this account, this category

of substance stands under the title of relation, rather because it is the

condition thereof than because it contains in itself any relation.

              Now, upon this notion of permanence rests the proper notion of the

conception change. Origin and extinction are not changes of that which

originates or becomes extinct. Change is but a mode of existence, which

follows on another mode of existence of the same object; hence all that

changes is permanent, and only the condition thereof changes. Now since this

mutation affects only determinations, which can have a beginning or an end,

we may say, employing an expression which seems somewhat paradoxical:

“Only the permanent (substance) is subject to change; the mutable suffers no

change, but rather alternation, that is, when certain determinations cease,

others begin.”

              Change, when, cannot be perceived by us except in substances, and

origin or extinction in an absolute sense, that does not concern merely a

determination of the permanent, cannot be a possible perception, for it is this

very notion of the permanent which renders possible the representation of a

transition from one state into another, and from non-being to being, which,

consequently, can be empirically cognized only as alternating determinations

of that which is permanent. Grant that a thing absolutely begins to be; we

must then have a point of time in which it was not. But how and by what can

we fix and determine this point of time, unless by that which already exists?For a void time — preceding — is not an object of perception; but if we

connect this beginning with objects which existed previously, and which

continue to exist till the object in question in question begins to be, then the

latter can only be a determination of the former as the permanent. The same

holds good of the notion of extinction, for this presupposes the empirical

representation of a time, in which a phenomenon no longer exists.

              Substances (in the world of phenomena) are the substratum of all

determinations of time. The beginning of some, and the ceasing to be of other

substances, would utterly do away with the only condition of the empirical

unity of time; and in that case phenomena would relate to two different times,

in which, side by side, existence would pass; which is absurd. For there is

only one time in which all different times must be placed, not as coexistent,

but as successive.

              Accordingly, permanence is a necessary condition under which

alone phenomena, as things or objects, are determinable in a possible

experience. But as regards the empirical criterion of this necessary

permanence, and with it of the substantiality of phenomena, we shall find

sufficient opportunity to speak in the sequel.

              B. SECOND ANALOGY.

              Principle of the Succession of Time According to the Law of

Causality.

              All changes take place according to the law of the connection of

Cause and Effect.

              PROOF.

              (That all phenomena in the succession of time are only changes, that

is, a successive being and non-being of the determinations of substance,

which is permanent; consequently that a being of substance itself which

follows on the non-being thereof, or a non-being of substance which follows

on the being thereof, in other words, that the origin or extinction of substance

itself, is impossible — all this has been fully established in treating of the

foregoing principle. This principle might have been expressed as follows:

“All alteration (succession) of phenomena is merely change”; for the changes

of substance are not origin or extinction, because the conception of change

presupposes the same subject as existing with two opposite determinations,and consequently as permanent. After this premonition, we shall proceed to

the proof.)

              I perceive that phenomena succeed one another, that is to say, a state

of things exists at one time, the opposite of which existed in a former state. In

this case, then, I really connect together two perceptions in time. Now

connection is not an operation of mere sense and intuition, but is the product

of a synthetical faculty of imagination, which determines the internal sense in

respect of a relation of time. But imagination can connect these two states in

two ways, so that either the one or the other may antecede in time; for time in

itself cannot be an object of perception, and what in an object precedes and

what follows cannot be empirically determined in relation to it. I am only

conscious, then, that my imagination places one state before and the other

after; not that the one state antecedes the other in the object. In other words,

the objective relation of the successive phenomena remains quite

undetermined by means of mere perception. Now in order that this relation

may be cognized as determined, the relation between the two states must be

so cogitated that it is thereby determined as necessary, which of them must be

placed before and which after, and not conversely. But the conception which

carries with it a necessity of synthetical unity, can be none other than a pure

conception of the understanding which does not lie in mere perception; and in

this case it is the conception of “the relation of cause and effect,” the former

of which determines the latter in time, as its necessary consequence, and not

as something which might possibly antecede (or which might in some cases

not be perceived to follow). It follows that it is only because we subject the

sequence of phenomena, and consequently all change, to the law of causality,

that experience itself, that is, empirical cognition of phenomena, becomes

possible; and consequently, that phenomena themselves, as objects of

experience, are possible only by virtue of this law.

              Our apprehension of the manifold of phenomena is always

successive. The representations of parts succeed one another. Whether they

succeed one another in the object also, is a second point for reflection, which

was not contained in the former. Now we may certainly give the name of

object to everything, even to every representation, so far as we are conscious

thereof; but what this word may mean in the case of phenomena, not merely

in so far as they (as representations) are objects, but only in so far as they

indicate an object, is a question requiring deeper consideration. In so far asthey, regarded merely as representations, are at the same time objects of

consciousness, they are not to be distinguished from apprehension, that is,

reception into the synthesis of imagination, and we must therefore say: “The

manifold of phenomena is always produced successively in the mind.” If

phenomena were things in themselves, no man would be able to conjecture

from the succession of our representations how this manifold is connected in

the object; for we have to do only with our representations. How things may

be in themselves, without regard to the representations through which they

affect us, is utterly beyond the sphere of our cognition. Now although

phenomena are not things in themselves, and are nevertheless the only thing

given to us to be cognized, it is my duty to show what sort of connection in

time belongs to the manifold in phenomena themselves, while the

representation of this manifold in apprehension is always successive. For

example, the apprehension of the manifold in the phenomenon of a house

which stands before me, is successive. Now comes the question whether the

manifold of this house is in itself successive — which no one will be at all

willing to grant. But, so soon as I raise my conception of an object to the

transcendental signification thereof, I find that the house is not a thing in

itself, but only a phenomenon, that is, a representation, the transcendental

object of which remains utterly unknown. What then am I to understand by

the question: “How can the manifold be connected in the phenomenon itself

— not considered as a thing in itself, but merely as a phenomenon?” Here

that which lies in my successive apprehension is regarded as representation,

whilst the phenomenon which is given me, notwithstanding that it is nothing

more than a complex of these representations, is regarded as the object

thereof, with which my conception, drawn from the representations of

apprehension, must harmonize. It is very soon seen that, as accordance of the

cognition with its object constitutes truth, the question now before us can

only relate to the formal conditions of empirical truth; and that the

phenomenon, in opposition to the representations of apprehension, can only

be distinguished therefrom as the object of them, if it is subject to a rule

which distinguishes it from every other apprehension, and which renders

necessary a mode of connection of the manifold. That in the phenomenon

which contains the condition of this necessary rule of apprehension, is the

object.

              Let us now proceed to our task. That something happens, that is to

say, that something or some state exists which before was not, cannot beempirically perceived, unless a phenomenon precedes, which does not

contain in itself this state. For a reality which should follow upon a void time,

in other words, a beginning, which no state of things precedes, can just as

little be apprehended as the void time itself. Every apprehension of an event

is therefore a perception which follows upon another perception. But as this

is the case with all synthesis of apprehension, as I have shown above in the

example of a house, my apprehension of an event is not yet sufficiently

distinguished from other apprehensions. But I remark also that if in a

phenomenon which contains an occurrence, I call the antecedent state of my

perception, A, and the following state, B, the perception B can only follow A

in apprehension, and the perception A cannot follow B, but only precede it.

For example, I see a ship float down the stream of a river. My perception of

its place lower down follows upon my perception of its place higher up the

course of the river, and it is impossible that, in the apprehension of this

phenomenon, the vessel should be perceived first below and afterwards

higher up the stream. Here, therefore, the order in the sequence of perceptions

in apprehension is determined; and by this order apprehension is regulated. In

the former example, my perceptions in the apprehension of a house might

begin at the roof and end at the foundation, or vice versa; or I might

apprehend the manifold in this empirical intuition, by going from left to right,

and from right to left. Accordingly, in the series of these perceptions, there

was no determined order, which necessitated my beginning at a certain point,

in order empirically to connect the manifold. But this rule is always to be met

with in the perception of that which happens, and it makes the order of the

successive perceptions in the apprehension of such a phenomenon necessary.

              I must, therefore, in the present case, deduce the subjective sequence

of apprehension from the objective sequence of phenomena, for otherwise the

former is quite undetermined, and one phenomenon is not distinguishable

from another. The former alone proves nothing as to the connection of the

manifold in an object, for it is quite arbitrary. The latter must consist in the

order of the manifold in a phenomenon, according to which order the

apprehension of one thing (that which happens) follows that of another thing

(which precedes), in conformity with a rule. In this way alone can I be

authorized to say of the phenomenon itself, and not merely of my own

apprehension, that a certain order or sequence is to be found therein. That is,

in other words, I cannot arrange my apprehension otherwise than in this

order.              In conformity with this rule, then, it is necessary that in that which

antecedes an event there be found the condition of a rule, according to which

in this event follows always and necessarily; but I cannot reverse this and go

back from the event, and determine (by apprehension) that which antecedes

it. For no phenomenon goes back from the succeeding point of time to the

preceding point, although it does certainly relate to a preceding point of time;

from a given time, on the other hand, there is always a necessary progression

to the determined succeeding time. Therefore, because there certainly is

something that follows, I must of necessity connect it with something else,

which antecedes, and upon which it follows, in conformity with a rule, that is

necessarily, so that the event, as conditioned, affords certain indication of a

condition, and this condition determines the event.

              Let us suppose that nothing precedes an event, upon which this event

must follow in conformity with a rule. All sequence of perception would then

exist only in apprehension, that is to say, would be merely subjective, and it

could not thereby be objectively determined what thing ought to precede, and

what ought to follow in perception. In such a case, we should have nothing

but a play of representations, which would possess no application to any

object. That is to say, it would not be possible through perception to

distinguish one phenomenon from another, as regards relations of time;

because the succession in the act of apprehension would always be of the

same sort, and therefore there would be nothing in the phenomenon to

determine the succession, and to render a certain sequence objectively

necessary. And, in this case, I cannot say that two states in a phenomenon

follow one upon the other, but only that one apprehension follows upon

another. But this is merely subjective, and does not determine an object, and

consequently cannot be held to be cognition of an object — not even in the

phenomenal world.

              Accordingly, when we know in experience that something happens,

we always presuppose that something precedes, whereupon it follows in

conformity with a rule. For otherwise I could not say of the object that it

follows; because the mere succession in my apprehension, if it be not

determined by a rule in relation to something preceding, does not authorize

succession in the object. Only, therefore, in reference to a rule, according to

which phenomena are determined in their sequence, that is, as they happen,

by the preceding state, can I make my subjective synthesis (of apprehension)objective, and it is only under this presupposition that even the experience of

an event is possible.

              No doubt it appears as if this were in thorough contradiction to all

the notions which people have hitherto entertained in regard to the procedure

of the human understanding. According to these opinions, it is by means of

the perception and comparison of similar consequences following upon

certain antecedent phenomena that the understanding is led to the discovery

of a rule, according to which certain events always follow certain

phenomena, and it is only by this process that we attain to the conception of

cause. Upon such a basis, it is clear that this conception must be merely

empirical, and the rule which it furnishes us with —“Everything that happens

must have a cause”— would be just as contingent as experience itself. The

universality and necessity of the rule or law would be perfectly spurious

attributes of it. Indeed, it could not possess universal validity, inasmuch as it

would not in this case be a priori, but founded on deduction. But the same is

the case with this law as with other pure a priori representations (e.g., space

and time), which we can draw in perfect clearness and completeness from

experience, only because we had already placed them therein, and by that

means, and by that alone, had rendered experience possible. Indeed, the

logical clearness of this representation of a rule, determining the series of

events, is possible only when we have made use thereof in experience.

Nevertheless, the recognition of this rule, as a condition of the synthetical

unity of phenomena in time, was the ground of experience itself and

consequently preceded it a priori.

              It is now our duty to show by an example that we never, even in

experience, attribute to an object the notion of succession or effect (of an

event — that is, the happening of something that did not exist before), and

distinguish it from the subjective succession of apprehension, unless when a

rule lies at the foundation, which compels us to observe this order of

perception in preference to any other, and that, indeed, it is this necessity

which first renders possible the representation of a succession in the object.

              We have representations within us, of which also we can be

conscious. But, however widely extended, however accurate and

thoroughgoing this consciousness may be, these representations are still

nothing more than representations, that is, internal determinations of the mind

in this or that relation of time. Now how happens it that to theserepresentations we should set an object, or that, in addition to their subjective

reality, as modifications, we should still further attribute to them a certain

unknown objective reality? It is clear that objective significancy cannot

consist in a relation to another representation (of that which we desire to term

object), for in that case the question again arises: “How does this other

representation go out of itself, and obtain objective significancy over and

above the subjective, which is proper to it, as a determination of a state of

mind?” If we try to discover what sort of new property the relation to an

object gives to our subjective representations, and what new importance they

thereby receive, we shall find that this relation has no other effect than that of

rendering necessary the connection of our representations in a certain

manner, and of subjecting them to a rule; and that conversely, it is only

because a certain order is necessary in the relations of time of our

representations, that objective significancy is ascribed to them.

              In the synthesis of phenomena, the manifold of our representations is

always successive. Now hereby is not represented an object, for by means of

this succession, which is common to all apprehension, no one thing is

distinguished from another. But so soon as I perceive or assume that in this

succession there is a relation to a state antecedent, from which the

representation follows in accordance with a rule, so soon do I represent

something as an event, or as a thing that happens; in other words, I cognize

an object to which I must assign a certain determinate position in time, which

cannot be altered, because of the preceding state in the object. When,

therefore, I perceive that something happens, there is contained in this

representation, in the first place, the fact, that something antecedes; because,

it. is only in relation to this that the phenomenon obtains its proper relation of

time, in other words, exists after an antecedent time, in which it did not exist.

But it can receive its determined place in time only by the presupposition that

something existed in the foregoing state, upon which it follows inevitably and

always, that is, in conformity with a rule. From all this it is evident that, in

the first place, I cannot reverse the order of succession, and make that which

happens precede that upon which it follows; and that, in the second place, if

the antecedent state be posited, a certain determinate event inevitably and

necessarily follows. Hence it follows that there exists a certain order in our

representations, whereby the present gives a sure indication of some

previously existing state, as a correlate, though still undetermined, of the

existing event which is given — a correlate which itself relates to the event asits consequence, conditions it, and connects it necessarily with itself in the

series of time.

              If then it be admitted as a necessary law of sensibility, and

consequently a formal condition of all perception, that the preceding

necessarily determines the succeeding time (inasmuch as I cannot arrive at

the succeeding except through the preceding), it must likewise be an

indispensable law of empirical representation of the series of time that the

phenomena of the past determine all phenomena in the succeeding time, and

that the latter, as events, cannot take place, except in so far as the former

determine their existence in time, that is to say, establish it according to a

rule. For it is of course only in phenomena that we can empirically cognize

this continuity in the connection of times.

              For all experience and for the possibility of experience,

understanding is indispensable, and the first step which it takes in this sphere

is not to render the representation of objects clear, but to render the

representation of an object in general, possible. It does this by applying the

order of time to phenomena, and their existence. In other words, it assigns to

each phenomenon, as a consequence, a place in relation to preceding

phenomena, determined a priori in time, without which it could not

harmonize with time itself, which determines a place a priori to all its parts.

This determination of place cannot be derived from the relation of

phenomena to absolute time (for it is not an object of perception); but, on the

contrary, phenomena must reciprocally determine the places in time of one

another, and render these necessary in the order of time. In other words,

whatever follows or happens, must follow in conformity with a universal rule

upon that which was contained in the foregoing state. Hence arises a series of

phenomena, which, by means of the understanding, produces and renders

necessary exactly the same order and continuous connection in the series of

our possible perceptions, as is found a priori in the form of internal intuition

(time), in which all our perceptions must have place.

              That something happens, then, is a perception which belongs to a

possible experience, which becomes real only because I look upon the

phenomenon as determined in regard to its place in time, consequently as an

object, which can always be found by means of a rule in the connected series

of my perceptions. But this rule of the determination of a thing according to

succession in time is as follows: “In what precedes may be found thecondition, under which an event always (that is, necessarily) follows.” From

all this it is obvious that the principle of cause and effect is the principle of

possible experience, that is, of objective cognition of phenomena, in regard to

their relations in the succession of time.

              The proof of this fundamental proposition rests entirely on the

following momenta of argument. To all empirical cognition belongs the

synthesis of the manifold by the imagination, a synthesis which is always

successive, that is, in which the representations therein always follow one

another. But the order of succession in imagination is not determined, and the

series of successive representations may be taken retrogressively as well as

progressively. But if this synthesis is a synthesis of apprehension (of the

manifold of a given phenomenon),then the order is determined in the object,

or to speak more accurately, there is therein an order of successive synthesis

which determines an object, and according to which something necessarily

precedes, and when this is posited, something else necessarily follows. If,

then, my perception is to contain the cognition of an event, that is, of

something which really happens, it must be an empirical judgement, wherein

we think that the succession is determined; that is, it presupposes another

phenomenon, upon which this event follows necessarily, or in conformity

with a rule. If, on the contrary, when I posited the antecedent, the event did

not necessarily follow, I should be obliged to consider it merely as a

subjective play of my imagination, and if in this I represented to myself

anything as objective, I must look upon it as a mere dream. Thus, the relation

of phenomena (as possible perceptions), according to which that which

happens is, as to its existence, necessarily determined in time by something

which antecedes, in conformity with a rule — in other words, the relation of

cause and effect — is the condition of the objective validity of our empirical

judgements in regard to the sequence of perceptions, consequently of their

empirical truth, and therefore of experience. The principle of the relation of

causality in the succession of phenomena is therefore valid for all objects of

experience, because it is itself the ground of the possibility of experience.

              Here, however, a difficulty arises, which must be resolved. The

principle of the connection of causality among phenomena is limited in our

formula to the succession thereof, although in practice we find that the

principle applies also when the phenomena exist together in the same time,

and that cause and effect may be simultaneous. For example, there is heat in aroom, which does not exist in the open air. I look about for the cause, and

find it to be the fire, Now the fire as the cause is simultaneous with its effect,

the heat of the room. In this case, then, there is no succession as regards time,

between cause and effect, but they are simultaneous; and still the law holds

good. The greater part of operating causes in nature are simultaneous with

their effects, and the succession in time of the latter is produced only because

the cause cannot achieve the total of its effect in one moment. But at the

moment when the effect first arises, it is always simultaneous with the

causality of its cause, because, if the cause had but a moment before ceased to

be, the effect could not have arisen. Here it must be specially remembered

that we must consider the order of time and not the lapse thereof. The relation

remains, even though no time has elapsed. The time between the causality of

the cause and its immediate effect may entirely vanish, and the cause and

effect be thus simultaneous, but the relation of the one to the other remains

always determinable according to time. If, for example, I consider a leaden

ball, which lies upon a cushion and makes a hollow in it, as a cause, then it is

simultaneous with the effect. But I distinguish the two through the relation of

time of the dynamical connection of both. For if I lay the ball upon the

cushion, then the hollow follows upon the before smooth surface; but

supposing the cushion has, from some cause or another, a hollow, there does

not thereupon follow a leaden ball.

              Thus, the law of succession of time is in all instances the only

empirical criterion of effect in relation to the causality of the antecedent

cause. The glass is the cause of the rising of the water above its horizontal

surface, although the two phenomena are contemporaneous. For, as soon as I

draw some water with the glass from a larger vessel, an effect follows

thereupon, namely, the change of the horizontal state which the water had in

the large vessel into a concave, which it assumes in the glass.

              This conception of causality leads us to the conception of action; that

of action, to the conception of force; and through it, to the conception of

substance. As I do not wish this critical essay, the sole purpose of which is to

treat of the sources of our synthetical cognition a priori, to be crowded with

analyses which merely explain, but do not enlarge the sphere of our

conceptions, I reserve the detailed explanation of the above conceptions for a

future system of pure reason. Such an analysis, indeed, executed with great

particularity, may already be found in well-known works on this subject. ButI cannot at present refrain from making a few remarks on the empirical

criterion of a substance, in so far as it seems to be more evident and more

easily recognized through the conception of action than through that of the

permanence of a phenomenon.

              Where action (consequently activity and force) exists, substance also

must exist, and in it alone must be sought the seat of that fruitful source of

phenomena. Very well. But if we are called upon to explain what we mean by

substance, and wish to avoid the vice of reasoning in a circle, the answer is

by no means so easy. How shall we conclude immediately from the action to

the permanence of that which acts, this being nevertheless an essential and

peculiar criterion of substance (phenomenon)? But after what has been said

above, the solution of this question becomes easy enough, although by the

common mode of procedure — merely analysing our conceptions — it would

be quite impossible. The conception of action indicates the relation of the

subject of causality to the effect. Now because all effect consists in that

which happens, therefore in the changeable, the last subject thereof is the

permanent, as the substratum of all that changes, that is, substance. For

according to the principle of causality, actions are always the first ground of

all change in phenomena and, consequently, cannot be a property of a subject

which itself changes, because if this were the case, other actions and another

subject would be necessary to determine this change. From all this it results

that action alone, as an empirical criterion, is a sufficient proof of the

presence of substantiality, without any necessity on my part of endeavouring

to discover the permanence of substance by a comparison. Besides, by this

mode of induction we could not attain to the completeness which the

magnitude and strict universality of the conception requires. For that the

primary subject of the causality of all arising and passing away, all origin and

extinction, cannot itself (in the sphere of phenomena) arise and pass away, is

a sound and safe conclusion, a conclusion which leads us to the conception of

empirical necessity and permanence in existence, and consequently to the

conception of a substance as phenomenon.

              When something happens, the mere fact of the occurrence, without

regard to that which occurs, is an object requiring investigation. The

transition from the non-being of a state into the existence of it, supposing that

this state contains no quality which previously existed in the phenomenon, is

a fact of itself demanding inquiry. Such an event, as has been shown in No.A, does not concern substance (for substance does not thus originate), but its

condition or state. It is therefore only change, and not origin from nothing. If

this origin be regarded as the effect of a foreign cause, it is termed creation,

which cannot be admitted as an event among phenomena, because the very

possibility of it would annihilate the unity of experience. If, however, I regard

all things not as phenomena, but as things in themselves and objects of

understanding alone, they, although substances, may be considered as

dependent, in respect of their existence, on a foreign cause. But this would

require a very different meaning in the words, a meaning which could not

apply to phenomena as objects of possible experience.

              How a thing can be changed, how it is possible that upon one state

existing in one point of time, an opposite state should follow in another point

of time — of this we have not the smallest conception a priori. There is

requisite for this the knowledge of real powers, which can only be given

empirically; for example, knowledge of moving forces, or, in other words, of

certain successive phenomena (as movements) which indicate the presence of

such forces. But the form of every change, the condition under which alone it

can take place as the coming into existence of another state (be the content of

the change, that is, the state which is changed, what it may), and

consequently the succession of the states themselves can very well be

considered a priori, in relation to the law of causality and the conditions of
    31
time.

        31
               It must be remarked that I do not speak of the change of certain

relations, but of the change of the state. Thus, when a body moves in a

uniform manner, it does not change its state (of motion); but only when all

motion increases or decreases.

              When a substance passes from one state, a, into another state, b, the

point of time in which the latter exists is different from, and subsequent to

that in which the former existed. In like manner, the second state, as reality

(in the phenomenon), differs from the first, in which the reality of the second

did not exist, as b from zero. That is to say, if the state, b, differs from the

state, a, only in respect to quantity, the change is a coming into existence of b

- a, which in the former state did not exist, and in relation to which that state

is = O.

              Now the question arises how a thing passes from one state = a, intoanother state = b. Between two moments there is always a certain time, and

between two states existing in these moments there is always a difference

having a certain quantity (for all parts of phenomena are in their turn

quantities). Consequently, every transition from one state into another is

always effected in a time contained between two moments, of which the first

determines the state which leaves, and the second determines the state into

the thing passes. the thing leaves, and the second determines the state into

which the thing Both moments, then, are limitations of the time of a change,

consequently of the intermediate state between both, and as such they belong

to the total of the change. Now every change has a cause, which evidences its

causality in the whole time during which the charge takes place. The cause,

therefore, does not produce the change all at once or in one moment, but in a

time, so that, as the time gradually increases from the commencing instant, a,

to its completion at b, in like manner also, the quantity of the reality (b — a)

is generated through the lesser degrees which are contained between the first

and last. All change is therefore possible only through a continuous action of

the causality, which, in so far as it is uniform, we call a momentum. The

change does not consist of these momenta, but is generated or produced by

them as their effect.

              Such is the law of the continuity of all change, the ground of which

is that neither time itself nor any phenomenon in time consists of parts which

are the smallest possible, but that, notwithstanding, the state of a thing passes

in the process of a change through all these parts, as elements, to its second

state. There is no smallest degree of reality in a phenomenon, just as there is

no smallest degree in the quantity of time; and so the new state of reality

grows up out of the former state, through all the infinite degrees thereof, the

differences of which one from another, taken all together, are less than the

difference between o and a.

              It is not our business to inquire here into the utility of this principle

in the investigation of nature. But how such a proposition, which appears so

greatly to extend our knowledge of nature, is possible completely a priori, is

indeed a question which deserves investigation, although the first view seems

to demonstrate the truth and reality of the principle, and the question, how it

is possible, may be considered superfluous. For there are so many groundless

pretensions to the enlargement of our knowledge by pure reason that we must

take it as a general rule to be mistrustful of all such, and without athoroughgoing and radical deduction, to believe nothing of the sort even on

the clearest dogmatical evidence.

              Every addition to our empirical knowledge, and every advance made

in the exercise of our perception, is nothing more than an extension of the

determination of the internal sense, that is to say, a progression in time, be

objects themselves what they may, phenomena, or pure intuitions. This

progression in time determines everything, and is itself determined by

nothing else. That is to say, the parts of the progression exist only in time,

and by means of the synthesis thereof, and are not given antecedently to it.

For this reason, every transition in perception to anything which follows upon

another in time, is a determination of time by means of the production of this

perception. And as this determination of time is, always and in all its parts, a

quantity, the perception produced is to be considered as a quantity which

proceeds through all its degrees — no one of which is the smallest possible

— from zero up to its determined degree. From this we perceive the

possibility of cognizing a priori a law of changes — a law, however, which

concerns their form merely. We merely anticipate our own apprehension, the

formal condition of which, inasmuch as it is itself to be found in the mind

antecedently to all given phenomena, must certainly be capable of being

cognized a priori.

              Thus, as time contains the sensuous condition a priori of the

possibility of a continuous progression of that which exists to that which

follows it, the understanding, by virtue of the unity of apperception, contains

the condition a priori of the possibility of a continuous determination of the

position in time of all phenomena, and this by means of the series of causes

and effects, the former of which necessitate the sequence of the latter, and

thereby render universally and for all time, and by consequence, objectively,

valid the empirical cognition of the relations of time.

              C. THIRD ANALOGY.

              Principle of Coexistence, According to the Law of Reciprocity or

Community.

              All substances, in so far as they can be perceived in space at the

same time, exist in a state of complete reciprocity of action.

              PROOF.              Things are coexistent, when in empirical intuition the perception of

the one can follow upon the perception of the other, and vice versa- which

cannot occur in the succession of phenomena, as we have shown in the

explanation of the second principle. Thus I can perceive the moon and then

the earth, or conversely, first the earth and then the moon; and for the reason

that my perceptions of these objects can reciprocally follow each other, I say,

they exist contemporaneously. Now coexistence is the existence of the

manifold in the same time. But time itself is not an object of perception; and

therefore we cannot conclude from the fact that things are placed in the same

time, the other fact, that the perception of these things can follow each other

reciprocally. The synthesis of the imagination in apprehension would only

present to us each of these perceptions as present in the subject when the

other is not present, and contrariwise; but would not show that the objects are

coexistent, that is to say, that, if the one exists, the other also exists in the

same time, and that this is necessarily so, in order that the perceptions may be

capable of following each other reciprocally. It follows that a conception of

the understanding or category of the reciprocal sequence of the

determinations of phenomena (existing, as they do, apart from each other,

and yet contemporaneously), is requisite to justify us in saying that the

reciprocal succession of perceptions has its foundation in the object, and to

enable us to represent coexistence as objective. But that relation of substances

in which the one contains determinations the ground of which is in the other

substance, is the relation of influence. And, when this influence is reciprocal,

it is the relation of community or reciprocity. Consequently the coexistence

of substances in space cannot be cognized in experience otherwise than under

the precondition of their reciprocal action. This is therefore the condition of

the possibility of things themselves as objects of experience.

              Things are coexistent, in so far as they exist in one and the same

time. But how can we know that they exist in one and the same time? Only

by observing that the order in the synthesis of apprehension of the manifold is

arbitrary and a matter of indifference, that is to say, that it can proceed from

A, through B, C, D, to E, or contrariwise from E to A. For if they were

successive in time (and in the order, let us suppose, which begins with A), it

is quite impossible for the apprehension in perception to begin with E and go

backwards to A, inasmuch as A belongs to past time and, therefore, cannot be

an object of apprehension.              Let us assume that in a number of substances considered as

phenomena each is completely isolated, that is, that no one acts upon another.

Then I say that the coexistence of these cannot be an object of possible

perception and that the existence of one cannot, by any mode of empirical

synthesis, lead us to the existence of another. For we imagine them in this

case to be separated by a completely void space, and thus perception, which

proceeds from the one to the other in time, would indeed determine their

existence by means of a following perception, but would be quite unable to

distinguish whether the one phenomenon follows objectively upon the first,

or is coexistent with it.

              Besides the mere fact of existence, then, there must be something by

means of which A determines the position of B in time and, conversely, B the

position of A; because only under this condition can substances be

empirically represented as existing contemporaneously. Now that alone

determines the position of another thing in time which is the cause of it or of

its determinations. Consequently every substance (inasmuch as it can have

succession predicated of it only in respect of its determinations) must contain

the causality of certain determinations in another substance, and at the same

time the effects of the causality of the other in itself. That is to say,

substances must stand (mediately or immediately) in dynamical community

with each other, if coexistence is to be cognized in any possible experience.

But, in regard to objects of experience, that is absolutely necessary without

which the experience of these objects would itself be impossible.

Consequently it is absolutely necessary that all substances in the world of

phenomena, in so far as they are coexistent, stand in a relation of complete

community of reciprocal action to each other.

                                                          32
              The word community has in our language two meanings, and

contains the two notions conveyed in the Latin communio and commercium.

We employ it in this place in the latter sense — that of a dynamical

community, without which even the community of place (communio spatii)

could not be empirically cognized. In our experiences it is easy to observe

that it is only the continuous influences in all parts of space that can conduct

our senses from one object to another; that the light which plays between our

eyes and the heavenly bodies produces a mediating community between them

and us, and thereby evidences their coexistence with us; that we cannot

empirically change our position (perceive this change), unless the existenceof matter throughout the whole of space rendered possible the perception of

the positions we occupy; and that this perception can prove the

contemporaneous existence of these places only through their reciprocal

influence, and thereby also the coexistence of even the most remote objects

— although in this case the proof is only mediate. Without community, every

perception (of a phenomenon in space) is separated from every other and

isolated, and the chain of empirical representations, that is, of experience,

must, with the appearance of a new object, begin entirely de novo, without

the least connection with preceding representations, and without standing

towards these even in the relation of time. My intention here is by no means

to combat the notion of empty space; for it may exist where our perceptions

cannot exist, inasmuch as they cannot reach thereto, and where, therefore, no

empirical perception of coexistence takes place. But in this case it is not an

object of possible experience.

        32
               German.

              The following remarks may be useful in the way of explanation. In

the mind, all phenomena, as contents of a possible experience, must exist in

community (communio) of apperception or consciousness, and in so far as it

is requisite that objects be represented as coexistent and connected, in so far

must they reciprocally determine the position in time of each other and

thereby constitute a whole. If this subjective community is to rest upon an

objective basis, or to be applied to substances as phenomena, the perception

of one substance must render possible the perception of another, and

conversely. For otherwise succession, which is always found in perceptions

as apprehensions, would be predicated of external objects, and their

representation of their coexistence be thus impossible. But this is a reciprocal

influence, that is to say, a real community (commercium) of substances,

without which therefore the empirical relation of coexistence would be a

notion beyond the reach of our minds. By virtue of this commercium,

phenomena, in so far as they are apart from, and nevertheless in connection

with each other, constitute a compositum reale. Such composita are possible

in many different ways. The three dynamical relations then, from which all

others spring, are those of inherence, consequence, and composition.

              These, then, are the three analogies of experience. They are nothing

more than principles of the determination of the existence of phenomena in

time, according to the three modi of this determination; to wit, the relation totime itself as a quantity (the quantity of existence, that is, duration), the

relation in time as a series or succession, finally, the relation in time as the

complex of all existence (simultaneity). This unity of determination in regard

to time is thoroughly dynamical; that is to say, time is not considered as that

in which experience determines immediately to every existence its position;

for this is impossible, inasmuch as absolute time is not an object of

perception, by means of which phenomena can be connected with each other.

On the contrary, the rule of the understanding, through which alone the

existence of phenomena can receive synthetical unity as regards relations of

time, determines for every phenomenon its position in time, and consequently

a priori, and with validity for all and every time.

              By nature, in the empirical sense of the word, we understand the

totality of phenomena connected, in respect of their existence, according to

necessary rules, that is, laws. There are therefore certain laws (which are

moreover a priori) which make nature possible; and all empirical laws can

exist only by means of experience, and by virtue of those primitive laws

through which experience itself becomes possible. The purpose of the

analogies is therefore to represent to us the unity of nature in the connection

of all phenomena under certain exponents, the only business of which is to

express the relation of time (in so far as it contains all existence in itself) to

the unity of apperception, which can exist in synthesis only according to

rules. The combined expression of all is this: “All phenomena exist in one

nature, and must so exist, inasmuch as without this a priori unity, no unity of

experience, and consequently no determination of objects in experience, is

possible.”

              As regards the mode of proof which we have employed in treating of

these transcendental laws of nature, and the peculiar character of we must

make one remark, which will at the same time be important as a guide in

every other attempt to demonstrate the truth of intellectual and likewise

synthetical propositions a priori. Had we endeavoured to prove these

analogies dogmatically, that is, from conceptions; that is to say, had we

employed this method in attempting to show that everything which exists,

exists only in that which is permanent — that every thing or event

presupposes the existence of something in a preceding state, upon which it

follows in conformity with a rule — lastly, that in the manifold, which is

coexistent, the states coexist in connection with each other according to arule- all our labour would have been utterly in vain. For more conceptions of

things, analyse them as we may, cannot enable us to conclude from the

existence of one object to the existence of another. What other course was left

for us to pursue? This only, to demonstrate the possibility of experience as a

cognition in which at last all objects must be capable of being presented to us,

if the representation of them is to possess any objective reality. Now in this

third, this mediating term, the essential form of which consists in the

synthetical unity of the apperception of all phenomena, we found a priori

conditions of the universal and necessary determination as to time of all

existences in the world of phenomena, without which the empirical

determination thereof as to time would itself be impossible, and we also

discovered rules of synthetical unity a priori, by means of which we could

anticipate experience. For want of this method, and from the fancy that it was

possible to discover a dogmatical proof of the synthetical propositions which

are requisite in the empirical employment of the understanding, has it

happened that a proof of the principle of sufficient reason has been so often

attempted, and always in vain. The other two analogies nobody has ever
                                                                                        33
thought of, although they have always been silently employed by the mind,

because the guiding thread furnished by the categories was wanting, the

guide which alone can enable us to discover every hiatus, both in the system

of conceptions and of principles.

        33
               The unity of the universe, in which all phenomena to be

connected, is evidently a mere consequence of the admitted principle of the

community of all substances which are coexistent. For were substances

isolated, they could not as parts constitute a whole, and were their connection

(reciprocal action of the manifold) not necessary from the very fact of

coexistence, we could not conclude from the fact of the latter as a merely

ideal relation to the former as a real one. We have, however, shown in its

place that community is the proper ground of the possibility of an empirical

cognition of coexistence, and that we may therefore properly reason from the

latter to the former as its condition.

                    4. The Postulates of Empirical Thought.

 

              1. That which agrees with the formal conditions (intuition and

conception) of experience, is possible.

              2. That which coheres with the material conditions of experience(sensation), is real.

              3. That whose coherence with the real is determined according to

universal conditions of experience is (exists) necessary.

              Explanation.

              The categories of modality possess this peculiarity, that they do not

in the least determine the object, or enlarge the conception to which they are

annexed as predicates, but only express its relation to the faculty of cognition.

Though my conception of a thing is in itself complete, I am still entitled to

ask whether the object of it is merely possible, or whether it is also real, or, if

the latter, whether it is also necessary. But hereby the object itself is not more

definitely determined in thought, but the question is only in what relation it,

including all its determinations, stands to the understanding and its

employment in experience, to the empirical faculty of judgement, and to the

reason of its application to experience.

              For this very reason, too, the categories of modality are nothing

more than explanations of the conceptions of possibility, reality, and

necessity, as employed in experience, and at the same time, restrictions of all

the categories to empirical use alone, not authorizing the transcendental

employment of them. For if they are to have something more than a merely

logical significance, and to be something more than a mere analytical

expression of the form of thought, and to have a relation to things and their

possibility, reality, or necessity, they must concern possible experience and

its synthetical unity, in which alone objects of cognition can be given.

              The postulate of the possibility of things requires also, that the

conception of the things agree with the formal conditions of our experience in

general. But this, that is to say, the objective form of experience, contains all

the kinds of synthesis which are requisite for the cognition of objects. A

conception which contains a synthesis must be regarded as empty and,

without reference to an object, if its synthesis does not belong to experience

— either as borrowed from it, and in this case it is called an empirical

conception, or such as is the ground and a priori condition of experience (its

form), and in this case it is a pure conception, a conception which

nevertheless belongs to experience, inasmuch as its object can be found in

this alone. For where shall we find the criterion or character of the possibility

of an object which is cogitated by means of an a priori syntheticalconception, if not in the synthesis which constitutes the form of empirical

cognition of objects? That in such a conception no contradiction exists is

indeed a necessary logical condition, but very far from being sufficient to

establish the objective reality of the conception, that is, the possibility of such

an object as is thought in the conception. Thus, in the conception of a figure

which is contained within two straight lines, there is no contradiction, for the

conceptions of two straight lines and of their junction contain no negation of

a figure. The impossibility in such a case does not rest upon the conception in

itself, but upon the construction of it in space, that is to say, upon the

conditions of space and its determinations. But these have themselves

objective reality, that is, they apply to possible things, because they contain a

priori the form of experience in general.

              And now we shall proceed to point out the extensive utility and

influence of this postulate of possibility. When I represent to myself a thing

that is permanent, so that everything in it which changes belongs merely to its

state or condition, from such a conception alone I never can cognize that such

a thing is possible. Or, if I represent to myself something which is so

constituted that, when it is posited, something else follows always and

infallibly, my thought contains no self-contradiction; but whether such a

property as causality is to be found in any possible thing, my thought alone

affords no means of judging. Finally, I can represent to myself different

things (substances) which are so constituted that the state or condition of one

causes a change in the state of the other, and reciprocally; but whether such a

relation is a property of things cannot be perceived from these conceptions,

which contain a merely arbitrary synthesis. Only from the fact, therefore, that

these conceptions express a priori the relations of perceptions in every

experience, do we know that they possess objective reality, that is,

transcendental truth; and that independent of experience, though not

independent of all relation to form of an experience in general and its

synthetical unity, in which alone objects can be empirically cognized.

              But when we fashion to ourselves new conceptions of substances,

forces, action, and reaction, from the material presented to us by perception,

without following the example of experience in their connection, we create

mere chimeras, of the possibility of which we cannot discover any criterion,

because we have not taken experience for our instructress, though we have

borrowed the conceptions from her. Such fictitious conceptions derive theircharacter of possibility not, like the categories, a priori, as conceptions on

which all experience depends, but only, a posteriori, as conceptions given by

means of experience itself, and their possibility must either be cognized a

posteriori and empirically, or it cannot be cognized at all. A substance which

is permanently present in space, yet without filling it (like that tertium quid

between matter and the thinking subject which some have tried to introduce

into metaphysics), or a peculiar fundamental power of the mind of intuiting

the future by anticipation (instead of merely inferring from past and present

events), or, finally, a power of the mind to place itself in community of

thought with other men, however distant they may be — these are

conceptions the possibility of which has no ground to rest upon. For they are

not based upon experience and its known laws; and, without experience, they

are a merely arbitrary conjunction of thoughts, which, though containing no

internal contradiction, has no claim to objective reality, neither, consequently,

to the possibility of such an object as is thought in these conceptions. As far

as concerns reality, it is self-evident that we cannot cogitate such a possibility

in concreto without the aid of experience; because reality is concerned only

with sensation, as the matter of experience, and not with the form of thought,

with which we can no doubt indulge in shaping fancies.

              But I pass by everything which derives its possibility from reality in

experience, and I purpose treating here merely of the possibility of things by

means of a priori conceptions. I maintain, then, that the possibility of things

is not derived from such conceptions per se, but only when considered as

formal and objective conditions of an experience in general.

              It seems, indeed, as if the possibility of a triangle could be cognized

from the conception of it alone (which is certainly independent of

experience); for we can certainly give to the conception a corresponding

object completely a priori, that is to say, we can construct it. But as a triangle

is only the form of an object, it must remain a mere product of the

imagination, and the possibility of the existence of an object corresponding to

it must remain doubtful, unless we can discover some other ground, unless

we know that the figure can be cogitated under the conditions upon which all

objects of experience rest. Now, the facts that space is a formal condition a

priori of external experience, that the formative synthesis, by which we

construct a triangle in imagination, is the very same as that we employ in the

apprehension of a phenomenon for the purpose of making an empiricalconception of it, are what alone connect the notion of the possibility of such a

thing, with the conception of it. In the same manner, the possibility of

continuous quantities, indeed of quantities in general, for the conceptions of

them are without exception synthetical, is never evident from the conceptions

in themselves, but only when they are considered as the formal conditions of

the determination of objects in experience. And where, indeed, should we

look for objects to correspond to our conceptions, if not in experience, by

which alone objects are presented to us? It is, however, true that without

antecedent experience we can cognize and characterize the possibility of

things, relatively to the formal conditions, under which something is

determined in experience as an object, consequently, completely a priori. But

still this is possible only in relation to experience and within its limits.

              The postulate concerning the cognition of the reality of things

requires perception, consequently conscious sensation, not indeed

immediately, that is, of the object itself, whose existence is to be cognized,

but still that the object have some connection with a real perception, in

accordance with the analogies of experience, which exhibit all kinds of real

connection in experience.

              From the mere conception of a thing it is impossible to conclude its

existence. For, let the conception be ever so complete, and containing a

statement of all the determinations of the thing, the existence of it has nothing

to do with all this, but only with thew question whether such a thing is given,

so that the perception of it can in every case precede the conception. For the

fact that the conception of it precedes the perception, merely indicates the

possibility of its existence; it is perception which presents matter to the

conception, that is the sole criterion of reality. Prior to the perception of the

thing, however, and therefore comparatively a priori, we are able to cognize

its existence, provided it stands in connection with some perceptions

according to the principles of the empirical conjunction of these, that is, in

conformity with the analogies of perception. For, in this case, the existence of

the supposed thing is connected with our perception in a possible experience,

and we are able, with the guidance of these analogies, to reason in the series

of possible perceptions from a thing which we do really perceive to the thing

we do not perceive. Thus, we cognize the existence of a magnetic matter

penetrating all bodies from the perception of the attraction of the steel-filings

by the magnet, although the constitution of our organs renders an immediateperception of this matter impossible for us. For, according to the laws of

sensibility and the connected context of our perceptions, we should in an

experience come also on an immediate empirical intuition of this matter, if

our senses were more acute — but this obtuseness has no influence upon and

cannot alter the form of possible experience in general. Our knowledge of the

existence of things reaches as far as our perceptions, and what may be

inferred from them according to empirical laws, extend. If we do not set out

from experience, or do not proceed according to the laws of the empirical

connection of phenomena, our pretensions to discover the existence of a thing

which we do not immediately perceive are vain. Idealism, however, brings

forward powerful objections to these rules for proving existence mediately.

This is, therefore, the proper place for its refutation.

                                Refutation of Idealism.

 

              Idealism — I mean material idealism — is the theory which declares

the existence of objects in space without us to be either () doubtful and

indemonstrable, or (2) false and impossible. The first is the problematical

idealism of Descartes, who admits the undoubted certainty of only one

empirical assertion (assertio), to wit, “I am.” The second is the dogmatical

idealism of Berkeley, who maintains that space, together with all the objects

of which it is the inseparable condition, is a thing which is in itself

impossible, and that consequently the objects in space are mere products of

the imagination. The dogmatical theory of idealism is unavoidable, if we

regard space as a property of things in themselves; for in that case it is, with

all to which it serves as condition, a nonentity. But the foundation for this

kind of idealism we have already destroyed in the transcendental aesthetic.

Problematical idealism, which makes no such assertion, but only alleges our

incapacity to prove the existence of anything besides ourselves by means of

immediate experience, is a theory rational and evidencing a thorough and

philosophical mode of thinking, for it observes the rule not to form a decisive

judgement before sufficient proof be shown. The desired proof must therefore

demonstrate that we have experience of external things, and not mere fancies.

For this purpose, we must prove, that our internal and, to Descartes,

indubitable experience is itself possible only under the previous assumption

of external experience.

              THEOREM.              The simple but empirically determined consciousness of my own

existence proves the existence of external objects in space.

              PROOF

              I am conscious of my own existence as determined in time. All

determination in regard to time presupposes the existence of something

permanent in perception. But this permanent something cannot be something

in me, for the very reason that my existence in time is itself determined by

this permanent something. It follows that the perception of this permanent

existence is possible only through a thing without me and not through the

mere representation of a thing without me. Consequently, the determination

of my existence in time is possible only through the existence of real things

external to me. Now, consciousness in time is necessarily connected with the

consciousness of the possibility of this determination in time. Hence it

follows that consciousness in time is necessarily connected also with the

existence of things without me, inasmuch as the existence of these things is

the condition of determination in time. That is to say, the consciousness of

my own existence is at the same time an immediate consciousness of the

existence of other things without me.

              Remark I. The reader will observe, that in the foregoing proof the

game which idealism plays is retorted upon itself, and with more justice. It

assumed that the only immediate experience is internal and that from this we

can only infer the existence of external things. But, as always happens, when

we reason from given effects to determined causes, idealism bas reasoned

with too much haste and uncertainty, for it is quite possible that the cause of

our representations may lie in ourselves, and that we ascribe it falsely to

external things. But our proof shows that external experience is properly
            34
immediate, that only by virtue of it — not, indeed, the consciousness of our

own existence, but certainly the determination of our existence in time, that

is, internal experience — is possible. It is true, that the representation “I am,”

which is the expression of the consciousness which can accompany all my

thoughts, is that which immediately includes the existence of a subject. But in

this representation we cannot find any knowledge of the subject, and

therefore also no empirical knowledge, that is, experience. For experience

contains, in addition to the thought of something existing, intuition, and in

this case it must be internal intuition, that is, time, in relation to which the

subject must be determined. But the existence of external things is absolutelyrequisite for this purpose, so that it follows that internal experience is itself

possible only mediately and through external experience.

        34
               The immediate consciousness of the existence of external things

is, in the preceding theorem, not presupposed, but proved, by the possibility

of this consciousness understood by us or not. The question as to the

possibility of it would stand thus: “Have we an internal sense, but no external

sense, and is our belief in external perception a mere delusion?” But it is

evident that, in order merely to fancy to ourselves anything as external, that

is, to present it to the sense in intuition we must already possess an external

sense, and must thereby distinguish immediately the mere receptivity of an

external intuition from the spontaneity which characterizes every act of

imagination. For merely to imagine also an external sense, would annihilate

the faculty of intuition itself which is to be determined by the imagination.

              Remark II. Now with this view all empirical use of our faculty of

cognition in the determination of time is in perfect accordance. Its truth is

supported by the fact that it is possible to perceive a determination of time

only by means of a change in external relations (motion) to the permanent in

space (for example, we become aware of the sun’s motion by observing the

changes of his relation to the objects of this earth). But this is not all. We find

that we possess nothing permanent that can correspond and be submitted to

the conception of a substance as intuition, except matter. This idea of

permanence is not itself derived from external experience, but is an a priori

necessary condition of all determination of time, consequently also of the

internal sense in reference to our own existence, and that through the

existence of external things. In the representation “I,” the consciousness of

myself is not an intuition, but a merely intellectual representation produced

by the spontaneous activity of a thinking subject. It follows, that this “I” has

not any predicate of intuition, which, in its character of permanence, could

serve as correlate to the determination of time in the internal sense — in the

same way as impenetrability is the correlate of matter as an empirical

intuition.

              Remark III. From the fact that the existence of external things is a

necessary condition of the possibility of a determined consciousness of

ourselves, it does not follow that every intuitive representation of external

things involves the existence of these things, for their representations may

very well be the mere products of the imagination (in dreams as well as inmadness); though, indeed, these are themselves created by the reproduction

of previous external perceptions, which, as has been shown, are possible only

through the reality of external objects. The sole aim of our remarks has,

however, been to prove that internal experience in general is possible only

through external experience in general. Whether this or that supposed

experience be purely imaginary must be discovered from its particular

determinations and by comparing these with the criteria of all real experience.

              Finally, as regards the third postulate, it applies to material necessity

in existence, and not to merely formal and logical necessity in the connection

of conceptions. Now as we cannot cognize completely a priori the existence

of any object of sense, though we can do so comparatively a priori, that is,

relatively to some other previously given existence — a cognition, however,

which can only be of such an existence as must be contained in the complex

of experience, of which the previously given perception is a part — the

necessity of existence can never be cognized from conceptions, but always,

on the contrary, from its connection with that which is an object of

perception. But the only existence cognized, under the condition of other

given phenomena, as necessary, is the existence of effects from given causes

in conformity with the laws of causality. It is consequently not the necessity

of the existence of things (as substances), but the necessity of the state of

things that we cognize, and that not immediately, but by means of the

existence of other states given in perception, according to empirical laws of

causality. Hence it follows that the criterion of necessity is to be found only

in the law of possible experience — that everything which happens is

determined a priori in the phenomenon by its cause. Thus we cognize only

the necessity of effects in nature, the causes of which are given us. Moreover,

the criterion of necessity in existence possesses no application beyond the

field of possible experience, and even in this it is not valid of the existence of

things as substances, because these can never be considered as empirical

effects, or as something that happens and has a beginning. Necessity,

therefore, regards only the relations of phenomena according to the

dynamical law of causality, and the possibility grounded thereon, of

reasoning from some given existence (of a cause) a priori to another existence

(of an effect). “Everything that happens is hypothetically necessary,” is a

principle which subjects the changes that take place in the world to a law, that

is, to a rule of necessary existence, without which nature herself could not

possibly exist. Hence the proposition, “Nothing happens by blind chance (inmundo non datur casus),” is an a priori law of nature. The case is the same

with the proposition, “Necessity in nature is not blind,” that is, it is

conditioned, consequently intelligible necessity (non datur fatum). Both laws

subject the play of change to “a nature of things (as phenomena),” or, which

is the same thing, to the unity of the understanding, and through the

understanding alone can changes belong to an experience, as the synthetical

unity of phenomena. Both belong to the class of dynamical principles. The

former is properly a consequence of the principle of causality — one of the

analogies of experience. The latter belongs to the principles of modality,

which to the determination of causality adds the conception of necessity,

which is itself, however, subject to a rule of the understanding. The principle

of continuity forbids any leap in the series of phenomena regarded as changes

(in mundo non datur saltus); and likewise, in the complex of all empirical

intuitions in space, any break or hiatus between two phenomena (non datur

hiatus)- for we can so express the principle, that experience can admit

nothing which proves the existence of a vacuum, or which even admits it as a

part of an empirical synthesis. For, as regards a vacuum or void, which we

may cogitate as out and beyond the field of possible experience (the world),

such a question cannot come before the tribunal of mere understanding,

which decides only upon questions that concern the employment of given

phenomena for the construction of empirical cognition. It is rather a problem

for ideal reason, which passes beyond the sphere of a possible experience and

aims at forming a judgement of that which surrounds and circumscribes it,

and the proper place for the consideration of it is the transcendental dialectic.

These four propositions, “In mundo non datur hiatus, non datur saltus, non

datur casus, non datur fatum,” as well as all principles of transcendental

origin, we could very easily exhibit in their proper order, that is, in

conformity with the order of the categories, and assign to each its proper

place. But the already practised reader will do this for himself, or discover the

clue to such an arrangement. But the combined result of all is simply this, to

admit into the empirical synthesis nothing which might cause a break in or be

foreign to the understanding and the continuous connection of all phenomena,

that is, the unity of the conceptions of the understanding. For in the

understanding alone is the unity of experience, in which all perceptions must

have their assigned place, possible.

              Whether the field of possibility be greater than that of reality, and

whether the field of the latter be itself greater than that of necessity, areinteresting enough questions, and quite capable of synthetic solution,

questions, however, which come under the jurisdiction of reason alone. For

they are tantamount to asking whether all things as phenomena do without

exception belong to the complex and connected whole of a single experience,

of which every given perception is a part which therefore cannot be

conjoined with any other phenomena — or, whether my perceptions can

belong to more than one possible experience? The understanding gives to

experience, according to the subjective and formal conditions, of sensibility

as well as of apperception, the rules which alone make this experience

possible. Other forms of intuition besides those of space and time, other

forms of understanding besides the discursive forms of thought, or of

cognition by means of conceptions, we can neither imagine nor make

intelligible to ourselves; and even if we could, they would still not belong to

experience, which is the only mode of cognition by which objects are

presented to us. Whether other perceptions besides those which belong to the

total of our possible experience, and consequently whether some other sphere

of matter exists, the understanding has no power to decide, its proper

occupation being with the synthesis of that which is given. Moreover, the

poverty of the usual arguments which go to prove the existence of a vast

sphere of possibility, of which all that is real (every object of experience) is

but a small part, is very remarkable. “All real is possible”; from this follows

naturally, according to the logical laws of conversion, the particular

proposition: “Some possible is real.” Now this seems to be equivalent to:

“Much is possible that is not real.” No doubt it does seem as if we ought to

consider the sum of the possible to be greater than that of the real, from the

fact that something must be added to the former to constitute the latter. But

this notion of adding to the possible is absurd. For that which is not in the

sum of the possible, and consequently requires to be added to it, is manifestly

impossible. In addition to accordance with the formal conditions of

experience, the understanding requires a connection with some perception;

but that which is connected with this perception is real, even although it is not

immediately perceived. But that another series of phenomena, in complete

coherence with that which is given in perception, consequently more than one

all-embracing experience is possible, is an inference which cannot be

concluded from the data given us by experience, and still less without any

data at all. That which is possible only under conditions which are themselves

merely possible, is not possible in any respect. And yet we can find no morecertain ground on which to base the discussion of the question whether the

sphere of possibility is wider than that of experience.

              I have merely mentioned these questions, that in treating of the

conception of the understanding, there might be no omission of anything that,

in the common opinion, belongs to them. In reality, however, the notion of

absolute possibility (possibility which is valid in every respect) is not a mere

conception of the understanding, which can be employed empirically, but

belongs to reason alone, which passes the bounds of all empirical use of the

understanding. We have, therefore, contented ourselves with a merely critical

remark, leaving the subject to be explained in the sequel.

              Before concluding this fourth section, and at the same time the

system of all principles of the pure understanding, it seems proper to mention

the reasons which induced me to term the principles of modality postulates.

This expression I do not here use in the sense which some more recent

philosophers, contrary to its meaning with mathematicians, to whom the

word properly belongs, attach to it- that of a proposition, namely,

immediately certain, requiring neither deduction nor proof. For if, in the case

of synthetical propositions, however evident they may be, we accord to them

without deduction, and merely on the strength of their own pretensions,

unqualified belief, all critique of the understanding is entirely lost; and, as

there is no want of bold pretensions, which the common belief (though for

the philosopher this is no credential) does not reject, the understanding lies

exposed to every delusion and conceit, without the power of refusing its

assent to those assertions, which, though illegitimate, demand acceptance as

veritable axioms. When, therefore, to the conception of a thing an a priori

determination is synthetically added, such a proposition must obtain, if not a

proof, at least a deduction of the legitimacy of its assertion.

              The principles of modality are, however, not objectively synthetical,

for the predicates of possibility, reality, and necessity do not in the least

augment the conception of that of which they are affirmed, inasmuch as they

contribute nothing to the representation of the object. But as they are,

nevertheless, always synthetical, they are so merely subjectively. That is to

say, they have a reflective power, and apply to the conception of a thing, of

which, in other respects, they affirm nothing, the faculty of cognition in

which the conception originates and has its seat. So that if the conception

merely agree with the formal conditions of experience, its object is calledpossible; if it is in connection with perception, and determined thereby, the

object is real; if it is determined according to conceptions by means of the

connection of perceptions, the object is called necessary. The principles of

modality therefore predicate of a conception nothing more than the procedure

of the faculty of cognition which generated it. Now a postulate in

mathematics is a practical proposition which contains nothing but the

synthesis by which we present an object to ourselves, and produce the

conception of it, for example —“With a given line, to describe a circle upon a

plane, from a given point”; and such a proposition does not admit of proof,

because the procedure, which it requires, is exactly that by which alone it is

possible to generate the conception of such a figure. With the same right,

accordingly, can we postulate the principles of modality, because they do not
        35
augment the conception of a thing but merely indicate the manner in which

it is connected with the faculty of cognition.

        35
               When I think the reality of a thing, I do really think more than the

possibility, but not in the thing; for that can never contain more in reality than

was contained in its complete possibility. But while the notion of possibility

is merely the notion of a position of thing in relation to the understanding (its

empirical use), reality is the conjunction of the thing with perception.

                  General Remark on the System of Principles.

 

              It is very remarkable that we cannot perceive the possibility of a

thing from the category alone, but must always have an intuition, by which to

make evident the objective reality of the pure conception of the

understanding. Take, for example, the categories of relation. How (1) a thing

can exist only as a subject, and not as a mere determination of other things,

that is, can be substance; or how (2), because something exists, some other

thing must exist, consequently how a thing can be a cause; or how (3), when

several things exist, from the fact that one of these things exists, some

consequence to the others follows, and reciprocally, and in this way a

community of substances can be possible — are questions whose solution

cannot be obtained from mere conceptions. The very same is the case with

the other categories; for example, how a thing can be of the same sort with

many others, that is, can be a quantity, and so on. So long as we have not

intuition we cannot know whether we do really think an object by the

categories, and where an object can anywhere be found to cohere with them,and thus the truth is established, that the categories are not in themselves

cognitions, but mere forms of thought for the construction of cognitions from

given intuitions. For the same reason is it true that from categories alone no

synthetical proposition can be made. For example: “In every existence there

is substance,” that is, something that can exist only as a subject and not as

mere predicate; or, “Everything is a quantity”— to construct propositions

such as these, we require something to enable us to go out beyond the given

conception and connect another with it. For the same reason the attempt to

prove a synthetical proposition by means of mere conceptions, for example:

“Everything that exists contingently has a cause,” has never succeeded. We

could never get further than proving that, without this relation to conceptions,

we could not conceive the existence of the contingent, that is, could not a

priori through the understanding cognize the existence of such a thing; but it

does not hence follow that this is also the condition of the possibility of the

thing itself that is said to be contingent. If, accordingly; we look back to our

proof of the principle of causality, we shall find that we were able to prove it

as valid only of objects of possible experience, and, indeed, only as itself the

principle of the possibility of experience, Consequently of the cognition of an

object given in empirical intuition, and not from mere conceptions. That,

however, the proposition: “Everything that is contingent must have a cause,”

is evident to every one merely from conceptions, is not to be denied. But in

this case the conception of the contingent is cogitated as involving not the

category of modality (as that the non-existence of which can be conceive but

that of relation (as that which can exist only as the consequence of something

else), and so it is really an identical proposition: “That which can exist only

as a consequence, has a cause.” In fact, when we have to give examples of

contingent existence, we always refer to changes, and not merely to the
                                            36
possibility of conceiving the opposite. But change is an event, which, as

such, is possible only through a cause, and considered per se its non-

existence is therefore possible, and we become cognizant of its contingency

from the fact that it can exist only as the effect of a cause. Hence, if a thing is

assumed to be contingent, it is an analytical proposition to say, it has a cause.

        36
               We can easily conceive the non-existence of matter; but the

ancients did not thence infer its contingency. But even the alternation of the

existence and non-existence of a given state in a thing, in which all change

consists, by no means proves the contingency of that state — the ground of

proof being the reality of its opposite. For example, a body is in a state of restafter motion, but we cannot infer the contingency of the motion from the fact

that the former is the opposite of the latter. For this opposite is merely a

logical and not a real opposite to the other. If we wish to demonstrate the

contingency of the motion, what we ought to prove is that, instead of the

motion which took place in the preceding point of time, it was possible for

the body to have been then in rest, not, that it is afterwards in rest; for in this

case, both opposites are perfectly consistent with each other.

              But it is still more remarkable that, to understand the possibility of

things according to the categories and thus to demonstrate the objective

reality of the latter, we require not merely intuitions, but external intuitions.

If, for example, we take the pure conceptions of relation, we find that (1) for

the purpose of presenting to the conception of substance something

permanent in intuition corresponding thereto and thus of demonstrating the

objective reality of this conception, we require an intuition (of matter) in

space, because space alone is permanent and determines things as such, while

time, and with it all that is in the internal sense, is in a state of continual flow;

(2) in order to represent change as the intuition corresponding to the

conception of causality, we require the representation of motion as change in

space; in fact, it is through it alone that changes, the possibility of which no

pure understanding can perceive, are capable of being intuited. Change is the

connection of determinations contradictorily opposed to each other in the

existence of one and the same thing. Now, how it is possible that out of a

given state one quite opposite to it in the same thing should follow, reason

without an example can not only not conceive, but cannot even make

intelligible without intuition; and this intuition is the motion of a point in

space; the existence of which in different spaces (as a consequence of

opposite determinations) alone makes the intuition of change possible. For, in

order to make even internal change cognitable, we require to represent time,

as the form of the internal sense, figuratively by a line, and the internal

change by the drawing of that line (motion), and consequently are obliged to

employ external intuition to be able to represent the successive existence of

ourselves in different states. The proper ground of this fact is that all change

to be perceived as change presupposes something permanent in intuition,

while in the internal sense no permanent intuition is to be found. Lastly, the

objective possibility of the category of community cannot be conceived by

mere reason, and consequently its objective reality cannot be demonstrated

without an intuition, and that external in space. For how can we conceive thepossibility of community, that is, when several substances exist, that some

effect on the existence of the one follows from the existence of the other, and

reciprocally, and therefore that, because something exists in the latter,

something else must exist in the former, which could not be understood from

its own existence alone? For this is the very essence of community — which

is inconceivable as a property of things which are perfectly isolated. Hence,

Leibnitz, in attributing to the substances of the world — as cogitated by the

understanding alone — a community, required the mediating aid of a

divinity; for, from their existence, such a property seemed to him with justice

inconceivable. But we can very easily conceive the possibility of community

(of substances as phenomena) if we represent them to ourselves as in space,

consequently in external intuition. For external intuition contains in itself a

priori formal external relations, as the conditions of the possibility of the real

relations of action and reaction, and therefore of the possibility of

community. With the same ease can it be demonstrated, that the possibility of

things as quantities, and consequently the objective reality of the category of

quantity, can be grounded only in external intuition, and that by its means

alone is the notion of quantity appropriated by the internal sense. But I must

avoid prolixity, and leave the task of illustrating this by examples to the

reader’s own reflection.

              The above remarks are of the greatest importance, not only for the

confirmation of our previous confutation of idealism, but still more when the

subject of self-cognition by mere internal consciousness and the

determination of our own nature without the aid of external empirical

intuitions is under discussion, for the indication of the grounds of the

possibility of such a cognition.

              The result of the whole of this part of the analytic of principles is,

therefore: “All principles of the pure understanding are nothing more than a

priori principles of the possibility of experience, and to experience alone do

all a priori synthetical propositions apply and relate”; indeed, their possibility

itself rests entirely on this relation.

 

 

       Chapter III. Of the Ground of the Division of all Objects into

                            Phenomena and Noumena.

 

 

              We have now not only traversed the region of the pure

understanding and carefully surveyed every part of it, but we have also

measured it, and assigned to everything therein its proper place. But this land

is an island, and enclosed by nature herself within unchangeable limits. It is

the land of truth (an attractive word), surrounded by a wide and stormy

ocean, the region of illusion, where many a fog-bank, many an iceberg,

seems to the mariner, on his voyage of discovery, a new country, and, while

constantly deluding him with vain hopes, engages him in dangerous

adventures, from which he never can desist, and which yet he never can bring

to a termination. But before venturing upon this sea, in order to explore it in

its whole extent, and to arrive at a certainty whether anything is to be

discovered there, it will not be without advantage if we cast our eyes upon the

chart of the land that we are about to leave, and to ask ourselves, firstly,

whether we cannot rest perfectly contented with what it contains, or whether

we must not of necessity be contented with it, if we can find nowhere else a

solid foundation to build upon; and, secondly, by what title we possess this

land itself, and how we hold it secure against all hostile claims? Although, in

the course of our analytic, we have already given sufficient answers to these

questions, yet a summary recapitulation of these solutions may be useful in

strengthening our conviction, by uniting in one point the momenta of the

arguments.

              We have seen that everything which the understanding draws from

itself, without borrowing from experience, it nevertheless possesses only for

the behoof and use of experience. The principles of the pure understanding,

whether constitutive a priori (as the mathematical principles), or merely

regulative (as the dynamical), contain nothing but the pure schema, as it

were, of possible experience. For experience possesses its unity from the

synthetical unity which the understanding, originally and from itself, imparts

to the synthesis of the imagination in relation to apperception, and in a priori

relation to and agreement with which phenomena, as data for a possible

cognition, must stand. But although these rules of the understanding are notonly a priori true, but the very source of all truth, that is, of the accordance of

our cognition with objects, and on this ground, that they contain the basis of

the possibility of experience, as the ensemble of all cognition, it seems to us

not enough to propound what is true — we desire also to be told what we

want to know. If, then, we learn nothing more by this critical examination

than what we should have practised in the merely empirical use of the

understanding, without any such subtle inquiry, the presumption is that the

advantage we reap from it is not worth the labour bestowed upon it. It may

certainly be answered that no rash curiosity is more prejudicial to the

enlargement of our knowledge than that which must know beforehand the

utility of this or that piece of information which we seek, before we have

entered on the needful investigations, and before one could form the least

conception of its utility, even though it were placed before our eyes. But there

is one advantage in such transcendental inquiries which can be made

comprehensible to the dullest and most reluctant learner — this, namely, that

the understanding which is occupied merely with empirical exercise, and

does not reflect on the sources of its own cognition, may exercise its

functions very well and very successfully, but is quite unable to do one thing,

and that of very great importance, to determine, namely, the bounds that limit

its employment, and to know what lies within or without its own sphere. This

purpose can be obtained only by such profound investigations as we have

instituted. But if it cannot distinguish whether certain questions lie within its

horizon or not, it can never be sure either as to its claims or possessions, but

must lay its account with many humiliating corrections, when it transgresses,

as it unavoidably will, the limits of its own territory, and loses itself in

fanciful opinions and blinding illusions.

              That the understanding, therefore, cannot make of its a priori

principles, or even of its conceptions, other than an empirical use, is a

proposition which leads to the most important results. A transcendental use is

made of a conception in a fundamental proposition or principle, when it is

referred to things in general and considered as things in themselves; an

empirical use, when it is referred merely to phenomena, that is, to objects of a

possible experience. That the latter use of a conception is the only admissible

one is evident from the reasons following. For every conception are requisite,

firstly, the logical form of a conception (of thought) general; and, secondly,

the possibility of presenting to this an object to which it may apply. Failing

this latter, it has no sense, and utterly void of content, although it may containthe logical function for constructing a conception from certain data. Now,

object cannot be given to a conception otherwise than by intuition, and, even

if a pure intuition antecedent to the object is a priori possible, this pure

intuition can itself obtain objective validity only from empirical intuition, of

which it is itself but the form. All conceptions, therefore, and with them all

principles, however high the degree of their a priori possibility, relate to

empirical intuitions, that is, to data towards a possible experience. Without

this they possess no objective validity, but are mere play of imagination or of

understanding with images or notions. Let us take, for example, the

conceptions of mathematics, and first in its pure intuitions. “Space has three

dimensions”—“Between two points there can be only one straight line,” etc.

Although all these principles, and the representation of the object with which

this science occupies itself, are generated in the mind entirely a priori, they

would nevertheless have no significance if we were not always able to exhibit

their significance in and by means of phenomena (empirical objects). Hence

it is requisite that an abstract conception be made sensuous, that is, that an

object corresponding to it in intuition be forthcoming, otherwise the

conception remains, as we say, without sense, that is, without meaning.

Mathematics fulfils this requirement by the construction of the figure, which

is a phenomenon evident to the senses. The same science finds support and

significance in number; this in its turn finds it in the fingers, or in counters, or

in lines and points. The conception itself is always produced a priori, together

with the synthetical principles or formulas from such conceptions; but the

proper employment of them, and their application to objects, can exist

nowhere but in experience, the possibility of which, as regards its form, they

contain a priori.

              That this is also the case with all of the categories and the principles

based upon them is evident from the fact that we cannot render intelligible

the possibility of an object corresponding to them without having recourse to

the conditions of sensibility, consequently, to the form of phenomena, to

which, as their only proper objects, their use must therefore be confined,

inasmuch as, if this condition is removed, all significance, that is, all relation

to an object, disappears, and no example can be found to make it

comprehensible what sort of things we ought to think under such

conceptions.

              The conception of quantity cannot be explained except by sayingthat it is the determination of a thing whereby it can be cogitated how many

times one is placed in it. But this “how many times” is based upon successive

repetition, consequently upon time and the synthesis of the homogeneous

therein. Reality, in contradistinction to negation, can be explained only by

cogitating a time which is either filled therewith or is void. If I leave out the

notion of permanence (which is existence in all time), there remains in the

conception of substance nothing but the logical notion of subject, a notion of

which I endeavour to realize by representing to myself something that can

exist only as a subject. But not only am I perfectly ignorant of any conditions

under which this logical prerogative can belong to a thing, I can make

nothing out of the notion, and draw no inference from it, because no object to

which to apply the conception is determined, and we consequently do not

know whether it has any meaning at all. In like manner, if I leave out the

notion of time, in which something follows upon some other thing in

conformity with a rule, I can find nothing in the pure category, except that

there is a something of such a sort that from it a conclusion may be drawn as

to the existence of some other thing. But in this case it would not only be

impossible to distinguish between a cause and an effect, but, as this power to

draw conclusions requires conditions of which I am quite ignorant, the

conception is not determined as to the mode in which it ought to apply to an

object. The so-called principle: “Everything that is contingent has a cause,”

comes with a gravity and self-assumed authority that seems to require no

support from without. But, I ask, what is meant by contingent? The answer is

that the non-existence of which is possible. But I should like very well to

know by what means this possibility of non-existence is to be cognized, if we

do not represent to ourselves a succession in the series of phenomena, and in

this succession an existence which follows a non-existence, or conversely,

consequently, change. For to say, that the non-existence of a thing is not self-

contradictory is a lame appeal to a logical condition, which is no doubt a

necessary condition of the existence of the conception, but is far from being

sufficient for the real objective possibility of non-existence. I can annihilate

in thought every existing substance without self-contradiction, but I cannot

infer from this their objective contingency in existence, that is to say, the

possibility of their non-existence in itself. As regards the category of

community, it may easily be inferred that, as the pure categories of substance

and causality are incapable of a definition and explanation sufficient to

determine their object without the aid of intuition, the category of reciprocalcausality in the relation of substances to each other (commercium) is just as

little susceptible thereof. Possibility, existence, and necessity nobody has

ever yet been able to explain without being guilty of manifest tautology,

when the definition has been drawn entirely from the pure understanding. For

the substitution of the logical possibility of the conception — the condition of

which is that it be not self-contradictory, for the transcendental possibility of

things — the condition of which is that there be an object corresponding to
                                                                              37
the conception, is a trick which can only deceive the inexperienced.

        37
               In one word, to none of these conceptions belongs a corresponding

object, and consequently their real possibility cannot be demonstrated, if we

take away sensuous intuition — the only intuition which we possess — and

there then remains nothing but the logical possibility, that is, the fact that the

conception or thought is possible — which, however, is not the question;

what we want to know being, whether it relates to an object and thus

possesses any meaning.

              It follows incontestably, that the pure conceptions of the

understanding are incapable of transcendental, and must always be of

empirical use alone, and that the principles of the pure understanding relate

only to the general conditions of a possible experience, to objects of the

senses, and never to things in general, apart from the mode in which we

intuite them.

              Transcendental analytic has accordingly this important result, to wit,

that the understanding is competent’ effect nothing a priori, except the

anticipation of the form of a possible experience in general, and that, as that

which is not phenomenon cannot be an object of experience, it can never

overstep the limits of sensibility, within which alone objects are presented to

us. Its principles are merely principles of the exposition of phenomena, and

the proud name of an ontology, which professes to present synthetical

cognitions a priori of things in general in a systematic doctrine, must give

place to the modest title of analytic of the pure understanding.

              Thought is the act of referring a given intuition to an object. If the

mode of this intuition is unknown to us, the object is merely transcendental,

and the conception of the understanding is employed only transcendentally,

that is, to produce unity in the thought of a manifold in general. Now a pure

category, in which all conditions of sensuous intuition — as the only intuitionwe possess — are abstracted, does not determine an object, but merely

expresses the thought of an object in general, according to different modes.

Now, to employ a conception, the function of judgement is required, by

which an object is subsumed under the conception, consequently the at least

formal condition, under which something can be given in intuition. Failing

this condition of judgement (schema), subsumption is impossible; for there is

in such a case nothing given, which may be subsumed under the conception.

The merely transcendental use of the categories is therefore, in fact, no use at

all and has no determined, or even, as regards its form, determinable object.

Hence it follows that the pure category is incompetent to establish a

synthetical a priori principle, and that the principles of the pure understanding

are only of empirical and never of transcendental use, and that beyond the

sphere of possible experience no synthetical a priori principles are possible.

              It may be advisable, therefore, to express ourselves thus. The pure

categories, apart from the formal conditions of sensibility, have a merely

transcendental meaning, but are nevertheless not of transcendental use,

because this is in itself impossible, inasmuch as all the conditions of any

employment or use of them (in judgements) are absent, to wit, the formal

conditions of the subsumption of an object under these conceptions. As,

therefore, in the character of pure categories, they must be employed

empirically, and cannot be employed transcendentally, they are of no use at

all, when separated from sensibility, that is, they cannot be applied to an

object. They are merely the pure form of the employment of the

understanding in respect of objects in general and of thought, without its

being at the same time possible to think or to determine any object by their

means.

              But there lurks at the foundation of this subject an illusion which it is

very difficult to avoid. The categories are not based, as regards their origin,

upon sensibility, like the forms of intuition, space, and time; they seem,

therefore, to be capable of an application beyond the sphere of sensuous

objects. But this is not the case. They are nothing but mere forms of thought,

which contain only the logical faculty of uniting a priori in consciousness the

manifold given in intuition. Apart, then, from the only intuition possible for

us, they have still less meaning than the pure sensuous forms, space and time,

for through them an object is at least given, while a mode of connection of

the manifold, when the intuition which alone gives the manifold is wanting,has no meaning at all. At the same time, when we designate certain objects as

phenomena or sensuous existences, thus distinguishing our mode of intuiting

them from their own nature as things in themselves, it is evident that by this

very distinction we as it were place the latter, considered in this their own

nature, although we do not so intuite them, in opposition to the former, or, on

the other hand, we do so place other possible things, which are not objects of

our senses, but are cogitated by the understanding alone, and call them

intelligible existences (noumena). Now the question arises whether the pure

conceptions of our understanding do possess significance in respect of these

latter, and may possibly be a mode of cognizing them.

              But we are met at the very commencement with an ambiguity, which

may easily occasion great misapprehension. The understanding, when it

terms an object in a certain relation phenomenon, at the same time forms out

of this relation a representation or notion of an object in itself, and hence

believes that it can form also conceptions of such objects. Now as the

understanding possesses no other fundamental conceptions besides the

categories, it takes for granted that an object considered as a thing in itself

must be capable of being thought by means of these pure conceptions, and is

thereby led to hold the perfectly undetermined conception of an intelligible

existence, a something out of the sphere of our sensibility, for a determinate

conception of an existence which we can cognize in some way or other by

means of the understanding.

              If, by the term noumenon, we understand a thing so far as it is not an

object of our sensuous intuition, thus making abstraction of our mode of

intuiting it, this is a noumenon in the negative sense of the word. But if we

understand by it an object of a non-sensuous intuition, we in this case assume

a peculiar mode of intuition, an intellectual intuition, to wit, which does not,

however, belong to us, of the very possibility of which we have no notion —

and this is a noumenon in the positive sense.

              The doctrine of sensibility is also the doctrine of noumena in the

negative sense, that is, of things which the understanding is obliged to

cogitate apart from any relation to our mode of intuition, consequently not as

mere phenomena, but as things in themselves. But the understanding at the

same time comprehends that it cannot employ its categories for the

consideration of things in themselves, because these possess significance

only in relation to the unity of intuitions in space and time, and that they arecompetent to determine this unity by means of general a priori connecting

conceptions only on account of the pure ideality of space and time. Where

this unity of time is not to be met with, as is the case with noumena, the

whole use, indeed the whole meaning of the categories is entirely lost, for

even the possibility of things to correspond to the categories is in this case

incomprehensible. On this point, I need only refer the reader to what I have

said at the commencement of the General Remark appended to the foregoing

chapter. Now, the possibility of a thing can never be proved from the fact that

the conception of it is not self-contradictory, but only by means of an

intuition corresponding to the conception. If, therefore, we wish to apply the

categories to objects which cannot be regarded as phenomena, we must have

an intuition different from the sensuous, and in this case the objects would be

a noumena in the positive sense of the word. Now, as such an intuition, that

is, an intellectual intuition, is no part of our faculty of cognition, it is

absolutely impossible for the categories to possess any application beyond

the limits of experience. It may be true that there are intelligible existences to

which our faculty of sensuous intuition has no relation, and cannot be

applied, but our conceptions of the understanding, as mere forms of thought

for our sensuous intuition, do not extend to these. What, therefore, we call

noumenon must be understood by us as such in a negative sense.

              If I take away from an empirial intuition all thought (by means of the

categories), there remains no cognition of any object; for by means of mere

intuition nothing is cogitated, and, from the existence of such or such an

affection of sensibility in me, it does not follow that this affection or

representation has any relation to an object without me. But if I take away all

intuition, there still remains the form of thought, that is, the mode of

determining an object for the manifold of a possible intuition. Thus the

categories do in some measure really extend further than sensuous intuition,

inasmuch as they think objects in general, without regard to the mode (of

sensibility) in which these objects are given. But they do not for this reason

apply to and determine a wider sphere of objects, because we cannot assume

that such can be given, without presupposing the possibility of another than

the sensuous mode of intuition, a supposition we are not justified in making.

              I call a conception problematical which contains in itself no

contradiction, and which is connected with other cognitions as a limitation of

given conceptions, but whose objective reality cannot be cognized in anymanner. The conception of a noumenon, that is, of a thing which must be

cogitated not as an object of sense, but as a thing in itself (solely through the

pure understanding), is not self-contradictory, for we are not entitled to

maintain that sensibility is the only possible mode of intuition. Nay, further,

this conception is necessary to restrain sensuous intuition within the bounds

of phenomena, and thus to limit the objective validity of sensuous cognition;

for things in themselves, which lie beyond its province, are called noumena

for the very purpose of indicating that this cognition does not extend its

application to all that the understanding thinks. But, after all, the possibility

of such noumena is quite incomprehensible, and beyond the sphere of

phenomena, all is for us a mere void; that is to say, we possess an

understanding whose province does problematically extend beyond this

sphere, but we do not possess an intuition, indeed, not even the conception of

a possible intuition, by means of which objects beyond the region of

sensibility could be given us, and in reference to which the understanding

might be employed assertorically. The conception of a noumenon is therefore

merely a limitative conception and therefore only of negative use. But it is

not an arbitrary or fictitious notion, but is connected with the limitation of

sensibility, without, however, being capable of presenting us with any

positive datum beyond this sphere.

              The division of objects into phenomena and noumena, and of the

world into a mundus sensibilis and intelligibilis is therefore quite

inadmissible in a positive sense, although conceptions do certainly admit of

such a division; for the class of noumena have no determinate object

corresponding to them, and cannot therefore possess objective validity. If we

abandon the senses, how can it be made conceivable that the categories

(which are the only conceptions that could serve as conceptions for noumena)

have any sense or meaning at all, inasmuch as something more than the mere

unity of thought, namely, a possible intuition, is requisite for their application

to an object? The conception of a noumenon, considered as merely

problematical, is, however, not only admissible, but, as a limitative

conception of sensibility, absolutely necessary. But, in this case, a noumenon

is not a particular intelligible object for our understanding; on the contrary,

the kind of understanding to which it could belong is itself a problem, for we

cannot form the most distant conception of the possibility of an

understanding which should cognize an object, not discursively by means of

categories, but intuitively in a non-sensuous intuition. Our understandingattains in this way a sort of negative extension. That is to say, it is not limited

by, but rather limits, sensibility, by giving the name of noumena to things, not

considered as phenomena, but as things in themselves. But it at the same time

prescribes limits to itself, for it confesses itself unable to cognize these by

means of the categories, and hence is compelled to cogitate them merely as

an unknown something.

              I find, however, in the writings of modern authors, an entirely

different use of the expressions, mundus sensibilis and intelligibilis, which

quite departs from the meaning of the ancients — an acceptation in which,

indeed, there is to be found no difficulty, but which at the same time depends

on mere verbal quibbling. According to this meaning, some have chosen to

call the complex of phenomena, in so far as it is intuited, mundus sensibilis,

but in so far as the connection thereof is cogitated according to general laws

of thought, mundus intelligibilis. Astronomy, in so far as we mean by the

word the mere observation of the starry heaven, may represent the former; a

system of astronomy, such as the Copernican or Newtonian, the latter. But

such twisting of words is a mere sophistical subterfuge, to avoid a difficult

question, by modifying its meaning to suit our own convenience. To be sure,

understanding and reason are employed in the cognition of phenomena; but

the question is, whether these can be applied when the object is not a

phenomenon and in this sense we regard it if it is cogitated as given to the

understanding alone, and not to the senses. The question therefore is whether,

over and above the empirical use of the understanding, a transcendental use is

possible, which applies to the noumenon as an object. This question we have

answered in the negative.

              When therefore we say, the senses represent objects as they appear,

the understanding as they are, the latter statement must not be understood in a

transcendental, but only in an empirical signification, that is, as they must be

represented in the complete connection of phenomena, and not according to

what they may be, apart from their relation to possible experience,

consequently not as objects of the pure understanding. For this must ever

remain unknown to us. Nay, it is also quite unknown to us whether any such

transcendental or extraordinary cognition is possible under any

circumstances, at least, whether it is possible by means of our categories.

Understanding and sensibility, with us, can determine objects only in

conjunction. If we separate them, we have intuitions without conceptions, orconceptions without intuitions; in both cases, representations, which we

cannot apply to any determinate object.

              If, after all our inquiries and explanations, any one still hesitates to

abandon the mere transcendental use of the categories, let him attempt to

construct with them a synthetical proposition. It would, of course, be

unnecessary for this purpose to construct an analytical proposition, for that

does not extend the sphere of the understanding, but, being concerned only

about what is cogitated in the conception itself, it leaves it quite undecided

whether the conception has any relation to objects, or merely indicates the

unity of thought — complete abstraction being made of the modi in which an

object may be given: in such a proposition, it is sufficient for the

understanding to know what lies in the conception — to what it applies is to

it indifferent. The attempt must therefore be made with a synthetical and so-

called transcendental principle, for example: “Everything that exists, exists as

substance,” or, “Everything that is contingent exists as an effect of some

other thing, viz., of its cause.” Now I ask, whence can the understanding

draw these synthetical propositions, when the conceptions contained therein

do not relate to possible experience but to things in themselves (noumena)?

Where is to be found the third term, which is always requisite PURE site in a

synthetical proposition, which may connect in the same proposition

conceptions which have no logical (analytical) connection with each other?

The proposition never will be demonstrated, nay, more, the possibility of any

such pure assertion never can be shown, without making reference to the

empirical use of the understanding, and thus, ipso facto, completely

renouncing pure and non-sensuous judgement. Thus the conception of pure

and merely intelligible objects is completely void of all principles of its

application, because we cannot imagine any mode in which they might be

given, and the problematical thought which leaves a place open for them

serves only, like a void space, to limit the use of empirical principles, without

containing at the same time any other object of cognition beyond their sphere.

 

 

                                       Appendix.

 

 

Of the Equivocal Nature or Amphiboly of the Conceptions of Reflection from

    the Confusion of the Transcendental with the Empirical use of the

                                      Understanding.

 

              Reflection (reflexio) is not occupied about objects themselves, for

the purpose of directly obtaining conceptions of them, but is that state of the

mind in which we set ourselves to discover the subjective conditions under

which we obtain conceptions. It is the consciousness of the relation of given

representations to the different sources or faculties of cognition, by which

alone their relation to each other can be rightly determined. The first question

which occurs in considering our representations is to what faculty of

cognition do they belong? To the understanding or to the senses? Many

judgements are admitted to be true from mere habit or inclination; but,

because reflection neither precedes nor follows, it is held to be a judgement

that has its origin in the understanding. All judgements do not require

examination, that is, investigation into the grounds of their truth. For, when

they are immediately certain (for example: “Between two points there can be

only one straight line”), no better or less mediate test of their truth can be

found than that which they themselves contain and express. But all

judgement, nay, all comparisons require reflection, that is, a distinction of the

faculty of cognition to which the given conceptions belong. The act whereby

I compare my representations with the faculty of cognition which originates

them, and whereby I distinguish whether they are compared with each other

as belonging to the pure understanding or to sensuous intuition, I term

transcendental reflection. Now, the relations in which conceptions can stand

to each other are those of identity and difference, agreement and opposition,

of the internal and external, finally, of the determinable and the determining

(matter and form). The proper determination of these relations rests on the

question, to what faculty of cognition they subjectively belong, whether to

sensibility or understanding? For, on the manner in which we solve this

question depends the manner in which we must cogitate these relations.

              Before constructing any objective judgement, we compare theconceptions that are to be placed in the judgement, and observe whether there

exists identity (of many representations in one conception), if a general

judgement is to be constructed, or difference, if a particular; whether there is

agreement when affirmative; and opposition when negative judgements are to

be constructed, and so on. For this reason we ought to call these conceptions,

conceptions of comparison (conceptus comparationis). But as, when the

question is not as to the logical form, but as to the content of conceptions,

that is to say, whether the things themselves are identical or different, in

agreement or opposition, and so on, the things can have a twofold relation to

our faculty of cognition, to wit, a relation either to sensibility or to the

understanding, and as on this relation depends their relation to each other,

transcendental reflection, that is, the relation of given representations to one

or the other faculty of cognition, can alone determine this latter relation. Thus

we shall not be able to discover whether the things are identical or different,

in agreement or opposition, etc., from the mere conception of the things by

means of comparison (comparatio), but only by distinguishing the mode of

cognition to which they belong, in other words, by means of transcendental

reflection. We may, therefore, with justice say, that logical reflection is mere

comparison, for in it no account is taken of the faculty of cognition to which

the given conceptions belong, and they are consequently, as far as regards

their origin, to be treated as homogeneous; while transcendental reflection

(which applies to the objects themselves) contains the ground of the

possibility of objective comparison of representations with each other, and is

therefore very different from the former, because the faculties of cognition to

which they belong are not even the same. Transcendental reflection is a duty

which no one can neglect who wishes to establish an a priori judgement upon

things. We shall now proceed to fulfil this duty, and thereby throw not a little

light on the question as to the determination of the proper business of the

understanding.

              1. Identity and Difference. When an object is presented to us several

times, but always with the same internal determinations (qualitas et

quantitas), it, if an object of pure understanding, is always the same, not

several things, but only one thing (numerica identitas); but if a phenomenon,

we do not concern ourselves with comparing the conception of the thing with

the conception of some other, but, although they may be in this respect

perfectly the same, the difference of place at the same time is a sufficient

ground for asserting the numerical difference of these objects (of sense).Thus, in the case of two drops of water, we may make complete abstraction

of all internal difference (quality and quantity), and, the fact that they are

intuited at the same time in different places, is sufficient to justify us in

holding them to be numerically different. Leibnitz regarded phenomena as

things in themselves, consequently as intelligibilia, that is, objects of pure

understanding (although, on account of the confused nature of their

representations, he gave them the name of phenomena), and in this case his

principle of the indiscernible (principium identatis indiscernibilium) is not to

be impugned. But, as phenomena are objects of sensibility, and, as the

understanding, in respect of them, must be employed empirically and not

purely or transcendentally, plurality and numerical difference are given by

space itself as the condition of external phenomena. For one part of space,

although it may be perfectly similar and equal to another part, is still without

it, and for this reason alone is different from the latter, which is added to it in

order to make up a greater space. It follows that this must hold good of all

things that are in the different parts of space at the same time, however

similar and equal one may be to another.

              2. Agreement and Opposition. When reality is represented by the

pure understanding (realitas noumenon), opposition between realities is

incogitable — such a relation, that is, that when these realities are connected

in one subject, they annihilate the effects of each other and may be

represented in the formula 3 — 3 = 0. On the other hand, the real in a

phenomenon (realitas phaenomenon) may very well be in mutual opposition,

and, when united in the same subject, the one may completely or in part

annihilate the effect or consequence of the other; as in the case of two moving

forces in the same straight line drawing or impelling a point in opposite

directions, or in the case of a pleasure counterbalancing a certain amount of

pain.

              3. The Internal and External. In an object of the pure understanding,

only that is internal which has no relation (as regards its existence) to

anything different from itself. On the other hand, the internal determinations

of a substantia phaenomenon in space are nothing but relations, and it is itself

nothing more than a complex of mere relations. Substance in space we are

cognizant of only through forces operative in it, either drawing others

towards itself (attraction), or preventing others from forcing into itself

(repulsion and impenetrability). We know no other properties that make upthe conception of substance phenomenal in space, and which we term matter.

On the other hand, as an object of the pure understanding, every substance

must have internal determination and forces. But what other internal

attributes of such an object can I think than those which my internal sense

presents to me? That, to wit, which in either itself thought, or something

analogous to it. Hence Leibnitz, who looked upon things as noumena, after

denying them everything like external relation, and therefore also

composition or combination, declared that all substances, even the

component parts of matter, were simple substances with powers of

representation, in one word, monads.

              4. Matter and Form. These two conceptions lie at the foundation of

all other reflection, so inseparably are they connected with every mode of

exercising the understanding. The former denotes the determinable in

general, the second its determination, both in a transcendental sense,

abstraction being made of every difference in that which is given, and of the

mode in which it is determined. Logicians formerly termed the universal,

matter, the specific difference of this or that part of the universal, form. In a

judgement one may call the given conceptions logical matter (for the

judgement), the relation of these to each other (by means of the copula), the

form of the judgement. In an object, the composite parts thereof (essentialia)

are the matter; the mode in which they are connected in the object, the form.

In respect to things in general, unlimited reality was regarded as the matter of

all possibility, the limitation thereof (negation) as the form, by which one

thing is distinguished from another according to transcendental conceptions.

The understanding demands that something be given (at least in the

conception), in order to be able to determine it in a certain manner. Hence, in

a conception of the pure understanding, the matter precedes the form, and for

this reason Leibnitz first assumed the existence of things (monads) and of an

internal power of representation in them, in order to found upon this their

external relation and the community their state (that is, of their

representations). Hence, with him, space and time were possible — the

former through the relation of substances, the latter through the connection of

their determinations with each other, as causes and effects. And so would it

really be, if the pure understanding were capable of an immediate application

to objects, and if space and time were determinations of things in themselves.

But being merely sensuous intuitions, in which we determine all objects

solely as phenomena, the form of intuition (as a subjective property ofsensibility) must antecede all matter (sensations), consequently space and

time must antecede all phenomena and all data of experience, and rather

make experience itself possible. But the intellectual philosopher could not

endure that the form should precede the things themselves and determine

their possibility; an objection perfectly correct, if we assume that we intuite

things as they are, although with confused representation. But as sensuous

intuition is a peculiar subjective condition, which is a priori at the foundation

of all perception, and the form of which is primitive, the form must be given

per se, and so far from matter (or the things themselves which appear) lying

at the foundation of experience (as we must conclude, if we judge by mere

conceptions), the very possibility of itself presupposes, on the contrary, a

given formal intuition (space and time).

        Remark on the Amphiboly of the Conceptions of Reflection.

 

              Let me be allowed to term the position which we assign to a

conception either in the sensibility or in the pure understanding, the

transcendental place. In this manner, the appointment of the position which

must be taken by each conception according to the difference in its use, and

the directions for determining this place to all conceptions according to rules,

would be a transcendental topic, a doctrine which would thoroughly shield us

from the surreptitious devices of the pure understanding and the delusions

which thence arise, as it would always distinguish to what faculty of

cognition each conception properly belonged. Every conception, every title,

under which many cognitions rank together, may be called a logical place.

Upon this is based the logical topic of Aristotle, of which teachers and

rhetoricians could avail themselves, in order, under certain titles of thought,

to observe what would best suit the matter they had to treat, and thus enable

themselves to quibble and talk with fluency and an appearance of profundity.

              Transcendental topic, on the contrary, contains nothing more than

the above-mentioned four titles of all comparison and distinction, which

differ from categories in this respect, that they do not represent the object

according to that which constitutes its conception (quantity, reality), but set

forth merely the comparison of representations, which precedes our

conceptions of things. But this comparison requires a previous reflection, that

is, a determination of the place to which the representations of the things

which are compared belong, whether, to wit, they are cogitated by the pureunderstanding, or given by sensibility.

              Conceptions may be logically compared without the trouble of

inquiring to what faculty their objects belong, whether as noumena, to the

understanding, or as phenomena, to sensibility. If, however, we wish to

employ these conceptions in respect of objects, previous transcendental

reflection is necessary. Without this reflection I should make a very unsafe

use of these conceptions, and construct pretended synthetical propositions

which critical reason cannot acknowledge and which are based solely upon a

transcendental amphiboly, that is, upon a substitution of an object of pure

understanding for a phenomenon.

              For want of this doctrine of transcendental topic, and consequently

deceived by the amphiboly of the conceptions of reflection, the celebrated

Leibnitz constructed an intellectual system of the world, or rather, believed

himself competent to cognize the internal nature of things, by comparing all

objects merely with the understanding and the abstract formal conceptions of

thought. Our table of the conceptions of reflection gives us the unexpected

advantage of being able to exhibit the distinctive peculiarities of his system in

all its parts, and at the same time of exposing the fundamental principle of

this peculiar mode of thought, which rested upon naught but a misconception.

He compared all things with each other merely by means of conceptions, and

naturally found no other differences than those by which the understanding

distinguishes its pure conceptions one from another. The conditions of

sensuous intuition, which contain in themselves their own means of

distinction, he did not look upon as primitive, because sensibility was to him

but a confused mode of representation and not any particular source of

representations. A phenomenon was for him the representation of the thing in

itself, although distinguished from cognition by the understanding only in

respect of the logical form — the former with its usual want of analysis

containing, according to him, a certain mixture of collateral representations in

its conception of a thing, which it is the duty of the understanding to separate

and distinguish. In one word, Leibnitz intellectualized phenomena, just as

Locke, in his system of noogony (if I may be allowed to make use of such

expressions), sensualized the conceptions of the understanding, that is to say,

declared them to be nothing more than empirical or abstract conceptions of

reflection. Instead of seeking in the understanding and sensibility two

different sources of representations, which, however, can present us withobjective judgements of things only in conjunction, each of these great men

recognized but one of these faculties, which, in their opinion, applied

immediately to things in themselves, the other having no duty but that of

confusing or arranging the representations of the former.

              Accordingly, the objects of sense were compared by Leibnitz as

things in general merely in the understanding.

              1st. He compares them in regard to their identity or difference- as

judged by the understanding. As, therefore, he considered merely the

conceptions of objects, and not their position in intuition, in which alone

objects can be given, and left quite out of sight the transcendental locale of

these conceptions — whether, that is, their object ought to be classed among

phenomena, or among things in themselves, it was to be expected that he

should extend the application of the principle of indiscernibles, which is valid

solely of conceptions of things in general, to objects of sense (mundus

phaenomenon), and that he should believe that he had thereby contributed in

no small degree to extend our knowledge of nature. In truth, if I cognize in all

its inner determinations a drop of water as a thing in itself, I cannot look upon

one drop as different from another, if the conception of the one is completely

identical with that of the other. But if it is a phenomenon in space, it has a

place not merely in the understanding (among conceptions), but also in

sensuous external intuition (in space), and in this case, the physical locale is a

matter of indifference in regard to the internal determinations of things, and

one place, B, may contain a thing which is perfectly similar and equal to

another in a place, A, just as well as if the two things were in every respect

different from each other. Difference of place without any other conditions,

makes the plurality and distinction of objects as phenomena, not only

possible in itself, but even necessary. Consequently, the above so-called law

is not a law of nature. It is merely an analytical rule for the comparison of

things by means of mere conceptions.

              2nd. The principle: “Realities (as simple affirmations) never

logically contradict each other,” is a proposition perfectly true respecting the

relation of conceptions, but, whether as regards nature, or things in

themselves (of which we have not the slightest conception), is without any

the least meaning. For real opposition, in which A— B is = 0, exists

everywhere, an opposition, that is, in which one reality united with another in

the same subject annihilates the effects of the other — a fact which isconstantly brought before our eyes by the different antagonistic actions and

operations in nature, which, nevertheless, as depending on real forces, must

be called realitates phaenomena. General mechanics can even present us with

the empirical condition of this opposition in an a priori rule, as it directs its

attention to the opposition in the direction of forces — a condition of which

the transcendental conception of reality can tell us nothing. Although M.

Leibnitz did not announce this proposition with precisely the pomp of a new

principle, he yet employed it for the establishment of new propositions, and

his followers introduced it into their Leibnitzio-Wolfian system of

philosophy. According to this principle, for example, all evils are but

consequences of the limited nature of created beings, that is, negations,

because these are the only opposite of reality. (In the mere conception of a

thing in general this is really the case, but not in things as phenomena.) In

like manner, the upholders of this system deem it not only possible, but

natural also, to connect and unite all reality in one being, because they

acknowledge no other sort of opposition than that of contradiction (by which

the conception itself of a thing is annihilated), and find themselves unable to

conceive an opposition of reciprocal destruction, so to speak, in which one

real cause destroys the effect of another, and the conditions of whose

representation we meet with only in sensibility.

              3rd. The Leibnitzian monadology has really no better foundation

than on this philosopher’s mode of falsely representing the difference of the

internal and external solely in relation to the understanding. Substances, in

general, must have something inward, which is therefore free from external

relations, consequently from that of composition also. The simple — that

which can be represented by a unit — is therefore the foundation of that

which is internal in things in themselves. The internal state of substances

cannot therefore consist in place, shape, contact, or motion, determinations

which are all external relations, and we can ascribe to them no other than that

whereby we internally determine our faculty of sense itself, that is to say, the

state of representation. Thus, then, were constructed the monads, which were

to form the elements of the universe, the active force of which consists in

representation, the effects of this force being thus entirely confined to

themselves.

              For the same reason, his view of the possible community of

substances could not represent it but as a predetermined harmony, and by nomeans as a physical influence. For inasmuch as everything is occupied only

internally, that is, with its own representations, the state of the representations

of one substance could not stand in active and living connection with that of

another, but some third cause operating on all without exception was

necessary to make the different states correspond with one another. And this

did not happen by means of assistance applied in each particular case

(systema assistentiae), but through the unity of the idea of a cause occupied

and connected with all substances, in which they necessarily receive,

according to the Leibnitzian school, their existence and permanence,

consequently also reciprocal correspondence, according to universal laws.

              4th. This philosopher’s celebrated doctrine of space and time, in

which he intellectualized these forms of sensibility, originated in the same

delusion of transcendental reflection. If I attempt to represent by the mere

understanding, the external relations of things, I can do so only by employing

the conception of their reciprocal action, and if I wish to connect one state of

the same thing with another state, I must avail myself of the notion of the

order of cause and effect. And thus Leibnitz regarded space as a certain order

in the community of substances, and time as the dynamical sequence of their

states. That which space and time possess proper to themselves and

independent of things, he ascribed to a necessary confusion in our

conceptions of them, whereby that which is a mere form of dynamical

relations is held to be a self-existent intuition, antecedent even to things

themselves. Thus space and time were the intelligible form of the connection

of things (substances and their states) in themselves. But things were

intelligible substances (substantiae noumena). At the same time, he made

these conceptions valid of phenomena, because he did not allow to sensibility

a peculiar mode of intuition, but sought all, even the empirical representation

of objects, in the understanding, and left to sense naught but the despicable

task of confusing and disarranging the representations of the former.

              But even if we could frame any synthetical proposition concerning

things in themselves by means of the pure understanding (which is

impossible), it could not apply to phenomena, which do not represent things

in themselves. In such a case I should be obliged in transcendental reflection

to compare my conceptions only under the conditions of sensibility, and so

space and time would not be determinations of things in themselves, but of

phenomena. What things may be in themselves, I know not and need notknow, because a thing is never presented to me otherwise than as a

phenomenon.

              I must adopt the same mode of procedure with the other conceptions

of reflection. Matter is substantia phaenomenon. That in it which is internal I

seek to discover in all parts of space which it occupies, and in all the

functions and operations it performs, and which are indeed never anything

but phenomena of the external sense. I cannot therefore find anything that is

absolutely, but only what is comparatively internal, and which itself consists

of external relations. The absolutely internal in matter, and as it should be

according to the pure understanding, is a mere chimera, for matter is not an

object for the pure understanding. But the transcendental object, which is the

foundation of the phenomenon which we call matter, is a mere nescio quid,

the nature of which we could not understand, even though someone were

found able to tell us. For we can understand nothing that does not bring with

it something in intuition corresponding to the expressions employed. If, by

the complaint of being unable to perceive the internal nature of things, it is

meant that we do not comprehend by the pure understanding what the things

which appear to us may be in themselves, it is a silly and unreasonable

complaint; for those who talk thus really desire that we should be able to

cognize, consequently to intuite, things without senses, and therefore wish

that we possessed a faculty of cognition perfectly different from the human

faculty, not merely in degree, but even as regards intuition and the mode

thereof, so that thus we should not be men, but belong to a class of beings,

the possibility of whose existence, much less their nature and constitution, we

have no means of cognizing. By observation and analysis of phenomena we

penetrate into the interior of nature, and no one can say what progress this

knowledge may make in time. But those transcendental questions which pass

beyond the limits of nature, we could never answer, even although all nature

were laid open to us, because we have not the power of observing our own

mind with any other intuition than that of our internal sense. For herein lies

the mystery of the origin and source of our faculty of sensibility. Its

application to an object, and the transcendental ground of this unity of

subjective and objective, lie too deeply concealed for us, who cognize

ourselves only through the internal sense, consequently as phenomena, to be

able to discover in our existence anything but phenomena, the non-sensuous

cause of which we at the same time earnestly desire to penetrate to.              The great utility of this critique of conclusions arrived at by the

processes of mere reflection consists in its clear demonstration of the nullity

of all conclusions respecting objects which are compared with each other in

the understanding alone, while it at the same time confirms what we

particularly insisted on, namely, that, although phenomena are not included

as things in themselves among the objects of the pure understanding, they are

nevertheless the only things by which our cognition can possess objective

reality, that is to say, which give us intuitions to correspond with our

conceptions.

              When we reflect in a purely logical manner, we do nothing more

than compare conceptions in our understanding, to discover whether both

have the same content, whether they are self-contradictory or not, whether

anything is contained in either conception, which of the two is given, and

which is merely a mode of thinking that given. But if I apply these

conceptions to an object in general (in the transcendental sense), without first

determining whether it is an object of sensuous or intellectual intuition,

certain limitations present themselves, which forbid us to pass beyond the

conceptions and render all empirical use of them impossible. And thus these

limitations prove that the representation of an object as a thing in general is

not only insufficient, but, without sensuous determination and independently

of empirical conditions, self-contradictory; that we must therefore make

abstraction of all objects, as in logic, or, admitting them, must think them

under conditions of sensuous intuition; that, consequently, the intelligible

requires an altogether peculiar intuition, which we do not possess, and in the

absence of which it is for us nothing; while, on the other hand phenomena

cannot be objects in themselves. For, when I merely think things in general,

the difference in their external relations cannot constitute a difference in the

things themselves; on the contrary, the former presupposes the latter, and if

the conception of one of two things is not internally different from that of the

other, I am merely thinking the same thing in different relations. Further, by

the addition of one affirmation (reality) to the other, the positive therein is

really augmented, and nothing is abstracted or withdrawn from it; hence the

real in things cannot be in contradiction with or opposition to itself — and so

on.

              The true use of the conceptions of reflection in the employment of

the understanding has, as we have shown, been so misconceived by Leibnitz,one of the most acute philosophers of either ancient or modern times, that he

has been misled into the construction of a baseless system of intellectual

cognition, which professes to determine its objects without the intervention of

the senses. For this reason, the exposition of the cause of the amphiboly of

these conceptions, as the origin of these false principles, is of great utility in

determining with certainty the proper limits of the understanding.

              It is right to say whatever is affirmed or denied of the whole of a

conception can be affirmed or denied of any part of it (dictum de omni et

nullo); but it would be absurd so to alter this logical proposition as to say

whatever is not contained in a general conception is likewise not contained in

the particular conceptions which rank under it; for the latter are particular

conceptions, for the very reason that their content is greater than that which is

cogitated in the general conception. And yet the whole intellectual system of

Leibnitz is based upon this false principle, and with it must necessarily fall to

the ground, together with all the ambiguous principles in reference to the

employment of the understanding which have thence originated.

              Leibnitz’s principle of the identity of indiscernibles or

indistinguishables is really based on the presupposition that, if in the

conception of a thing a certain distinction is not to be found, it is also not to

be met with in things themselves; that, consequently, all things are

completely identical (numero eadem) which are not distinguishable from

each other (as to quality or quantity) in our conceptions of them. But, as in

the mere conception of anything abstraction has been made of many

necessary conditions of intuition, that of which abstraction has been made is

rashly held to be non-existent, and nothing is attributed to the thing but what

is contained in its conception.

              The conception of a cubic foot of space, however I may think it, is in

itself completely identical. But two cubic feet in space are nevertheless

distinct from each other from the sole fact of their being in different places

(they are numero diversa); and these places are conditions of intuition,

wherein the object of this conception is given, and which do not belong to the

conception, but to the faculty of sensibility. In like manner, there is in the

conception of a thing no contradiction when a negative is not connected with

an affirmative; and merely affirmative conceptions cannot, in conjunction,

produce any negation. But in sensuous intuition, wherein reality (take for

example, motion) is given, we find conditions (opposite directions)— ofwhich abstraction has been made in the conception of motion in general —

which render possible a contradiction or opposition (not indeed of a logical

kind)— and which from pure positives produce zero = 0. We are therefore

not justified in saying that all reality is in perfect agreement and harmony,
                                                                          38
because no contradiction is discoverable among its conceptions. According

to mere conceptions, that which is internal is the substratum of all relations or

external determinations. When, therefore, I abstract all conditions of

intuition, and confine myself solely to the conception of a thing in general, I

can make abstraction of all external relations, and there must nevertheless

remain a conception of that which indicates no relation, but merely internal

determinations. Now it seems to follow that in everything (substance) there is

something which is absolutely internal and which antecedes all external

determinations, inasmuch as it renders them possible; and that therefore this

substratum is something which does not contain any external relations and is

consequently simple (for corporeal things are never anything but relations, at

least of their parts external to each other); and, inasmuch as we know of no

other absolutely internal determinations than those of the internal sense, this

substratum is not only simple, but also, analogously with our internal sense,

determined through representations, that is to say, all things are properly

monads, or simple beings endowed with the power of representation. Now all

this would be perfectly correct, if the conception of a thing were the only

necessary condition of the presentation of objects of external intuition. It is,

on the contrary, manifest that a permanent phenomenon in space

(impenetrable extension) can contain mere relations, and nothing that is

absolutely internal, and yet be the primary substratum of all external

perception. By mere conceptions I cannot think anything external, without, at

the same time, thinking something internal, for the reason that conceptions of

relations presuppose given things, and without these are impossible. But, as

an intuition there is something (that is, space, which, with all it contains,

consists of purely formal, or, indeed, real relations) which is not found in the

mere conception of a thing in general, and this presents to us the substratum

which could not be cognized through conceptions alone, I cannot say:

because a thing cannot be represented by mere conceptions without

something absolutely internal, there is also, in the things themselves which

are contained under these conceptions, and in their intuition nothing external

to which something absolutely internal does not serve as the foundation. For,

when we have made abstraction of all the conditions of intuition, therecertainly remains in the mere conception nothing but the internal in general,

through which alone the external is possible. But this necessity, which is

grounded upon abstraction alone, does not obtain in the case of things

themselves, in so far as they are given in intuition with such determinations

as express mere relations, without having anything internal as their

foundation; for they are not things of a thing of which we can neither for they

are not things in themselves, but only phenomena. What we cognize in matter

is nothing but relations (what we call its internal determinations are but

comparatively internal). But there are some self-subsistent and permanent,

through which a determined object is given. That I, when abstraction is made

of these relations, have nothing more to think, does not destroy the

conception of a thing as phenomenon, nor the conception of an object in

abstracto, but it does away with the possibility of an object that is

determinable according to mere conceptions, that is, of a noumenon. It is

certainly startling to hear that a thing consists solely of relations; but this

thing is simply a phenomenon, and cannot be cogitated by means of the mere

categories: it does itself consist in the mere relation of something in general

to the senses. In the same way, we cannot cogitate relations of things in

abstracto, if we commence with conceptions alone, in any other manner than

that one is the cause of determinations in the other; for that is itself the

conception of the understanding or category of relation. But, as in this case

we make abstraction of all intuition, we lose altogether the mode in which the

manifold determines to each of its parts its place, that is, the form of

sensibility (space); and yet this mode antecedes all empirical causality.

        38
               If any one wishes here to have recourse to the usual subterfuge,

and to say, that at least realitates noumena cannot be in opposition to each

other, it will be requisite for him to adduce an example of this pure and non-

sensuous reality, that it may be understood whether the notion represents

something or nothing. But an example cannot be found except in experience,

which never presents to us anything more than phenomena; and thus the

proposition means nothing more than that the conception which contains only

affirmatives does not contain anything negative — a proposition nobody ever

doubted.

              If by intelligible objects we understand things which can be thought

by means of the pure categories, without the need of the schemata of

sensibility, such objects are impossible. For the condition of the objective useof all our conceptions of understanding is the mode of our sensuous intuition,

whereby objects are given; and, if we make abstraction of the latter, the

former can have no relation to an object. And even if we should suppose a

different kind of intuition from our own, still our functions of thought would

have no use or signification in respect thereof. But if we understand by the

term, objects of a non-sensuous intuition, in respect of which our categories

are not valid, and of which we can accordingly have no knowledge (neither

intuition nor conception), in this merely negative sense noumena must be

admitted. For this is no more than saying that our mode of intuition is not

applicable to all things, but only to objects of our senses, that consequently its

objective validity is limited, and that room is therefore left for another kind of

intuition, and thus also for things that may be objects of it. But in this sense

the conception of a noumenon is problematical, that is to say, it is the notion

of that it that it is possible, nor that it is impossible, inasmuch as we do not

know of any mode of intuition besides the sensuous, or of any other sort of

conceptions than the categories — a mode of intuition and a kind of

conception neither of which is applicable to a non-sensuous object. We are on

this account incompetent to extend the sphere of our objects of thought

beyond the conditions of our sensibility, and to assume the existence of

objects of pure thought, that is, of noumena, inasmuch as these have no true

positive signification. For it must be confessed of the categories that they are

not of themselves sufficient for the cognition of things in themselves and,

without the data of sensibility, are mere subjective forms of the unity of the

understanding. Thought is certainly not a product of the senses, and in so far

is not limited by them, but it does not therefore follow that it may be

employed purely and without the intervention of sensibility, for it would then

be without reference to an object. And we cannot call a noumenon an object

of pure thought; for the representation thereof is but the problematical

conception of an object for a perfectly different intuition and a perfectly

different understanding from ours, both of which are consequently

themselves problematical. The conception of a noumenon is therefore not the

conception of an object, but merely a problematical conception inseparably

connected with the limitation of our sensibility. That is to say, this conception

contains the answer to the question: “Are there objects quite unconnected

with, and independent of, our intuition?”— a question to which only an

indeterminate answer can be given. That answer is: “Inasmuch as sensuous

intuition does not apply to all things without distinction, there remains roomfor other and different objects.” The existence of these problematical objects

is therefore not absolutely denied, in the absence of a determinate conception

of them, but, as no category is valid in respect of them, neither must they be

admitted as objects for our understanding.

              Understanding accordingly limits sensibility, without at the same

time enlarging its own field. While, moreover, it forbids sensibility to apply

its forms and modes to things in themselves and restricts it to the sphere of

phenomena, it cogitates an object in itself, only, however, as a transcendental

object, which is the cause of a phenomenon (consequently not itself a

phenomenon), and which cannot be thought either as a quantity or as reality,

or as substance (because these conceptions always require sensuous forms in

which to determine an object)— an object, therefore, of which we are quite

unable to say whether it can be met with in ourselves or out of us, whether it

would be annihilated together with sensibility, or, if this were taken away,

would continue to exist. If we wish to call this object a noumenon, because

the representation of it is non-sensuous, we are at liberty to do so. But as we

can apply to it none of the conceptions of our understanding, the

representation is for us quite void, and is available only for the indication of

the limits of our sensuous intuition, thereby leaving at the same time an

empty space, which we are competent to fill by the aid neither of possible

experience, nor of the pure understanding.

              The critique of the pure understanding, accordingly, does not permit

us to create for ourselves a new field of objects beyond those which are

presented to us as phenomena, and to stray into intelligible worlds; nay, it

does not even allow us to endeavour to form so much as a conception of

them. The specious error which leads to this — and which is a perfectly

excusable one — lies in the fact that the employment of the understanding,

contrary to its proper purpose and destination, is made transcendental, and

objects, that is, possible intuitions, are made to regulate themselves according

to conceptions, instead of the conceptions arranging themselves according to

the intuitions, on which alone their own objective validity rests. Now the

reason of this again is that apperception, and with it thought, antecedes all

possible determinate arrangement of representations. Accordingly we think

something in general and determine it on the one hand sensuously, but, on the

other, distinguish the general and in abstracto represented object from this

particular mode of intuiting it. In this case there remains a mode ofdetermining the object by mere thought, which is really but a logical form

without content, which, however, seems to us to be a mode of the existence

of the object in itself (noumenon), without regard to intuition which is limited

to our senses.

              Before ending this transcendental analytic, we must make an

addition, which, although in itself of no particular importance, seems to be

necessary to the completeness of the system. The highest conception, with

which a transcendental philosophy commonly begins, is the division into

possible and impossible. But as all division presupposes a divided

conception, a still higher one must exist, and this is the conception of an

object in general — problematically understood and without its being decided

whether it is something or nothing. As the categories are the only conceptions

which apply to objects in general, the distinguishing of an object, whether it

is something or nothing, must proceed according to the order and direction of

the categories.

              1. To the categories of quantity, that is, the conceptions of all, many,

and one, the conception which annihilates all, that is, the conception of none,

is opposed. And thus the object of a conception, to which no intuition can be

found to correspond, is = nothing. That is, it is a conception without an object

(ens rationis), like noumena, which cannot be considered possible in the

sphere of reality, though they must not therefore be held to be impossible —

or like certain new fundamental forces in matter, the existence of which is

cogitable without contradiction, though, as examples from experience are not

forthcoming, they must not be regarded as possible.

              2. Reality is something; negation is nothing, that is, a conception of

the absence of an object, as cold, a shadow (nihil privativum).

              3. The mere form of intuition, without substance, is in itself no

object, but the merely formal condition of an object (as phenomenon), as pure

space and pure time. These are certainly something, as forms of intuition, but

are not themselves objects which are intuited (ens imaginarium).

              4. The object of a conception which is self-contradictory, is nothing,

because the conception is nothing — is impossible, as a figure composed of

two straight lines (nihil negativum).

              The table of this division of the conception of nothing (thecorresponding division of the conception of something does not require

special description) must therefore be arranged as follows:

  NOTHING AS 1 As Empty Conception without object, ens rationis 2 3

Empty object of Empty intuition a conception, without object, nihil

privativum ens imaginarium 4 Empty object without conception, nihil

negativum                We see that the ens rationis is distinguished from the

nihil negativum or pure nothing by the consideration that the former must not

be reckoned among possibilities, because it is a mere fiction- though not self-

contradictory, while the latter is completely opposed to all possibility,

inasmuch as the conception annihilates itself. Both, however, are empty

conceptions. On the other hand, the nihil privativum and ens imaginarium are

empty data for conceptions. If light be not given to the senses, we cannot

represent to ourselves darkness, and if extended objects are not perceived, we

cannot represent space. Neither the negation, nor the mere form of intuition

can, without something real, be an object.

 

 

                                 Transcendental Logic.

                                  Second Division.

                              Transcendental Dialectic.

 

 

 

 

                                       Introduction.

 

 

                  I. Of Transcendental Illusory Appearance.

 

 

              We termed dialectic in general a logic of appearance. This does not

signify a doctrine of probability; for probability is truth, only cognized upon

insufficient grounds, and though the information it gives us is imperfect, it is

not therefore deceitful. Hence it must not be separated from the analytical

part of logic. Still less must phenomenon and appearance be held to be

identical. For truth or illusory appearance does not reside in the object, in so

far as it is intuited, but in the judgement upon the object, in so far as it is

thought. It is, therefore, quite correct to say that the senses do not err, not

because they always judge correctly, but because they do not judge at all.

Hence truth and error, consequently also, illusory appearance as the cause of

error, are only to be found in a judgement, that is, in the relation of an object

to our understanding. In a cognition which completely harmonizes with the

laws of the understanding, no error can exist. In a representation of the senses

— as not containing any judgement — there is also no error. But no power of

nature can of itself deviate from its own laws. Hence neither the

understanding per se (without the influence of another cause), nor the senses

per se, would fall into error; the former could not, because, if it acts only

according to its own laws, the effect (the judgement) must necessarily accord

with these laws. But in accordance with the laws of the understanding

consists the formal element in all truth. In the senses there is no judgement —

neither a true nor a false one. But, as we have no source of cognition besides

these two, it follows that error is caused solely by the unobserved influence

of the sensibility upon the understanding. And thus it happens that the

subjective grounds of a judgement and are confounded with the objective,
                                                                    39
and cause them to deviate from their proper determination, just as a body in

motion would always of itself proceed in a straight line, but if another

impetus gives to it a different direction, it will then start off into a curvilinear

line of motion. To distinguish the peculiar action of the understanding from

the power which mingles with it, it is necessary to consider an erroneousjudgement as the diagonal between two forces, that determine the judgement

in two different directions, which, as it were, form an angle, and to resolve

this composite operation into the simple ones of the understanding and the

sensibility. In pure a priori judgements this must be done by means of

transcendental reflection, whereby, as has been already shown, each

representation has its place appointed in the corresponding faculty of

cognition, and consequently the influence of the one faculty upon the other is

made apparent.

        39
               Sensibility, subjected to the understanding, as the object upon

which the understanding employs its functions, is the source of real

cognitions. But, in so far as it exercises an influence upon the action of the

understanding and determines it to judgement, sensibility is itself the cause of

error.

              It is not at present our business to treat of empirical illusory

appearance (for example, optical illusion), which occurs in the empirical

application of otherwise correct rules of the understanding, and in which the

judgement is misled by the influence of imagination. Our purpose is to speak

of transcendental illusory appearance, which influences principles — that are

not even applied to experience, for in this case we should possess a sure test

of their correctness — but which leads us, in disregard of all the warnings of

criticism, completely beyond the empirical employment of the categories and

deludes us with the chimera of an extension of the sphere of the pure

understanding. We shall term those principles the application of which is

confined entirely within the limits of possible experience, immanent; those,

on the other hand, which transgress these limits, we shall call transcendent

principles. But by these latter I do not understand principles of the

transcendental use or misuse of the categories, which is in reality a mere fault

of the judgement when not under due restraint from criticism, and therefore

not paying sufficient attention to the limits of the sphere in which the pure

understanding is allowed to exercise its functions; but real principles which

exhort us to break down all those barriers, and to lay claim to a perfectly new

field of cognition, which recognizes no line of demarcation. Thus

transcendental and transcendent are not identical terms. The principles of the

pure understanding, which we have already propounded, ought to be of

empirical and not of transcendental use, that is, they are not applicable to any

object beyond the sphere of experience. A principle which removes theselimits, nay, which authorizes us to overstep them, is called transcendent. If

our criticism can succeed in exposing the illusion in these pretended

principles, those which are limited in their employment to the sphere of

experience may be called, in opposition to the others, immanent principles of

the pure understanding.

              Logical illusion, which consists merely in the imitation of the form

of reason (the illusion in sophistical syllogisms), arises entirely from a want

of due attention to logical rules. So soon as the attention is awakened to the

case before us, this illusion totally disappears. Transcendental illusion, on the

contrary, does not cease to exist, even after it has been exposed, and its

nothingness clearly perceived by means of transcendental criticism. Take, for

example, the illusion in the proposition: “The world must have a beginning in

time.” The cause of this is as follows. In our reason, subjectively considered

as a faculty of human cognition, there exist fundamental rules and maxims of

its exercise, which have completely the appearance of objective principles.

Now from this cause it happens that the subjective necessity of a certain

connection of our conceptions, is regarded as an objective necessity of the

determination of things in themselves. This illusion it is impossible to avoid,

just as we cannot avoid perceiving that the sea appears to be higher at a

distance than it is near the shore, because we see the former by means of

higher rays than the latter, or, which is a still stronger case, as even the

astronomer cannot prevent himself from seeing the moon larger at its rising

than some time afterwards, although he is not deceived by this illusion.

              Transcendental dialectic will therefore content itself with exposing

the illusory appearance in transcendental judgements, and guarding us against

it; but to make it, as in the case of logical illusion, entirely disappear and

cease to be illusion is utterly beyond its power. For we have here to do with a

natural and unavoidable illusion, which rests upon subjective principles and

imposes these upon us as objective, while logical dialectic, in the detection of

sophisms, has to do merely with an error in the logical consequence of the

propositions, or with an artificially constructed illusion, in imitation of the

natural error. There is, therefore, a natural and unavoidable dialectic of pure

reason — not that in which the bungler, from want of the requisite

knowledge, involves himself, nor that which the sophist devises for the

purpose of misleading, but that which is an inseparable adjunct of human

reason, and which, even after its illusions have been exposed, does not ceaseto deceive, and continually to lead reason into momentary errors, which it

becomes necessary continually to remove.II. Of Pure Reason as the Seat of Transcendental Illusory Appearance.

 

 

                              A. Of Reason in General.

 

              All our knowledge begins with sense, proceeds thence to

understanding, and ends with reason, beyond which nothing higher can be

discovered in the human mind for elaborating the matter of intuition and

subjecting it to the highest unity of thought. At this stage of our inquiry it is

my duty to give an explanation of this, the highest faculty of cognition, and I

confess I find myself here in some difficulty. Of reason, as of the

understanding, there is a merely formal, that is, logical use, in which it makes

abstraction of all content of cognition; but there is also a real use, inasmuch

as it contains in itself the source of certain conceptions and principles, which

it does not borrow either from the senses or the understanding. The former

faculty has been long defined by logicians as the faculty of mediate

conclusion in contradistinction to immediate conclusions (consequentiae

immediatae); but the nature of the latter, which itself generates conceptions,

is not to be understood from this definition. Now as a division of reason into

a logical and a transcendental faculty presents itself here, it becomes

necessary to seek for a higher conception of this source of cognition which

shall comprehend both conceptions. In this we may expect, according to the

analogy of the conceptions of the understanding, that the logical conception

will give us the key to the transcendental, and that the table of the functions

of the former will present us with the clue to the conceptions of reason.

              In the former part of our transcendental logic, we defined the

understanding to be the faculty of rules; reason may be distinguished from

understanding as the faculty of principles.

              The term principle is ambiguous, and commonly signifies merely a

cognition that may be employed as a principle, although it is not in itself, and

as regards its proper origin, entitled to the distinction. Every general

proposition, even if derived from experience by the process of induction, may

serve as the major in a syllogism; but it is not for that reason a principle.

Mathematical axioms (for example, there can be only one straight linebetween two points) are general a priori cognitions, and are therefore rightly

denominated principles, relatively to the cases which can be subsumed under

them. But I cannot for this reason say that I cognize this property of a straight

line from principles — I cognize it only in pure intuition.

              Cognition from principles, then, is that cognition in which I cognize

the particular in the general by means of conceptions. Thus every syllogism is

a form of the deduction of a cognition from a principle. For the major always

gives a conception, through which everything that is subsumed under the

condition thereof is cognized according to a principle. Now as every general

cognition may serve as the major in a syllogism, and the understanding

presents us with such general a priori propositions, they may be termed

principles, in respect of their possible use.

              But if we consider these principles of the pure understanding in

relation to their origin, we shall find them to be anything rather than

cognitions from conceptions. For they would not even be possible a priori, if

we could not rely on the assistance of pure intuition (in mathematics), or on

that of the conditions of a possible experience. That everything that happens

has a cause, cannot be concluded from the general conception of that which

happens; on the contrary the principle of causality instructs us as to the mode

of obtaining from that which happens a determinate empirical conception.

              Synthetical cognitions from conceptions the understanding cannot

supply, and they alone are entitled to be called principles. At the same time,

all general propositions may be termed comparative principles.

              It has been a long-cherished wish — that (who knows how late),

may one day, be happily accomplished — that the principles of the endless

variety of civil laws should be investigated and exposed; for in this way alone

can we find the secret of simplifying legislation. But in this case, laws are

nothing more than limitations of our freedom upon conditions under which it

subsists in perfect harmony with itself; they consequently have for their

object that which is completely our own work, and of which we ourselves

may be the cause by means of these conceptions. But how objects as things in

themselves- how the nature of things is subordinated to principles and is to be

determined. according to conceptions, is a question which it seems well nigh

impossible to answer. Be this, however, as it may — for on this point our

investigation is yet to be made — it is at least manifest from what we havesaid that cognition from principles is something very different from cognition

by means of the understanding, which may indeed precede other cognitions

in the form of a principle, but in itself — in so far as it is synthetical — is

neither based upon mere thought, nor contains a general proposition drawn

from conceptions alone shall comprehend

              The understanding may be a faculty for the production of unity of

phenomena by virtue of rules; the reason is a faculty for the production of

unity of rules (of the understanding) under principles. Reason, therefore,

never applies directly to experience, or to any sensuous object; its object is,

on the contrary, the understanding, to the manifold cognition of which it

gives a unity a priori by means of conceptions — a unity which may be called

rational unity, and which is of a nature very different from that of the unity

produced by the understanding.

              The above is the general conception of the faculty of reason, in so

far as it has been possible to make it comprehensible in the absence of

examples. These will be given in the sequel.

                        B. Of the Logical Use of Reason.

 

              A distinction is commonly made between that which is immediately

cognized and that which is inferred or concluded. That in a figure which is

bounded by three straight lines there are three angles, is an immediate

cognition; but that these angles are together equal to two right angles, is an

inference or conclusion. Now, as we are constantly employing this mode of

thought and have thus become quite accustomed to it, we no longer remark

the above distinction, and, as in the case of the so-called deceptions of sense,

consider as immediately perceived, what has really been inferred. In every

reasoning or syllogism, there is a fundamental proposition, afterwards a

second drawn from it, and finally the conclusion, which connects the truth in

the first with the truth in the second — and that infallibly. If the judgement

concluded is so contained in the first proposition that it can be deduced from

it without the meditation of a third notion, the conclusion is called immediate

(consequentia immediata); I prefer the term conclusion of the understanding.

But if, in addition to the fundamental cognition, a second judgement is

necessary for the production of the conclusion, it is called a conclusion of the

reason. In the proposition: All men are mortal, are contained the propositions:

Some men are mortal, Nothing that is not mortal is a man, and these aretherefore immediate conclusions from the first. On the other hand, the

proposition: all the learned are mortal, is not contained in the main

proposition (for the conception of a learned man does not occur in it), and it

can be deduced from the main proposition only by means of a mediating

judgement.

              In every syllogism I first cogitate a rule (the major) by means of the

understanding. In the next place I subsume a cognition under the condition of

the rule (and this is the minor) by means of the judgement. And finally I

determine my cognition by means of the predicate of the rule (this is the

conclusio), consequently, I determine it a priori by means of the reason. The

relations, therefore, which the major proposition, as the rule, represents

between a cognition and its condition, constitute the different kinds of

syllogisms. These are just threefold — analogously with all judgements, in so

far as they differ in the mode of expressing the relation of a cognition in the

understanding — namely, categorical, hypothetical, and disjunctive.

              When as often happens, the conclusion is a judgement which may

follow from other given judgements, through which a perfectly different

object is cogitated, I endeavour to discover in the understanding whether the

assertion in this conclusion does not stand under certain conditions according

to a general rule. If I find such a condition, and if the object mentioned in the

conclusion can be subsumed under the given condition, then this conclusion

follows from a rule which is also valid for other objects of cognition. From

this we see that reason endeavours to subject the great variety of the

cognitions of the understanding to the smallest possible number of principles

(general conditions), and thus to produce in it the highest unity.

                          C. Of the Pure Use of Reason.

 

              Can we isolate reason, and, if so, is it in this case a peculiar source

of conceptions and judgements which spring from it alone, and through

which it can be applied to objects; or is it merely a subordinate faculty, whose

duty it is to give a certain form to given cognitions — a form which is called

logical, and through which the cognitions of the understanding are

subordinated to each other, and lower rules to higher (those, to wit, whose

condition comprises in its sphere the condition of the others), in so far as this

can be done by comparison? This is the question which we have at present to

answer. Manifold variety of rules and unity of principles is a requirement ofreason, for the purpose of bringing the understanding into complete

accordance with itself, just as understanding subjects the manifold content of

intuition to conceptions, and thereby introduces connection into it. But this

principle prescribes no law to objects, and does not contain any ground of the

possibility of cognizing or of determining them as such, but is merely a

subjective law for the proper arrangement of the content of the

understanding. The purpose of this law is, by a comparison of the

conceptions of the understanding, to reduce them to the smallest possible

number, although, at the same time, it does not justify us in demanding from

objects themselves such a uniformity as might contribute to the convenience

and the enlargement of the sphere of the understanding, or in expecting that it

will itself thus receive from them objective validity. In one word, the

question is: “does reason in itself, that is, does pure reason contain a priori

synthetical principles and rules, and what are those principles?”

              The formal and logical procedure of reason in syllogisms gives us

sufficient information in regard to the ground on which the transcendental

principle of reason in its pure synthetical cognition will rest.

              1. Reason, as observed in the syllogistic process, is not applicable to

intuitions, for the purpose of subjecting them to rules — for this is the

province of the understanding with its categories — but to conceptions and

judgements. If pure reason does apply to objects and the intuition of them, it

does so not immediately, but mediately- through the understanding and its

judgements, which have a direct relation to the senses and their intuition, for

the purpose of determining their objects. The unity of reason is therefore not

the unity of a possible experience, but is essentially different from this unity,

which is that of the understanding. That everything which happens has a

cause, is not a principle cognized and prescribed by reason. This principle

makes the unity of experience possible and borrows nothing from reason,

which, without a reference to possible experience, could never have produced

by means of mere conceptions any such synthetical unity.

              2. Reason, in its logical use, endeavours to discover the general

condition of its judgement (the conclusion), and a syllogism is itself nothing

but a judgement by means of the subsumption of its condition under a general

rule (the major). Now as this rule may itself be subjected to the same process

of reason, and thus the condition of the condition be sought (by means of a

prosyllogism) as long as the process can be continued, it is very manifest thatthe peculiar principle of reason in its logical use is to find for the conditioned

cognition of the understanding the unconditioned whereby the unity of the

former is completed.

              But this logical maxim cannot be a principle of pure reason, unless

we admit that, if the conditioned is given, the whole series of conditions

subordinated to one another — a series which is consequently itself

unconditioned — is also given, that is, contained in the object and its

connection.

              But this principle of pure reason is evidently synthetical; for,

analytically, the conditioned certainly relates to some condition, but not to the

unconditioned. From this principle also there must originate different

synthetical propositions, of which the pure understanding is perfectly

ignorant, for it has to do only with objects of a possible experience, the

cognition and synthesis of which is always conditioned. The unconditioned,

if it does really exist, must be especially considered in regard to the

determinations which distinguish it from whatever is conditioned, and will

thus afford us material for many a priori synthetical propositions.

              The principles resulting from this highest principle of pure reason

will, however, be transcendent in relation to phenomena, that is to say, it will

be impossible to make any adequate empirical use of this principle. It is

therefore completely different from all principles of the understanding, the

use made of which is entirely immanent, their object and purpose being

merely the possibility of experience. Now our duty in the transcendental

dialectic is as follows. To discover whether the principle that the series of

conditions (in the synthesis of phenomena, or of thought in general) extends

to the unconditioned is objectively true, or not; what consequences result

therefrom affecting the empirical use of the understanding, or rather whether

there exists any such objectively valid proposition of reason, and whether it is

not, on the contrary, a merely logical precept which directs us to ascend

perpetually to still higher conditions, to approach completeness in the series

of them, and thus to introduce into our cognition the highest possible unity of

reason. We must ascertain, I say, whether this requirement of reason has not

been regarded, by a misunderstanding, as a transcendental principle of pure

reason, which postulates a thorough completeness in the series of conditions

in objects themselves. We must show, moreover, the misconceptions and

illusions that intrude into syllogisms, the major proposition of which purereason has supplied — a proposition which has perhaps more of the character

of a petitio than of a postulatum — and that proceed from experience

upwards to its conditions. The solution of these problems is our task in

transcendental dialectic, which we are about to expose even at its source, that

lies deep in human reason. We shall divide it into two parts, the first of which

will treat of the transcendent conceptions of pure reason, the second of

transcendent and dialectical syllogisms.

 

 

                 Book I. – Of the Conceptions of Pure Reason.

 

 

              The conceptions of pure reason — we do not here speak of the

possibility of them — are not obtained by reflection, but by inference or

conclusion. The conceptions of understanding are also cogitated a priori

antecedently to experience, and render it possible; but they contain nothing

but the unity of reflection upon phenomena, in so far as these must

necessarily belong to a possible empirical consciousness. Through them

alone are cognition and the determination of an object possible. It is from

them, accordingly, that we receive material for reasoning, and antecedently to

them we possess no a priori conceptions of objects from which they might be

deduced, On the other hand, the sole basis of their objective reality consists in

the necessity imposed on them, as containing the intellectual form of all

experience, of restricting their application and influence to the sphere of

experience.

              But the term, conception of reason, or rational conception, itself

indicates that it does not confine itself within the limits of experience,

because its object-matter is a cognition, of which every empirical cognition is

but a part — nay, the whole of possible experience may be itself but a part of

it — a cognition to which no actual experience ever fully attains, although it

does always pertain to it. The aim of rational conceptions is the

comprehension, as that of the conceptions of understanding is the

understanding of perceptions. If they contain the unconditioned, they relate to

that to which all experience is subordinate, but which is never itself an object

of experience — that towards which reason tends in all its conclusions from

experience, and by the standard of which it estimates the degree of their

empirical use, but which is never itself an element in an empirical synthesis.

If, notwithstanding, such conceptions possess objective validity, they may be

called conceptus ratiocinati (conceptions legitimately concluded); in cases

where they do not, they have been admitted on account of having the

appearance of being correctly concluded, and may be called conceptus

ratiocinantes (sophistical conceptions). But as this can only be sufficiently

demonstrated in that part of our treatise which relates to the dialectical

conclusions of reason, we shall omit any consideration of it in this place. Aswe called the pure conceptions of the understanding categories, we shall also

distinguish those of pure reason by a new name and call them transcendental

ideas. These terms, however, we must in the first place explain and justify.

                           Section I. Of Ideas in General.

 

 

              Despite the great wealth of words which European languages

possess, the thinker finds himself often at a loss for an expression exactly

suited to his conception, for want of which he is unable to make himself

intelligible either to others or to himself. To coin new words is a pretension to

legislation in language which is seldom successful; and, before recourse is

taken to so desperate an expedient, it is advisable to examine the dead and

learned languages, with the hope and the probability that we may there meet

with some adequate expression of the notion we have in our minds. In this

case, even if the original meaning of the word has become somewhat

uncertain, from carelessness or want of caution on the part of the authors of

it, it is always better to adhere to and confirm its proper meaning — even

although it may be doubtful whether it was formerly used in exactly this

sense — than to make our labour vain by want of sufficient care to render

ourselves intelligible.

              For this reason, when it happens that there exists only a single word

to express a certain conception, and this word, in its usual acceptation, is

thoroughly adequate to the conception, the accurate distinction of which from

related conceptions is of great importance, we ought not to employ the

expression improvidently, or, for the sake of variety and elegance of style,

use it as a synonym for other cognate words. It is our duty, on the contrary,

carefully to preserve its peculiar signification, as otherwise it easily happens

that when the attention of the reader is no longer particularly attracted to the

expression, and it is lost amid the multitude of other words of very different

import, the thought which it conveyed, and which it alone conveyed, is lost

with it.

              Plato employed the expression idea in a way that plainly showed he

meant by it something which is never derived from the senses, but which far

transcends even the conceptions of the understanding (with which Aristotle

occupied himself), inasmuch as in experience nothing perfectly

corresponding to them could be found. Ideas are, according to him,

archetypes of things themselves, and not merely keys to possible experiences,like the categories. In his view they flow from the highest reason, by which

they have been imparted to human reason, which, however, exists no longer

in its original state, but is obliged with great labour to recall by reminiscence

— which is called philosophy — the old but now sadly obscured ideas. I will

not here enter upon any literary investigation of the sense which this sublime

philosopher attached to this expression. I shall content myself with remarking

that it is nothing unusual, in common conversation as well as in written

works, by comparing the thoughts which an author has delivered upon a

subject, to understand him better than he understood himself inasmuch as he

may not have sufficiently determined his conception, and thus have

sometimes spoken, nay even thought, in opposition to his own opinions.

              Plato perceived very clearly that our faculty of cognition has the

feeling of a much higher vocation than that of merely spelling out phenomena

according to synthetical unity, for the purpose of being able to read them as

experience, and that our reason naturally raises itself to cognitions far too

elevated to admit of the possibility of an object given by experience

corresponding to them- cognitions which are nevertheless real, and are not

mere phantoms of the brain.

                                                                                      40
              This philosopher found his ideas especially in all that is practical,

that is, which rests upon freedom, which in its turn ranks under cognitions

that are the peculiar product of reason. He who would derive from experience

the conceptions of virtue, who would make (as many have really done) that,

which at best can but serve as an imperfectly illustrative example, a model for

or the formation of a perfectly adequate idea on the subject, would in fact

transform virtue into a nonentity changeable according to time and

circumstance and utterly incapable of being employed as a rule. On the

contrary, every one is conscious that, when any one is held up to him as a

model of virtue, he compares this so-called model with the true original

which he possesses in his own mind and values him according to this

standard. But this standard is the idea of virtue, in relation to which all

possible objects of experience are indeed serviceable as examples — proofs

of the practicability in a certain degree of that which the conception of virtue

demands — but certainly not as archetypes. That the actions of man will

never be in perfect accordance with all the requirements of the pure ideas of

reason, does not prove the thought to be chimerical. For only through this

idea are all judgements as to moral merit or demerit possible; it consequentlylies at the foundation of every approach to moral perfection, however far

removed from it the obstacles in human nature- indeterminable as to degree

— may keep us.

        40
               He certainly extended the application of his conception to

speculative cognitions also, provided they were given pure and completely a

priori, nay, even to mathematics, although this science cannot possess an

object otherwhere than in Possible experience. I cannot follow him in this,

and as little can I follow him in his mystical deduction of these ideas, or in

his hypostatization of them; although, in truth, the elevated and exaggerated

language which he employed in describing them is quite capable of an

interpretation more subdued and more in accordance with fact and the nature

of things.

              The Platonic Republic has become proverbial as an example — and

a striking one — of imaginary perfection, such as can exist only in the brain

of the idle thinker; and Brucker ridicules the philosopher for maintaining that

a prince can never govern well, unless he is participant in the ideas. But we

should do better to follow up this thought and, where this admirable thinker

leaves us without assistance, employ new efforts to place it in clearer light,

rather than carelessly fling it aside as useless, under the very miserable and

pernicious pretext of impracticability. A constitution of the greatest possible

human freedom according to laws, by which the liberty of every individual

can consist with the liberty of every other (not of the greatest possible

happiness, for this follows necessarily from the former), is, to say the least, a

necessary idea, which must be placed at the foundation not only of the first

plan of the constitution of a state, but of all its laws. And, in this, it not

necessary at the outset to take account of the obstacles which lie in our way

— obstacles which perhaps do not necessarily arise from the character of

human nature, but rather from the previous neglect of true ideas in

legislation. For there is nothing more pernicious and more unworthy of a

philosopher, than the vulgar appeal to a so-called adverse experience, which

indeed would not have existed, if those institutions had been established at

the proper time and in accordance with ideas; while, instead of this,

conceptions, crude for the very reason that they have been drawn from

experience, have marred and frustrated all our better views and intentions.

The more legislation and government are in harmony with this idea, the more

rare do punishments become and thus it is quite reasonable to maintain, asPlato did, that in a perfect state no punishments at all would be necessary.

Now although a perfect state may never exist, the idea is not on that account

the less just, which holds up this maximum as the archetype or standard of a

constitution, in order to bring legislative government always nearer and

nearer to the greatest possible perfection. For at what precise degree human

nature must stop in its progress, and how wide must be the chasm which must

necessarily exist between the idea and its realization, are problems which no

one can or ought to determine- and for this reason, that it is the destination of

freedom to overstep all assigned limits between itself and the idea.

              But not only in that wherein human reason is a real causal agent and

where ideas are operative causes (of actions and their objects), that is to say,

in the region of ethics, but also in regard to nature herself, Plato saw clear

proofs of an origin from ideas. A plant, and animal, the regular order of

nature — probably also the disposition of the whole universe — give

manifest evidence that they are possible only by means of and according to

ideas; that, indeed, no one creature, under the individual conditions of its

existence, perfectly harmonizes with the idea of the most perfect of its kind-

just as little as man with the idea of humanity, which nevertheless he bears in

his soul as the archetypal standard of his actions; that, notwithstanding, these

ideas are in the highest sense individually, unchangeably, and completely

determined, and are the original causes of things; and that the totality of

connected objects in the universe is alone fully adequate to that idea. Setting

aside the exaggerations of expression in the writings of this philosopher, the

mental power exhibited in this ascent from the ectypal mode of regarding the

physical world to the architectonic connection thereof according to ends, that

is, ideas, is an effort which deserves imitation and claims respect. But as

regards the principles of ethics, of legislation, and of religion, spheres in

which ideas alone render experience possible, although they never attain to

full expression therein, he has vindicated for himself a position of peculiar

merit, which is not appreciated only because it is judged by the very

empirical rules, the validity of which as principles is destroyed by ideas. For

as regards nature, experience presents us with rules and is the source of truth,

but in relation to ethical laws experience is the parent of illusion, and it is in

the highest degree reprehensible to limit or to deduce the laws which dictate

what I ought to do, from what is done.

              We must, however, omit the consideration of these importantsubjects, the development of which is in reality the peculiar duty and dignity

of philosophy, and confine ourselves for the present to the more humble but

not less useful task of preparing a firm foundation for those majestic edifices

of moral science. For this foundation has been hitherto insecure from the

many subterranean passages which reason in its confident but vain search for

treasures has made in all directions. Our present duty is to make ourselves

perfectly acquainted with the transcendental use made of pure reason, its

principles and ideas, that we may be able properly to determine and value its

influence and real worth. But before bringing these introductory remarks to a

close, I beg those who really have philosophy at heart — and their number is

but small — if they shall find themselves convinced by the considerations

following as well as by those above, to exert themselves to preserve to the

expression idea its original signification, and to take care that it be not lost

among those other expressions by which all sorts of representations are

loosely designated — that the interests of science may not thereby suffer. We

are in no want of words to denominate adequately every mode of

representation, without the necessity of encroaching upon terms which are

proper to others. The following is a graduated list of them. The genus is

representation in general (representation. Under it stands representation with

consciousness (perceptio). A perception which relates solely to the subject as

a modification of its state, is a sensation (sensatio), an objective perception is

a cognition (cognitio). A cognition is either an intuition or a conception

(intuitus vel conceptus). The former has an immediate relation to the object

and is singular and individual; the latter has but a mediate relation, by means

of a characteristic mark which may be common to several things. A

conception is either empirical or pure. A pure conception, in so far as it has

its origin in the understanding alone, and is not the conception of a pure

sensuous image, is called notio. A conception formed from notions, which

transcends the possibility of experience, is an idea, or a conception of reason.

To one who has accustomed himself to these distinctions, it must be quite

intolerable to hear the representation of the colour red called an idea. It ought

not even to be called a notion or conception of understanding.                      Section II. Of Transcendental Ideas.

 

 

              Transcendental analytic showed us how the mere logical form of our

cognition can contain the origin of pure conceptions a priori, conceptions

which represent objects antecedently to all experience, or rather, indicate the

synthetical unity which alone renders possible an empirical cognition of

objects. The form of judgements — converted into a conception of the

synthesis of intuitions — produced the categories which direct the

employment of the understanding in experience. This consideration warrants

us to expect that the form of syllogisms, when applied to synthetical unity of

intuitions, following the rule of the categories, will contain the origin of

particular a priori conceptions, which we may call pure conceptions of reason

or transcendental ideas, and which will determine the use of the

understanding in the totality of experience according to principles.

              The function of reason in arguments consists in the universality of a

cognition according to conceptions, and the syllogism itself is a judgement

which is determined a priori in the whole extent of its condition. The

proposition: “Caius is mortal,” is one which may be obtained from

experience by the aid of the understanding alone; but my wish is to find a

conception which contains the condition under which the predicate of this

judgement is given — in this case, the conception of man — and after

subsuming under this condition, taken in its whole extent (all men are

mortal), I determine according to it the cognition of the object thought, and

say: “Caius is mortal.”

              Hence, in the conclusion of a syllogism we restrict a predicate to a

certain object, after having thought it in the major in its whole extent under a

certain condition. This complete quantity of the extent in relation to such a

condition is called universality (universalitas). To this corresponds totality

(universitas) of conditions in the synthesis of intuitions. The transcendental

conception of reason is therefore nothing else than the conception of the

totality of the conditions of a given conditioned. Now as the unconditioned

alone renders possible totality of conditions, and, conversely, the totality of

conditions is itself always unconditioned; a pure rational conception ingeneral can be defined and explained by means of the conception of the

unconditioned, in so far as it contains a basis for the synthesis of the

conditioned.

              To the number of modes of relation which the understanding

cogitates by means of the categories, the number of pure rational conceptions

will correspond. We must therefore seek for, first, an unconditioned of the

categorical synthesis in a subject; secondly, of the hypothetical synthesis of

the members of a series; thirdly, of the disjunctive synthesis of parts in a

system.

              There are exactly the same number of modes of syllogisms, each of

which proceeds through prosyllogisms to the unconditioned — one to the

subject which cannot be employed as predicate, another to the presupposition

which supposes nothing higher than itself, and the third to an aggregate of the

members of the complete division of a conception. Hence the pure rational

conceptions of totality in the synthesis of conditions have a necessary

foundation in the nature of human reason — at least as modes of elevating

the unity of the understanding to the unconditioned. They may have no valid

application, corresponding to their transcendental employment, in concreto,

and be thus of no greater utility than to direct the understanding how, while

extending them as widely as possible, to maintain its exercise and application

in perfect consistence and harmony.

              But, while speaking here of the totality of conditions and of the

unconditioned as the common title of all conceptions of reason, we again

light upon an expression which we find it impossible to dispense with, and

which nevertheless, owing to the ambiguity attaching to it from long abuse,

we cannot employ with safety. The word absolute is one of the few words

which, in its original signification, was perfectly adequate to the conception it

was intended to convey — a conception which no other word in the same

language exactly suits, and the loss — or, which is the same thing, the

incautious and loose employment — of which must be followed by the loss

of the conception itself. And, as it is a conception which occupies much of

the attention of reason, its loss would be greatly to the detriment of all

transcendental philosophy. The word absolute is at present frequently used to

denote that something can be predicated of a thing considered in itself and

intrinsically. In this sense absolutely possible would signify that which is

possible in itself (interne)- which is, in fact, the least that one can predicate ofan object. On the other hand, it is sometimes employed to indicate that a

thing is valid in all respects — for example, absolute sovereignty. Absolutely

possible would in this sense signify that which is possible in all relations and

in every respect; and this is the most that can be predicated of the possibility

of a thing. Now these significations do in truth frequently coincide. Thus, for

example, that which is intrinsically impossible, is also impossible in all

relations, that is, absolutely impossible. But in most cases they differ from

each other toto caelo, and I can by no means conclude that, because a thing is

in itself possible, it is also possible in all relations, and therefore absolutely.

Nay, more, I shall in the sequel show that absolute necessity does not by any

means depend on internal necessity, and that, therefore, it must not be

considered as synonymous with it. Of an opposite which is intrinsically

impossible, we may affirm that it is in all respects impossible, and that,

consequently, the thing itself, of which this is the opposite, is absolutely

necessary; but I cannot reason conversely and say, the opposite of that which

is absolutely necessary is intrinsically impossible, that is, that the absolute

necessity of things is an internal necessity. For this internal necessity is in

certain cases a mere empty word with which the least conception cannot be

connected, while the conception of the necessity of a thing in all relations

possesses very peculiar determinations. Now as the loss of a conception of

great utility in speculative science cannot be a matter of indifference to the

philosopher, I trust that the proper determination and careful preservation of

the expression on which the conception depends will likewise be not

indifferent to him.

              In this enlarged signification, then, shall I employ the word absolute,

in opposition to that which is valid only in some particular respect; for the

latter is restricted by conditions, the former is valid without any restriction

whatever.

              Now the transcendental conception of reason has for its object

nothing else than absolute totality in the synthesis of conditions and does not

rest satisfied till it has attained to the absolutely, that is, in all respects and

relations, unconditioned. For pure reason leaves to the understanding

everything that immediately relates to the object of intuition or rather to their

synthesis in imagination. The former restricts itself to the absolute totality in

the employment of the conceptions of the understanding and aims at carrying

out the synthetical unity which is cogitated in the category, even to theunconditioned. This unity may hence be called the rational unity of

phenomena, as the other, which the category expresses, may be termed the

unity of the understanding. Reason, therefore, has an immediate relation to

the use of the understanding, not indeed in so far as the latter contains the

ground of possible experience (for the conception of the absolute totality of

conditions is not a conception that can be employed in experience, because

no experience is unconditioned), but solely for the purpose of directing it to a

certain unity, of which the understanding has no conception, and the aim of

which is to collect into an absolute whole all acts of the understanding. Hence

the objective employment of the pure conceptions of reason is always

transcendent, while that of the pure conceptions of the understanding must,

according to their nature, be always immanent, inasmuch as they are limited

to possible experience.

              I understand by idea a necessary conception of reason, to which no

corresponding object can be discovered in the world of sense. Accordingly,

the pure conceptions of reason at present under consideration are

transcendental ideas. They are conceptions of pure reason, for they regard all

empirical cognition as determined by means of an absolute totality of

conditions. They are not mere fictions, but natural and necessary products of

reason, and have hence a necessary relation to the whole sphere of the

exercise of the understanding. And, finally, they are transcendent, and

overstep the limits of all experiences, in which, consequently, no object can

ever be presented that would be perfectly adequate to a transcendental idea.

When we use the word idea, we say, as regards its object (an object of the

pure understanding), a great deal, but as regards its subject (that is, in respect

of its reality under conditions of experience), exceedingly little, because the

idea, as the conception of a maximum, can never be completely and

adequately presented in concreto. Now, as in the merely speculative

employment of reason the latter is properly the sole aim, and as in this case

the approximation to a conception, which is never attained in practice, is the

same thing as if the conception were non-existent — it is commonly said of

the conception of this kind, “it is only an idea.” So we might very well say,

“the absolute totality of all phenomena is only an idea,” for, as we never can

present an adequate representation of it, it remains for us a problem incapable

of solution. On the other hand, as in the practical use of the understanding we

have only to do with action and practice according to rules, an idea of pure

reason can always be given really in concreto, although only partially, nay, itis the indispensable condition of all practical employment of reason. The

practice or execution of the idea is always limited and defective, but

nevertheless within indeterminable boundaries, consequently always under

the influence of the conception of an absolute perfection. And thus the

practical idea is always in the highest degree fruitful, and in relation to real

actions indispensably necessary. In the idea, pure reason possesses even

causality and the power of producing that which its conception contains.

Hence we cannot say of wisdom, in a disparaging way, “it is only an idea.”

For, for the very reason that it is the idea of the necessary unity of all possible

aims, it must be for all practical exertions and endeavours the primitive

condition and rule — a rule which, if not constitutive, is at least limitative.

              Now, although we must say of the transcendental conceptions of

reason, “they are only ideas,” we must not, on this account, look upon them

as superfluous and nugatory. For, although no object can be determined by

them, they can be of great utility, unobserved and at the basis of the edifice of

the understanding, as the canon for its extended and self-consistent exercise

— a canon which, indeed, does not enable it to cognize more in an object

than it would cognize by the help of its own conceptions, but which guides it

more securely in its cognition. Not to mention that they perhaps render

possible a transition from our conceptions of nature and the non-ego to the

practical conceptions, and thus produce for even ethical ideas keeping, so to

speak, and connection with the speculative cognitions of reason. The

explication of all this must be looked for in the sequel.

              But setting aside, in conformity with our original purpose, the

consideration of the practical ideas, we proceed to contemplate reason in its

speculative use alone, nay, in a still more restricted sphere, to wit, in the

transcendental use; and here must strike into the same path which we

followed in our deduction of the categories. That is to say, we shall consider

the logical form of the cognition of reason, that we may see whether reason

may not be thereby a source of conceptions which enables us to regard

objects in themselves as determined synthetically a priori, in relation to one

or other of the functions of reason.

              Reason, considered as the faculty of a certain logical form of

cognition, is the faculty of conclusion, that is, of mediate judgement — by

means of the subsumption of the condition of a possible judgement under the

condition of a given judgement. The given judgement is the general rule(major). The subsumption of the condition of another possible judgement

under the condition of the rule is the minor. The actual judgement, which

enounces the assertion of the rule in the subsumed case, is the conclusion

(conclusio). The rule predicates something generally under a certain

condition. The condition of the rule is satisfied in some particular case. It

follows that what was valid in general under that condition must also be

considered as valid in the particular case which satisfies this condition. It is

very plain that reason attains to a cognition, by means of acts of the

understanding which constitute a series of conditions. When I arrive at the

proposition, “All bodies are changeable,” by beginning with the more remote

cognition (in which the conception of body does not appear, but which

nevertheless contains the condition of that conception), “All compound is

changeable,” by proceeding from this to a less remote cognition, which

stands under the condition of the former, “Bodies are compound,” and hence

to a third, which at length connects for me the remote cognition (changeable)

with the one before me, “Consequently, bodies are changeable”— I have

arrived at a cognition (conclusion) through a series of conditions (premisses).

Now every series, whose exponent (of the categorical or hypothetical

judgement) is given, can be continued; consequently the same procedure of

reason conducts us to the ratiocinatio polysyllogistica, which is a series of

syllogisms, that can be continued either on the side of the conditions (per

prosyllogismos) or of the conditioned (per episyllogismos) to an indefinite

extent.

              But we very soon perceive that the chain or series of prosyllogisms,

that is, of deduced cognitions on the side of the grounds or conditions of a

given cognition, in other words, the ascending series of syllogisms must have

a very different relation to the faculty of reason from that of the descending

series, that is, the progressive procedure of reason on the side of the

conditioned by means of episyllogisms. For, as in the former case the

cognition (conclusio) is given only as conditioned, reason can attain to this

cognition only under the presupposition that all the members of the series on

the side of the conditions are given (totality in the series of premisses),

because only under this supposition is the judgement we may be considering

possible a priori; while on the side of the conditioned or the inferences, only

an incomplete and becoming, and not a presupposed or given series,

consequently only a potential progression, is cogitated. Hence, when a

cognition is contemplated as conditioned, reason is compelled to consider theseries of conditions in an ascending line as completed and given in their

totality. But if the very same condition is considered at the same time as the

condition of other cognitions, which together constitute a series of inferences

or consequences in a descending line, reason may preserve a perfect

indifference, as to how far this progression may extend a parte posteriori, and

whether the totality of this series is possible, because it stands in no need of

such a series for the purpose of arriving at the conclusion before it, inasmuch

as this conclusion is sufficiently guaranteed and determined on grounds a

parte priori. It may be the case, that upon the side of the conditions the series

of premisses has a first or highest condition, or it may not possess this, and so

be a parte priori unlimited; but it must, nevertheless, contain totality of

conditions, even admitting that we never could succeed in completely

apprehending it; and the whole series must be unconditionally true, if the

conditioned, which is considered as an inference resulting from it, is to be

held as true. This is a requirement of reason, which announces its cognition

as determined a priori and as necessary, either in itself — and in this case it

needs no grounds to rest upon — or, if it is deduced, as a member of a series

of grounds, which is itself unconditionally true.                Section III. System of Transcendental Ideas.

 

 

              We are not at present engaged with a logical dialectic, which makes

complete abstraction of the content of cognition and aims only at unveiling

the illusory appearance in the form of syllogisms. Our subject is

transcendental dialectic, which must contain, completely a priori, the origin

of certain cognitions drawn from pure reason, and the origin of certain

deduced conceptions, the object of which cannot be given empirically and

which therefore lie beyond the sphere of the faculty of understanding. We

have observed, from the natural relation which the transcendental use of our

cognition, in syllogisms as well as in judgements, must have to the logical,

that there are three kinds of dialectical arguments, corresponding to the three

modes of conclusion, by which reason attains to cognitions on principles; and

that in all it is the business of reason to ascend from the conditioned

synthesis, beyond which the understanding never proceeds, to the

unconditioned which the understanding never can reach.

              Now the most general relations which can exist in our

representations are: 1st, the relation to the subject; 2nd, the relation to

objects, either as phenomena, or as objects of thought in general. If we

connect this subdivision with the main division, all the relations of our

representations, of which we can form either a conception or an idea, are

threefold: 1. The relation to the subject; 2. The relation to the manifold of the

object as a phenomenon; 3. The relation to all things in general.

              Now all pure conceptions have to do in general with the synthetical

unity of representations; conceptions of pure reason (transcendental ideas),

on the other hand, with the unconditional synthetical unity of all conditions.

It follows that all transcendental ideas arrange themselves in three classes, the

first of which contains the absolute (unconditioned) unity of the thinking

subject, the second the absolute unity of the series of the conditions of a

phenomenon, the third the absolute unity of the condition of all objects of

thought in general.

              The thinking subject is the object-matter of Psychology; the sum

total of all phenomena (the world) is the object-matter of Cosmology; and thething which contains the highest condition of the possibility of all that is

cogitable (the being of all beings) is the object-matter of all Theology. Thus

pure reason presents us with the idea of a transcendental doctrine of the soul

(psychologia rationalis), of a transcendental science of the world (cosmologia

rationalis), and finally of a transcendental doctrine of God (theologia

transcendentalis). Understanding cannot originate even the outline of any of

these sciences, even when connected with the highest logical use of reason,

that is, all cogitable syllogisms- for the purpose of proceeding from one

object (phenomenon) to all others, even to the utmost limits of the empirical

synthesis. They are, on the contrary, pure and genuine products, or problems,

of pure reason.

              What modi of the pure conceptions of reason these transcendental

ideas are will be fully exposed in the following chapter. They follow the

guiding thread of the categories. For pure reason never relates immediately to

objects, but to the conceptions of these contained in the understanding. In like

manner, it will be made manifest in the detailed explanation of these ideas —

how reason, merely through the synthetical use of the same function which it

employs in a categorical syllogism, necessarily attains to the conception of

the absolute unity of the thinking subject — how the logical procedure in

hypothetical ideas necessarily produces the idea of the absolutely

unconditioned in a series of given conditions, and finally — how the mere

form of the disjunctive syllogism involves the highest conception of a being

of all beings: a thought which at first sight seems in the highest degree

paradoxical.

              An objective deduction, such as we were able to present in the case

of the categories, is impossible as regards these transcendental ideas. For they

have, in truth, no relation to any object, in experience, for the very reason that

they are only ideas. But a subjective deduction of them from the nature of our

reason is possible, and has been given in the present chapter.

              It is easy to perceive that the sole aim of pure reason is the absolute

totality of the synthesis on the side of the conditions, and that it does not

concern itself with the absolute completeness on the Part of the conditioned.

For of the former alone does she stand in need, in order to preposit the whole

series of conditions, and thus present them to the understanding a priori. But

if we once have a completely (and unconditionally) given condition, there is

no further necessity, in proceeding with the series, for a conception of reason;for the understanding takes of itself every step downward, from the condition

to the conditioned. Thus the transcendental ideas are available only for

ascending in the series of conditions, till we reach the unconditioned, that is,

principles. As regards descending to the conditioned, on the other hand, we

find that there is a widely extensive logical use which reason makes of the

laws of the understanding, but that a transcendental use thereof is impossible;

and that when we form an idea of the absolute totality of such a synthesis, for

example, of the whole series of all future changes in the world, this idea is a

mere ens rationis, an arbitrary fiction of thought, and not a necessary

presupposition of reason. For the possibility of the conditioned presupposes

the totality of its conditions, but not of its consequences. Consequently, this

conception is not a transcendental idea — and it is with these alone that we

are at present occupied.

              Finally, it is obvious that there exists among the transcendental ideas

a certain connection and unity, and that pure reason, by means of them,

collects all its cognitions into one system. From the cognition of self to the

cognition of the world, and through these to the supreme being, the

progression is so natural, that it seems to resemble the logical march of
                                                    41
reason from the premisses to the conclusion. Now whether there lies

unobserved at the foundation of these ideas an analogy of the same kind as

exists between the logical and transcendental procedure of reason, is another

of those questions, the answer to which we must not expect till we arrive at a

more advanced stage in our inquiries. In this cursory and preliminary view,

we have, meanwhile, reached our aim. For we have dispelled the ambiguity

which attached to the transcendental conceptions of reason, from their being

commonly mixed up with other conceptions in the systems of philosophers,

and not properly distinguished from the conceptions of the understanding; we

have exposed their origin and, thereby, at the same time their determinate

number, and presented them in a systematic connection, and have thus

marked out and enclosed a definite sphere for pure reason.

        41
               The science of Metaphysics has for the proper object of its

inquiries only three grand ideas: GOD, FREEDOM, and IMMORTALITY,

and it aims at showing, that the second conception, conjoined with the first,

must lead to the third, as a necessary conclusion. All the other subjects with

which it occupies itself, are merely means for the attainment and realization

of these ideas. It does not require these ideas for the construction of a scienceof nature, but, on the contrary, for the purpose of passing beyond the sphere

of nature. A complete insight into and comprehension of them would render

Theology, Ethics, and, through the conjunction of both, Religion, solely

dependent on the speculative faculty of reason. In a systematic representation

of these ideas the above-mentioned arrangement — the synthetical one —

would be the most suitable; but in the investigation which must necessarily

precede it, the analytical, which reverses this arrangement, would be better

adapted to our purpose, as in it we should proceed from that which

experience immediately presents to us — psychology, to cosmology, and

thence to theology.

 

 

           Book II. – Of the Dialectical Procedure of Pure Reason.

 

 

              It may be said that the object of a merely transcendental idea is

something of which we have no conception, although the idea may be a

necessary product of reason according to its original laws. For, in fact, a

conception of an object that is adequate to the idea given by reason, is

impossible. For such an object must be capable of being presented and

intuited in a Possible experience. But we should express our meaning better,

and with less risk of being misunderstood, if we said that we can have no

knowledge of an object, which perfectly corresponds to an idea, although we

may possess a problematical conception thereof.

              Now the transcendental (subjective) reality at least of the pure

conceptions of reason rests upon the fact that we are led to such ideas by a

necessary procedure of reason. There must therefore be syllogisms which

contain no empirical premisses, and by means of which we conclude from

something that we do know, to something of which we do not even possess a

conception, to which we, nevertheless, by an unavoidable illusion, ascribe

objective reality. Such arguments are, as regards their result, rather to be

termed sophisms than syllogisms, although indeed, as regards their origin,

they are very well entitled to the latter name, inasmuch as they are not

fictions or accidental products of reason, but are necessitated by its very

nature. They are sophisms, not of men, but of pure reason herself, from which

the Wisest cannot free himself. After long labour he may be able to guard

against the error, but he can never be thoroughly rid of the illusion which

continually mocks and misleads him.

              Of these dialectical arguments there are three kinds, corresponding

to the number of the ideas which their conclusions present. In the argument

or syllogism of the first class, I conclude, from the transcendental conception

of the subject contains no manifold, the absolute unity of the subject itself, of

which I cannot in this manner attain to a conception. This dialectical

argument I shall call the transcendental paralogism. The second class of

sophistical arguments is occupied with the transcendental conception of the

absolute totality of the series of conditions for a given phenomenon, and Iconclude, from the fact that I have always a self-contradictory conception of

the unconditioned synthetical unity of the series upon one side, the truth of

the opposite unity, of which I have nevertheless no conception. The condition

of reason in these dialectical arguments, I shall term the antinomy of pure

reason. Finally, according to the third kind of sophistical argument, I

conclude, from the totality of the conditions of thinking objects in general, in

so far as they can be given, the absolute synthetical unity of all conditions of

the possibility of things in general; that is, from things which I do not know

in their mere transcendental conception, I conclude a being of all beings

which I know still less by means of a transcendental conception, and of

whose unconditioned necessity I can form no conception whatever. This

dialectical argument I shall call the ideal of pure reason.

 

                Chapter I. Of the Paralogisms of Pure Reason.

 

 

              The logical paralogism consists in the falsity of an argument in

respect of its form, be the content what it may. But a transcendental

paralogism has a transcendental foundation, and concludes falsely, while the

form is correct and unexceptionable. In this manner the paralogism has its

foundation in the nature of human reason, and is the parent of an

unavoidable, though not insoluble, mental illusion.

              We now come to a conception which was not inserted in the general

list of transcendental conceptions. and yet must be reckoned with them, but at

the same time without in the least altering, or indicating a deficiency in that

table. This is the conception, or, if the term is preferred, the judgement, “I

think.” But it is readily perceived that this thought is as it were the vehicle of

all conceptions in general, and consequently of transcendental conceptions

also, and that it is therefore regarded as a transcendental conception, although

it can have no peculiar claim to be so ranked, inasmuch as its only use is to

indicate that all thought is accompanied by consciousness. At the same time,

pure as this conception is from empirical content (impressions of the senses),

it enables us to distinguish two different kinds of objects. “I,” as thinking, am

an object of the internal sense, and am called soul. That which is an object of

the external senses is called body. Thus the expression, “I,” as a thinkingbeing, designates the object-matter of psychology, which may be called “the

rational doctrine of the soul,” inasmuch as in this science I desire to know

nothing of the soul but what, independently of all experience (which

determines me in concreto), may be concluded from this conception “I,” in so

far as it appears in all thought.

              Now, the rational doctrine of the soul is really an undertaking of this

kind. For if the smallest empirical element of thought, if any particular

perception of my internal state, were to be introduced among the grounds of

cognition of this science, it would not be a rational, but an empirical doctrine

of the soul. We have thus before us a pretended science, raised upon the

single proposition, “I think,” whose foundation or want of foundation we may

very properly, and agreeably with the nature of a transcendental philosophy,

here examine. It ought not to be objected that in this proposition, which

expresses the perception of one’s self, an internal experience is asserted, and

that consequently the rational doctrine of the soul which is founded upon it, is

not pure, but partly founded upon an empirical principle. For this internal

perception is nothing more than the mere apperception, “I think,” which in

fact renders all transcendental conceptions possible, in which we say, “I think

substance, cause, etc.” For internal experience in general and its possibility,

or perception in general, and its relation to other perceptions, unless some

particular distinction or determination thereof is empirically given, cannot be

regarded as empirical cognition, but as cognition of the empirical, and

belongs to the investigation of the possibility of every experience, which is

certainly transcendental. The smallest object of experience (for example, only

pleasure or pain), that should be included in the general representation of

self-consciousness, would immediately change the rational into an empirical

psychology.

              “I think” is therefore the only text of rational psychology, from

which it must develop its whole system. It is manifest that this thought, when

applied to an object (myself), can contain nothing but transcendental

predicates thereof; because the least empirical predicate would destroy the

purity of the science and its independence of all experience.

              But we shall have to follow here the guidance of the categories-

only, as in the present case a thing, “I,” as thinking being, is at first given, we

shall — not indeed change the order of the categories as it stands in the table

— but begin at the category of substance, by which at the a thing a thing isrepresented and proceeds backwards through the series. The topic of the

rational doctrine of the soul, from which everything else it may contain must

be deduced, is accordingly as follows:

  1 2 The Soul is SUBSTANCE As regards its quality it is SIMPLE 3 As

regards the different times in which it exists, it is numerically identical, that is
                                                                              42
UNITY, not Plurality. 4 It is in relation to possible objects in space   
        42
               The reader, who may not so easily perceive the psychological

sense of these expressions, taken here in their transcendental abstraction, and

cannot guess why the latter attribute of the soul belongs to the category of

existence, will find the expressions sufficiently explained and justified in the

sequel. I have, moreover, to apologize for the Latin terms which have been

employed,instead of their German synonyms, contrary to the rules of correct

writing. But I judged it better to sacrifice elegance to perspicuity.

              From these elements originate all the conceptions of pure

psychology, by combination alone, without the aid of any other principle.

This substance, merely as an object of the internal sense, gives the conception

of Immateriality; as simple substance, that of Incorruptibility; its identity, as

intellectual substance, gives the conception of Personality; all these three

together, Spirituality. Its relation to objects in space gives us the conception

of connection (commercium) with bodies. Thus it represents thinking

substance as the principle of life in matter, that is, as a soul (anima), and as

the ground of Animality; and this, limited and determined by the conception

of spirituality, gives us that of Immortality.

              Now to these conceptions relate four paralogisms of a transcendental

psychology, which is falsely held to be a science of pure reason. touching the

nature of our thinking being. We can, however, lay at the foundation of this

science nothing but the simple and in itself perfectly contentless

representation “I which cannot even be called a conception, but merely a

consciousness which accompanies all conceptions. By this “I,” or “He,” or

“It,” who or which thinks, nothing more is represented than a transcendental

subject of thought = x, which is cognized only by means of the thoughts that

are its predicates, and of which, apart from these, we cannot form the least

conception. Hence in a perpetual circle, inasmuch as we must always employ

it, in order to frame any judgement respecting it. And this inconvenience we

find it impossible to rid ourselves of, because consciousness in itself is not so

much a representation distinguishing a particular object, as a form ofrepresentation in general, in so far as it may be termed cognition; for in and

by cognition alone do I think anything.

              It must, however, appear extraordinary at first sight that the

condition under which I think, and which is consequently a property of my

subject, should be held to be likewise valid for every existence which thinks,

and that we can presume to base upon a seemingly empirical proposition a

judgement which is apodeictic and universal, to wit, that everything which

thinks is constituted as the voice of my consciousness declares it to be, that

is, as a self-conscious being. The cause of this belief is to be found in the fact

that we necessarily attribute to things a priori all the properties which

constitute conditions under which alone we can cogitate them. Now I cannot

obtain the least representation of a thinking being by means of external

experience, but solely through self-consciousness. Such objects are

consequently nothing more than the transference of this consciousness of

mine to other things which can only thus be represented as thinking beings.

The proposition, “I think,” is, in the present case, understood in a

problematical sense, not in so far as it contains a perception of an existence
                                              43
(like the Cartesian “Cogito, ergo sum”), but in regard to its mere possibility

— for the purpose of discovering what properties may be inferred from so

simple a proposition and predicated of the subject of it.

        43
               [”I think, therefore I am.”]

              If at the foundation of our pure rational cognition of thinking beings

there lay more than the mere Cogito — if we could likewise call in aid

observations on the play of our thoughts, and the thence derived natural laws

of the thinking self, there would arise an empirical psychology which would

be a kind of physiology of the internal sense and might possibly be capable of

explaining the phenomena of that sense. But it could never be available for

discovering those properties which do not belong to possible experience

(such as the quality of simplicity), nor could it make any apodeictic

enunciation on the nature of thinking beings: it would therefore not be a

rational psychology.

              Now, as the proposition “I think” (in the problematical sense)

contains the form of every judgement in general and is the constant

accompaniment of all the categories, it is manifest that conclusions are drawn

from it only by a transcendental employment of the understanding. This useof the understanding excludes all empirical elements; and we cannot, as has

been shown above, have any favourable conception beforehand of its

procedure. We shall therefore follow with a critical eye this proposition

through all the predicaments of pure psychology; but we shall, for brevity’s

sake, allow this examination to proceed in an uninterrupted connection.

              Before entering on this task, however, the following general remark

may help to quicken our attention to this mode of argument. It is not merely

through my thinking that I cognize an object, but only through my

determining a given intuition in relation to the unity of consciousness in

which all thinking consists. It follows that I cognize myself, not through my

being conscious of myself as thinking, but only when I am conscious of the

intuition of myself as determined in relation to the function of thought. All

the modi of self-consciousness in thought are hence not conceptions of

objects (conceptions of the understanding — categories); they are mere

logical functions, which do not present to thought an object to be cognized,

and cannot therefore present my Self as an object. Not the consciousness of

the determining, but only that of the determinable self, that is, of my internal

intuition (in so far as the manifold contained in it can be connected

conformably with the general condition of the unity of apperception in

thought), is the object.

              1. In all judgements I am the determining subject of that relation

which constitutes a judgement. But that the I which thinks, must be

considered as in thought always a subject, and as a thing which cannot be a

predicate to thought, is an apodeictic and identical proposition. But this

proposition does not signify that I, as an object, am, for myself, a self-

subsistent being or substance. This latter statement- an ambitious one —

requires to be supported by data which are not to be discovered in thought;

and are perhaps (in so far as I consider the thinking self merely as such) not

to be discovered in the thinking self at all.

              2. That the I or Ego of apperception, and consequently in all thought,

is singular or simple, an;3 cannot be resolved into a plurality of subjects, and

therefore indicates a logically simple subject — this is self-evident from the

very conception of an Ego, and is consequently an analytical proposition. But

this is not tantamount to declaring that the thinking Ego is a simple

substance- for this would be a synthetical proposition. The conception of

substance always relates to intuitions, which with me cannot be other thansensuous, and which consequently lie completely out of the sphere of the

understanding and its thought: but to this sphere belongs the affirmation that

the Ego is simple in thought. It would indeed be surprising, if the conception

of “substance,” which in other cases requires so much labour to distinguish

from the other elements presented by intuition — so much trouble, too, to

discover whether it can be simple (as in the case of the parts of matter)—

should be presented immediately to me, as if by revelation, in the poorest

mental representation of all.

              3. The proposition of the identity of my Self amidst all the manifold

representations of which I am conscious, is likewise a proposition lying in the

conceptions themselves, and is consequently analytical. But this identity of

the subject, of which I am conscious in all its representations, does not relate

to or concern the intuition of the subject, by which it is given as an object.

This proposition cannot therefore enounce the identity of the person, by

which is understood the consciousness of the identity of its own substance as

a thinking being in all change and variation of circumstances. To prove this,

we should require not a mere analysis of the proposition, but synthetical

judgements based upon a given intuition.

              4. I distinguish my own existence, as that of a thinking being, from

that of other things external to me — among which my body also is reckoned.

This is also an analytical proposition, for other things are exactly those which

I think as different or distinguished from myself. But whether this

consciousness of myself is possible without things external to me; and

whether therefore I can exist merely as a thinking being (without being man)

— cannot be known or inferred from this proposition.

              Thus we have gained nothing as regards the cognition of myself as

object, by the analysis of the consciousness of my Self in thought. The logical

exposition of thought in general is mistaken for a metaphysical determination

of the object.

              Our Critique would be an investigation utterly superfluous, if there

existed a possibility of proving a priori, that all thinking beings are in

themselves simple substances, as such, therefore, possess the inseparable

attribute of personality, and are conscious of their existence apart from and

unconnected with matter. For we should thus have taken a step beyond the

world of sense, and have penetrated into the sphere of noumena; and in thiscase the right could not be denied us of extending our knowledge in this

sphere, of establishing ourselves, and, under a favouring star, appropriating to

ourselves possessions in it. For the proposition: “Every thinking being, as

such, is simple substance,” is an a priori synthetical proposition; because in

the first place it goes beyond the conception which is the subject of it, and

adds to the mere notion of a thinking being the mode of its existence, and in

the second place annexes a predicate (that of simplicity) to the latter

conception — a predicate which it could not have discovered in the sphere of

experience. It would follow that a priori synthetical propositions are possible

and legitimate, not only, as we have maintained, in relation to objects of

possible experience, and as principles of the possibility of this experience

itself, but are applicable to things in themselves — an inference which makes

an end of the whole of this Critique, and obliges us to fall back on the old

mode of metaphysical procedure. But indeed the danger is not so great, if we

look a little closer into the question.

              There lurks in the procedure of rational Psychology a paralogism,

which is represented in the following syllogism:

              That which cannot be cogitated otherwise than as subject, does not

exist otherwise than as subject, and is therefore substance.

              A thinking being, considered merely as such, cannot be cogitated

otherwise than as subject.

              Therefore it exists also as such, that is, as substance.

              In the major we speak of a being that can be cogitated generally and

in every relation, consequently as it may be given in intuition. But in the

minor we speak of the same being only in so far as it regards itself as subject,

relatively to thought and the unity of consciousness, but not in relation to

intuition, by which it is presented as an object to thought. Thus the
                                                                        44
conclusion is here arrived at by a Sophisma figurae dictionis.

        44
               Thought is taken in the two premisses in two totally different

senses. In the major it is considered as relating and applying to objects in

general, consequently to objects of intuition also. In the minor, we understand

it as relating merely to self-consciousness. In this sense, we do not cogitate an

object, but merely the relation to the self-consciousness of the subject, as the

form of thought. In the former premiss we speak of things which cannot becogitated otherwise than as subjects. In the second, we do not speak of things,

but of thought all objects being abstracted), in which the Ego is always the

subject of consciousness. Hence the conclusion cannot be, “I cannot exist

otherwise than as subject”; but only “I can, in cogitating my existence,

employ my Ego only as the subject of the judgement.” But this is an identical

proposition, and throws no light on the mode of my existence.

              That this famous argument is a mere paralogism, will be plain to any

one who will consider the general remark which precedes our exposition of

the principles of the pure understanding, and the section on noumena. For it

was there proved that the conception of a thing, which can exist per se —

only as a subject and never as a predicate, possesses no objective reality; that

is to say, we can never know whether there exists any object to correspond to

the conception; consequently, the conception is nothing more than a

conception, and from it we derive no proper knowledge. If this conception is

to indicate by the term substance, an object that can be given, if it is to

become a cognition, we must have at the foundation of the cognition a

permanent intuition, as the indispensable condition of its objective reality.

For through intuition alone can an object be given. But in internal intuition

there is nothing permanent, for the Ego is but the consciousness of my

thought. If then, we appeal merely to thought, we cannot discover the

necessary condition of the application of the conception of substance — that

is, of a subject existing per se- to the subject as a thinking being. And thus the

conception of the simple nature of substance, which is connected with the

objective reality of this conception, is shown to be also invalid, and to be, in

fact, nothing more than the logical qualitative unity of self-consciousness in

thought; whilst we remain perfectly ignorant whether the subject is composite

or not.

    Refutation of the Argument of Mendelssohn for the Substantiality or

                              Permanence of the Soul.

 

              This acute philosopher easily perceived the insufficiency of the

common argument which attempts to prove that the soul — it being granted

that it is a simple being — cannot perish by dissolution or decomposition; he

saw it is not impossible for it to cease to be by extinction, or disappearance.

He endeavoured to prove in his Phaedo, that the soul cannot be annihilated,

by showing that a simple being cannot cease to exist. Inasmuch as, be said, asimple existence cannot diminish, nor gradually lose portions of its being,

and thus be by degrees reduced to nothing (for it possesses no parts, and

therefore no multiplicity), between the moment in which it is, and the

moment in which it is not, no time can be discovered — which is impossible.

But this philosopher did not consider that, granting the soul to possess this

simple nature, which contains no parts external to each other and

consequently no extensive quantity, we cannot refuse to it any less than to

any other being, intensive quantity, that is, a degree of reality in regard to all

its faculties, nay, to all that constitutes its existence. But this degree of reality

can become less and less through an infinite series of smaller degrees. It

follows, therefore, that this supposed substance — this thing, the permanence

of which is not assured in any other way, may, if not by decomposition, by

gradual loss (remissio) of its powers (consequently by elanguescence, if I

may employ this expression), be changed into nothing. For consciousness
                                                          45
itself has always a degree, which may be lessened. Consequently the faculty

of being conscious may be diminished; and so with all other faculties. The

permanence of the soul, therefore, as an object of the internal sense, remains

undemonstrated, nay, even indemonstrable. Its permanence in life is evident,

per se, inasmuch as the thinking being (as man) is to itself, at the same time,

an object of the external senses. But this does not authorize the rational
                                                                                        46
psychologist to affirm, from mere conceptions, its permanence beyond life.
2

        45
               Clearness is not, as logicians maintain, the consciousness of a

representation. For a certain degree of consciousness, which may not,

however, be sufficient for recollection, is to be met with in many dim

representations. For without any consciousness at all, we should not be able

to recognize any difference in the obscure representations we connect; as we

really can do with many conceptions, such as those of right and justice, and

those of the musician, who strikes at once several notes in improvising a

piece of music. But a representation is clear, in which our consciousness is

sufficient for the consciousness of the difference of this representation from

others. If we are only conscious that there is a difference, but are not

conscious of the difference — that is, what the difference is- the

representation must be termed obscure. There is, consequently, an infinite

series of degrees of consciousness down to its entire disappearance.

        462
                There are some who think they have done enough to establish anew possibility in the mode of the existence of souls, when they have shown

that there is no contradiction in their hypotheses on this subject. Such are

those who affirm the possibility of thought — of which they have no other

knowledge than what they derive from its use in connecting empirical

intuitions presented in this our human life — after this life bas ceased. But it

is very easy to embarrass them by the introduction of counter-possibilities,

which rest upon quite as good a foundation. Such, for example, is the

possibility of the division of a simple substance into several substances; and

conversely, of the coalition of several into one simple substance. For,

although divisibility presupposes composition, it does not necessarily require

a composition of substances, but only of the degrees (of the several faculties)

of one and the same substance. Now we can cogitate all the powers and

faculties of the soul — even that of consciousness — as diminished by one

half, the substance still remaining. In the same way we can represent to

ourselves without contradiction, this obliterated half as preserved, not in the

soul, but without it; and we can believe that, as in this case every. thing that is

real in the soul, and has a degree — consequently its entire existence — has

been halved, a particular substance would arise out of the soul. For the

multiplicity, which has been divided, formerly existed, but not as a

multiplicity of substances, but of every reality as the quantum of existence in

it; and the unity of substance was merely a mode of existence, which by this

division alone has been transformed into a plurality of subsistence. In the

same manner several simple substances might coalesce into one, without

anything being lost except the plurality of subsistence, inasmuch as the one

substance would contain the degree of reality of all the former substances.

Perhaps, indeed, the simple substances, which appear under the form of

matter, might (not indeed by a mechanical or chemical influence upon each

other, but by an unknown influence, of which the former would be but the

phenomenal appearance), by means of such a dynamical division of the

parent-souls, as intensive quantities, produce other souls, while the former

repaired the loss thus sustained with new matter of the same sort. I am far

from allowing any value to such chimeras; and the principles of our analytic

have clearly proved that no other than an empirical use of the categories —

that of substance, for example — is possible. But if the rationalist is bold

enough to construct, on the mere authority of the faculty of thought —

without any intuition, whereby an object is given — a self-subsistent being,

merely because the unity of apperception in thought cannot allow him tobelieve it a composite being, instead of declaring, as he ought to do, that he is

unable to explain the possibility of a thinking nature; what ought to hinder the

materialist, with as complete an independence of experience, to employ the

principle of the rationalist in a directly opposite manner- still preserving the

formal unity required by his opponent?

              If, now, we take the above propositions — as they must be accepted

as valid for all thinking beings in the system of rational psychology — in

synthetical connection, and proceed, from the category of relation, with the

proposition: “All thinking beings are, as such, substances,” backwards

through the series, till the circle is completed; we come at last to their

existence, of which, in this system of rational psychology, substances are

held to be conscious, independently of external things; nay, it is asserted that,

in relation to the permanence which is a necessary characteristic of substance,

they can of themselves determine external things. It follows that idealism —

at least problematical idealism, is perfectly unavoidable in this rationalistic

system. And, if the existence of outward things is not held to be requisite to

the determination of the existence of a substance in time, the existence of

these outward things at all, is a gratuitous assumption which remains without

the possibility of a proof.

              But if we proceed analytically — the “I think” as a proposition

containing in itself an existence as given, consequently modality being the

principle — and dissect this proposition, in order to ascertain its content, and

discover whether and how this Ego determines its existence in time and space

without the aid of anything external; the propositions of rationalistic

psychology would not begin with the conception of a thinking being, but with

a reality, and the properties of a thinking being in general would be deduced

from the mode in which this reality is cogitated, after everything empirical

had been abstracted; as is shown in the following table:

  1 I think, 2 3 as Subject, as simple Subject, 4 as identical Subject, in every

state of my thought.                Now, inasmuch as it is not determined in this

second proposition, whether I can exist and be cogitated only as subject, and

not also as a predicate of another being, the conception of a subject is here

taken in a merely logical sense; and it remains undetermined, whether

substance is to be cogitated under the conception or not. But in the third

proposition, the absolute unity of apperception- the simple Ego in the

representation to which all connection and separation, which constitutethought, relate, is of itself important; even although it presents us with no

information about the constitution or subsistence of the subject. Apperception

is something real, and the simplicity of its nature is given in the very fact of

its possibility. Now in space there is nothing real that is at the same time

simple; for points, which are the only simple things in space, are merely

limits, but not constituent parts of space. From this follows the impossibility

of a definition on the basis of materialism of the constitution of my Ego as a

merely thinking subject. But, because my existence is considered in the first

proposition as given, for it does not mean, “Every thinking being exists” (for

this would be predicating of them absolute necessity), but only, “I exist

thinking”; the proposition is quite empirical, and contains the determinability

of my existence merely in relation to my representations in time. But as I

require for this purpose something that is permanent, such as is not given in

internal intuition; the mode of my existence, whether as substance or as

accident, cannot be determined by means of this simple self-consciousness.

Thus, if materialism is inadequate to explain the mode in which I exist,

spiritualism is likewise as insufficient; and the conclusion is that we are

utterly unable to attain to any knowledge of the constitution of the soul, in so

far as relates to the possibility of its existence apart from external objects.

              And, indeed, how should it be possible, merely by the aid of the

unity of consciousness — which we cognize only for the reason that it is

indispensable to the possibility of experience — to pass the bounds of

experience (our existence in this life); and to extend our cognition to the

nature of all thinking beings by means of the empirical — but in relation to

every sort of intuition, perfectly undetermined — proposition, “I think”?

              There does not then exist any rational psychology as a doctrine

furnishing any addition to our knowledge of ourselves. It is nothing more

than a discipline, which sets impassable limits to speculative reason in this

region of thought, to prevent it, on the one hand, from throwing itself into the

arms of a soulless materialism, and, on the other, from losing itself in the

mazes of a baseless spiritualism. It teaches us to consider this refusal of our

reason to give any satisfactory answer to questions which reach beyond the

limits of this our human life, as a hint to abandon fruitless speculation; and to

direct, to a practical use, our knowledge of ourselves — which, although

applicable only to objects of experience, receives its principles from a higher

source, and regulates its procedure as if our destiny reached far beyond theboundaries of experience and life.

              From all this it is evident that rational psychology has its origin in a

mere misunderstanding. The unity of consciousness, which lies at the basis of

the categories, is considered to be an intuition of the subject as an object; and

the category of substance is applied to the intuition. But this unity is nothing

more than the unity in thought, by which no object is given; to which

therefore the category of substance — which always presupposes a given

intuition- cannot be applied. Consequently, the subject cannot be cognized.

The subject of the categories cannot, therefore, for the very reason that it

cogitates these, frame any conception of itself as an object of the categories;

for, to cogitate these, it must lay at the foundation its own pure self-

consciousness — the very thing that it wishes to explain and describe. In like

manner, the subject, in which the representation of time has its basis, cannot

determine, for this very reason, its own existence in time. Now, if the latter is

impossible, the former, as an attempt to determine itself by means of the
                                                              47
categories as a thinking being in general, is no less so.

        47
               The “I think” is, as has been already stated, an empirical

proposition, and contains the proposition, “I exist.” But I cannot say,

“Everything, which thinks, exists”; for in this case the property of thought

would constitute all beings possessing it, necessary being Hence my

existence cannot be considered as an inference from the proposition, “I

think,” as Descartes maintained — because in this case the major premiss,

“Everything, which thinks, exists,” must precede — but the two propositions

are identical. The proposition, “I think,” expresses an undetermined empirical

intuition, that perception (proving consequently that sensation, which must

belong to sensibility, lies at the foundation of this proposition); but it

precedes experience, whose province it is to determine an object of

perception by means of the categories in relation to time; and existence in this

proposition is not a category, as it does not apply to an undetermined given

object, but only to one of which we have a conception, and about which we

wish to know whether it does or does not exist, out of, and apart from this

conception. An undetermined perception signifies here merely something real

that has been given, only, however, to thought in general — but not as a

phenomenon, nor as a thing in itself (noumenon), but only as something that

really exists, and is designated as such in the proposition, “I think.” For it

must be remarked that, when I call the proposition, “I think,” an empiricalproposition, I do not thereby mean that the Ego in the proposition is an

empirical representation; on the contrary, it is purely intellectual, because it

belongs to thought in general. But without some empirical representation,

which presents to the mind material for thought, the mental act, “I think,”

would not take place; and the empirical is only the condition of the

application or employment of the pure intellectual faculty.

              Thus, then, appears the vanity of the hope of establishing a cognition

which is to extend its rule beyond the limits of experience- a cognition which

is one of the highest interests of humanity; and thus is proved the futility of

the attempt of speculative philosophy in this region of thought. But, in this

interest of thought, the severity of criticism has rendered to reason a not

unimportant service, by the demonstration of the impossibility of making any

dogmatical affirmation concerning an object of experience beyond the

boundaries of experience. She has thus fortified reason against all

affirmations of the contrary. Now, this can be accomplished in only two

ways. Either our proposition must be proved apodeictically; or, if this is

unsuccessful, the sources of this inability must be sought for, and, if these are

discovered to exist in the natural and necessary limitation of our reason, our

opponents must submit to the same law of renunciation and refrain from

advancing claims to dogmatic assertion.

              But the right, say rather the necessity to admit a future life, upon

principles of the practical conjoined with the speculative use of reason, has

lost nothing by this renunciation; for the merely speculative proof has never

had any influence upon the common reason of men. It stands upon the point

of a hair, so that even the schools have been able to preserve it from falling

only by incessantly discussing it and spinning it like a top; and even in their

eyes it has never been able to present any safe foundation for the erection of a

theory. The proofs which have been current among men, preserve their value

undiminished; nay, rather gain in clearness and unsophisticated power, by the

rejection of the dogmatical assumptions of speculative reason. For reason is

thus confined within her own peculiar province — the arrangement of ends or

aims, which is at the same time the arrangement of nature; and, as a practical

faculty, without limiting itself to the latter, it is justified in extending the

former, and with it our own existence, beyond the boundaries of experience

and life. If we turn our attention to the analogy of the nature of living beings

in this world, in the consideration of which reason is obliged to accept as aprinciple that no organ, no faculty, no appetite is useless, and that nothing is

superfluous, nothing disproportionate to its use, nothing unsuited to its end;

but that, on the contrary, everything is perfectly conformed to its destination

in life — we shall find that man, who alone is the final end and aim of this

order, is still the only animal that seems to be excepted from it. For his

natural gifts — not merely as regards the talents and motives that may incite

him to employ them, but especially the moral law in him — stretch so far

beyond all mere earthly utility and advantage, that he feels himself bound to

prize the mere consciousness of probity, apart from all advantageous

consequences — even the shadowy gift of posthumous fame — above

everything; and he is conscious of an inward call to constitute himself, by his

conduct in this world — without regard to mere sublunary interests — the

citizen of a better. This mighty, irresistible proof — accompanied by an ever-

increasing knowledge of the conformability to a purpose in everything we see

around us, by the conviction of the boundless immensity of creation, by the

consciousness of a certain illimitableness in the possible extension of our

knowledge, and by a desire commensurate therewith — remains to humanity,

even after the theoretical cognition of ourselves bas failed to establish the

necessity of an existence after death.

          Conclusion of the Solution of the Psychological Paralogism.

 

              The dialectical illusion in rational psychology arises from our

confounding an idea of reason (of a pure intelligence) with the conception —

in every respect undetermined — of a thinking being in general. I cogitate

myself in behalf of a possible experience, at the same time making

abstraction of all actual experience; and infer therefrom that I can be

conscious of myself apart from experience and its empirical conditions. I

consequently confound the possible abstraction of my empirically determined

existence with the supposed consciousness of a possible separate existence of

my thinking self; and I believe that I cognize what is substantial in myself as

a transcendental subject, when I have nothing more in thought than the unity

of consciousness, which lies at the basis of all determination of cognition.

              The task of explaining the community of the soul with the body does

not properly belong to the psychology of which we are here speaking;

because it proposes to prove the personality of the soul apart from this

communion (after death), and is therefore transcendent in the proper sense ofthe word, although occupying itself with an object of experience — only in

so far, however, as it ceases to be an object of experience. But a sufficient

answer may be found to the question in our system. The difficulty which lies

in the execution of this task consists, as is well known, in the presupposed

heterogeneity of the object of the internal sense (the soul) and the objects of

the external senses; inasmuch as the formal condition of the intuition of the

one is time, and of that of the other space also. But if we consider that both

kinds of objects do not differ internally, but only in so far as the one appears

externally to the other — consequently, that what lies at the basis of

phenomena, as a thing in itself, may not be heterogeneous; this difficulty

disappears. There then remains no other difficulty than is to be found in the

question — how a community of substances is possible; a question which lies

out of the region of psychology, and which the reader, after what in our

analytic has been said of primitive forces and faculties, will easily judge to be

also beyond the region of human cognition.

                                    General Remark

 

        On the Transition from Rational Psychology to Cosmology.

 

              The proposition, “I think,” or, “I exist thinking,” is an empirical

proposition. But such a proposition must be based on empirical intuition, and

the object cogitated as a phenomenon; and thus our theory appears to

maintain that the soul, even in thought, is merely a phenomenon; and in this

way our consciousness itself, in fact, abuts upon nothing.

              Thought, per se, is merely the purely spontaneous logical function

which operates to connect the manifold of a possible intuition; and it does not

represent the subject of consciousness as a phenomenon — for this reason

alone, that it pays no attention to the question whether the mode of intuiting it

is sensuous or intellectual. I therefore do not represent myself in thought

either as I am, or as I appear to myself; I merely cogitate myself as an object

in general, of the mode of intuiting which I make abstraction. When I

represent myself as the subject of thought, or as the ground of thought, these

modes of representation are not related to the categories of substance or of

cause; for these are functions of thought applicable only to our sensuous

intuition. The application of these categories to the Ego would, however, be

necessary, if I wished to make myself an object of knowledge. But I wish tobe conscious of myself only as thinking; in what mode my Self is given in

intuition, I do not consider, and it may be that I, who think, am a

phenomenon — although not in so far as I am a thinking being; but in the

consciousness of myself in mere thought I am a being, though this

consciousness does not present to me any property of this being as material

for thought.

              But the proposition, “I think,” in so far as it declares, “I exist

thinking,” is not the mere representation of a logical function. It determines

the subject (which is in this case an object also) in relation to existence; and it

cannot be given without the aid of the internal sense, whose intuition presents

to us an object, not as a thing in itself, but always as a phenomenon. In this

proposition there is therefore something more to be found than the mere

spontaneity of thought; there is also the receptivity of intuition, that is, my

thought of myself applied to the empirical intuition of myself. Now, in this

intuition the thinking self must seek the conditions of the employment of its

logical functions as categories of substance, cause, and so forth; not merely

for the purpose of distinguishing itself as an object in itself by means of the

representation “I,” but also for the purpose of determining the mode of its

existence, that is, of cognizing itself as noumenon. But this is impossible, for

the internal empirical intuition is sensuous, and presents us with nothing but

phenomenal data, which do not assist the object of pure consciousness in its

attempt to cognize itself as a separate existence, but are useful only as

contributions to experience.

              But, let it be granted that we could discover, not in experience, but in

certain firmly-established a priori laws of the use of pure reason — laws

relating to our existence, authority to consider ourselves as legislating a priori

in relation to our own existence and as determining this existence; we should,

on this supposition, find ourselves possessed of a spontaneity, by which our

actual existence would be determinable, without the aid of the conditions of

empirical intuition. We should also become aware that in the consciousness

of our existence there was an a priori content, which would serve to

determine our own existence — an existence only sensuously determinable

— relatively, however, to a certain internal faculty in relation to an

intelligible world.

              But this would not give the least help to the attempts of rational

psychology. For this wonderful faculty, which the consciousness of the morallaw in me reveals, would present me with a principle of the determination of

my own existence which is purely intellectual — but by what predicates? By

none other than those which are given in sensuous intuition. Thus I should

find myself in the same position in rational psychology which I formerly

occupied, that is to say, I should find myself still in need of sensuous

intuitions, in order to give significance to my conceptions of substance and

cause, by means of which alone I can possess a knowledge of myself: but

these intuitions can never raise me above the sphere of experience. I should

be justified, however, in applying these conceptions, in regard to their

practical use, which is always directed to objects of experience — in

conformity with their analogical significance when employed theoretically —

to freedom and its subject. At the same time, I should understand by them

merely the logical functions of subject and predicate, of principle and

consequence, in conformity with which all actions are so determined, that

they are capable of being explained along with the laws of nature,

conformably to the categories of substance and cause, although they originate

from a very different principle. We have made these observations for the

purpose of guarding against misunderstanding, to which the doctrine of our

intuition of self as a phenomenon is exposed. We shall have occasion to

perceive their utility in the sequel.

 

 

                   Chapter II. The Antinomy of Pure Reason.

 

 

              We showed in the introduction to this part of our work, that all

transcendental illusion of pure reason arose from dialectical arguments, the

schema of which logic gives us in its three formal species of syllogisms —

just as the categories find their logical schema in the four functions of all

judgements. The first kind of these sophistical arguments related to the

unconditioned unity of the subjective conditions of all representations in

general (of the subject or soul), in correspondence with the categorical

syllogisms, the major of which, as the principle, enounces the relation of a

predicate to a subject. The second kind of dialectical argument will therefore

be concerned, following the analogy with hypothetical syllogisms, with the

unconditioned unity of the objective conditions in the phenomenon; and, in

this way, the theme of the third kind to be treated of in the following chapter

will be the unconditioned unity of the objective conditions of the possibility

of objects in general.

              But it is worthy of remark that the transcendental paralogism

produced in the mind only a one-third illusion, in regard to the idea of the

subject of our thought; and the conceptions of reason gave no ground to

maintain the contrary proposition. The advantage is completely on the side of

Pneumatism; although this theory itself passes into naught, in the crucible of

pure reason.

              Very different is the case when we apply reason to the objective

synthesis of phenomena. Here, certainly, reason establishes, with much

plausibility, its principle of unconditioned unity; but it very soon falls into

such contradictions that it is compelled, in relation to cosmology, to renounce

its pretensions.

              For here a new phenomenon of human reason meets us — a

perfectly natural antithetic, which does not require to be sought for by subtle

sophistry, but into which reason of itself unavoidably falls. It is thereby

preserved, to be sure, from the slumber of a fancied conviction — which a

merely one-sided illusion produces; but it is at the same time compelled,

either, on the one hand, to abandon itself to a despairing scepticism, or, onthe other, to assume a dogmatical confidence and obstinate persistence in

certain assertions, without granting a fair hearing to the other side of the

question. Either is the death of a sound philosophy, although the former

might perhaps deserve the title of the euthanasia of pure reason.

              Before entering this region of discord and confusion, which the

conflict of the laws of pure reason (antinomy) produces, we shall present the

reader with some considerations, in explanation and justification of the

method we intend to follow in our treatment of this subject. I term all

transcendental ideas, in so far as they relate to the absolute totality in the

synthesis of phenomena, cosmical conceptions; partly on account of this

unconditioned totality, on which the conception of the world-whole is based

— a conception, which is itself an idea — partly because they relate solely to

the synthesis of phenomena — the empirical synthesis; while, on the other

hand, the absolute totality in the synthesis of the conditions of all possible

things gives rise to an ideal of pure reason, which is quite distinct from the

cosmical conception, although it stands in relation with it. Hence, as the

paralogisms of pure reason laid the foundation for a dialectical psychology,

the antinomy of pure reason will present us with the transcendental principles

of a pretended pure (rational) cosmology — not, however, to declare it valid

and to appropriate it, but — as the very term of a conflict of reason

sufficiently indicates, to present it as an idea which cannot be reconciled with

phenomena and experience.

 

 

                     Section I. System of Cosmological Ideas.

 

 

              That We may be able to enumerate with systematic precision these

ideas according to a principle, we must remark, in the first place, that it is

from the understanding alone that pure and transcendental conceptions take

their origin; that the reason does not properly give birth to any conception,

but only frees the conception of the understanding from the unavoidable

limitation of a possible experience, and thus endeavours to raise it above the

empirical, though it must still be in connection with it. This happens from the

fact that, for a given conditioned, reason demands absolute totality on the

side of the conditions (to which the understanding submits all phenomena),

and thus makes of the category a transcendental idea. This it does that it may

be able to give absolute completeness to the empirical synthesis, by

continuing it to the unconditioned (which is not to be found in experience,

but only in the idea). Reason requires this according to the principle: If the

conditioned is given the whole of the conditions, and consequently the

absolutely unconditioned, is also given, whereby alone the former was

possible. First, then, the transcendental ideas are properly nothing but

categories elevated to the unconditioned; and they may be arranged in a table

according to the titles of the latter. But, secondly, all the categories are not

available for this purpose, but only those in which the synthesis constitutes a

series — of conditions subordinated to, not co-ordinated with, each other.

Absolute totality is required of reason only in so far as concerns the

ascending series of the conditions of a conditioned; not, consequently, when

the question relates to the descending series of consequences, or to the

aggregate of the co-ordinated conditions of these consequences. For, in

relation to a given conditioned, conditions are presupposed and considered to

be given along with it. On the other hand, as the consequences do not render

possible their conditions, but rather presuppose them — in the consideration

of the procession of consequences (or in the descent from the given condition

to the conditioned), we may be quite unconcerned whether the series ceases

or not; and their totality is not a necessary demand of reason.

              Thus we cogitate — and necessarily — a given time completely

elapsed up to a given moment, although that time is not determinable by us.But as regards time future, which is not the condition of arriving at the

present, in order to conceive it; it is quite indifferent whether we consider

future time as ceasing at some point, or as prolonging itself to infinity. Take,

for example, the series m, n, o, in which n is given as conditioned in relation

to m, but at the same time as the condition of o, and let the series proceed

upwards from the conditioned n to m (l, k, i, etc.), and also downwards from

the condition n to the conditioned o (p, q, r, etc.)— I must presuppose the

former series, to be able to consider n as given, and n is according to reason

(the totality of conditions) possible only by means of that series. But its

possibility does not rest on the following series o, p, q, r, which for this

reason cannot be regarded as given, but only as capable of being given

(dabilis).

              I shall term the synthesis of the series on the side of the conditions

— from that nearest to the given phenomenon up to the more remote —

regressive; that which proceeds on the side of the conditioned, from the

immediate consequence to the more remote, I shall call the progressive

synthesis. The former proceeds in antecedentia, the latter in consequentia.

The cosmological ideas are therefore occupied with the totality of the

regressive synthesis, and proceed in antecedentia, not in consequentia. When

the latter takes place, it is an arbitrary and not a necessary problem of pure

reason; for we require, for the complete understanding of what is given in a

phenomenon, not the consequences which succeed, but the grounds or

principles which precede.

              In order to construct the table of ideas in correspondence with the

table of categories, we take first the two primitive quanta of all our intuitions,

time and space. Time is in itself a series (and the formal condition of all

series), and hence, in relation to a given present, we must distinguish a priori

in it the antecedentia as conditions (time past) from the consequentia (time

future). Consequently, the transcendental idea of the absolute totality of the

series of the conditions of a given conditioned, relates merely to all past time.

According to the idea of reason, the whole past time, as the condition of the

given moment, is necessarily cogitated as given. But, as regards space, there

exists in it no distinction between progressus and regressus; for it is an

aggregate and not a series — its parts existing together at the same time. I can

consider a given point of time in relation to past time only as conditioned,

because this given moment comes into existence only through the past timerather through the passing of the preceding time. But as the parts of space are

not subordinated, but co-ordinated to each other, one part cannot be the

condition of the possibility of the other; and space is not in itself, like time, a

series. But the synthesis of the manifold parts of space —(the syntheses

whereby we apprehend space)— is nevertheless successive; it takes place,

therefore, in time, and contains a series. And as in this series of aggregated

spaces (for example, the feet in a rood), beginning with a given portion of

space, those which continue to be annexed form the condition of the limits of

the former — the measurement of a space must also be regarded as a

synthesis of the series of the conditions of a given conditioned. It differs,

however, in this respect from that of time, that the side of the conditioned is

not in itself distinguishable from the side of the condition; and, consequently,

regressus and progressus in space seem to be identical. But, inasmuch as one

part of space is not given, but only limited, by and through another, we must

also consider every limited space as conditioned, in so far as it presupposes

some other space as the condition of its limitation, and so on. As regards

limitation, therefore, our procedure in space is also a regressus, and the

transcendental idea of the absolute totality of the synthesis in a series of

conditions applies to space also; and I am entitled to demand the absolute

totality of the phenomenal synthesis in space as well as in time. Whether my

demand can be satisfied is a question to be answered in the sequel.

              Secondly, the real in space — that is, matter — is conditioned. Its

internal conditions are its parts, and the parts of parts its remote conditions;

so that in this case we find a regressive synthesis, the absolute totality of

which is a demand of reason. But this cannot be obtained otherwise than by a

complete division of parts, whereby the real in matter becomes either nothing

or that which is not matter, that is to say, the simple. Consequently we find

here also a series of conditions and a progress to the unconditioned.

              Thirdly, as regards the categories of a real relation between

phenomena, the category of substance and its accidents is not suitable for the

formation of a transcendental idea; that is to say, reason has no ground, in

regard to it, to proceed regressively with conditions. For accidents (in so far

as they inhere in a substance) are co-ordinated with each other, and do not

constitute a series. And, in relation to substance, they are not properly

subordinated to it, but are the mode of existence of the substance itself. The

conception of the substantial might nevertheless seem to be an idea of thetranscendental reason. But, as this signifies nothing more than the conception

of an object in general, which subsists in so far as we cogitate in it merely a

transcendental subject without any predicates; and as the question here is of

an unconditioned in the series of phenomena — it is clear that the substantial

can form no member thereof. The same holds good of substances in

community, which are mere aggregates and do not form a series. For they are

not subordinated to each other as conditions of the possibility of each other;

which, however, may be affirmed of spaces, the limits of which are never

determined in themselves, but always by some other space. It is, therefore,

only in the category of causality that we can find a series of causes to a given

effect, and in which we ascend from the latter, as the conditioned, to the

former as the conditions, and thus answer the question of reason.

              Fourthly, the conceptions of the possible, the actual, and the

necessary do not conduct us to any series — excepting only in so far as the

contingent in existence must always be regarded as conditioned, and as

indicating, according to a law of the understanding, a condition, under which

it is necessary to rise to a higher, till in the totality of the series, reason arrives

at unconditioned necessity.

              There are, accordingly, only four cosmological ideas, corresponding

with the four titles of the categories. For we can select only such as

necessarily furnish us with a series in the synthesis of the manifold.

  1 The absolute Completeness of the COMPOSITION of the given totality of

all phenomena. 2 The absolute Completeness of the DIVISION of given

totality in a phenomenon. 3 The absolute Completeness of the

ORIGINATION of a phenomenon. 4 The absolute Completeness of the

DEPENDENCE of the EXISTENCE of what is changeable in a

phenomenon.                We must here remark, in the first place, that the idea

of absolute totality relates to nothing but the exposition of phenomena, and

therefore not to the pure conception of a totality of things. Phenomena are

here, therefore, regarded as given, and reason requires the absolute

completeness of the conditions of their possibility, in so far as these

conditions constitute a series- consequently an absolutely (that is, in every

respect) complete synthesis, whereby a phenomenon can be explained

according to the laws of the understanding.

              Secondly, it is properly the unconditioned alone that reason seeks inthis serially and regressively conducted synthesis of conditions. It wishes, to

speak in another way, to attain to completeness in the series of premisses, so

as to render it unnecessary to presuppose others. This unconditioned is

always contained in the absolute totality of the series, when we endeavour to

form a representation of it in thought. But this absolutely complete synthesis

is itself but an idea; for it is impossible, at least before hand, to know whether

any such synthesis is possible in the case of phenomena. When we represent

all existence in thought by means of pure conceptions of the understanding,

without any conditions of sensuous intuition, we may say with justice that for

a given conditioned the whole series of conditions subordinated to each other

is also given; for the former is only given through the latter. But we find in

the case of phenomena a particular limitation of the mode in which

conditions are given, that is, through the successive synthesis of the manifold

of intuition, which must be complete in the regress. Now whether this

completeness is sensuously possible, is a problem. But the idea of it lies in

the reason — be it possible or impossible to connect with the idea adequate

empirical conceptions. Therefore, as in the absolute totality of the regressive

synthesis of the manifold in a phenomenon (following the guidance of the

categories, which represent it as a series of conditions to a given conditioned)

the unconditioned is necessarily contained — it being still left unascertained

whether and how this totality exists; reason sets out from the idea of totality,

although its proper and final aim is the unconditioned — of the whole series,

or of a part thereof.

              This unconditioned may be cogitated — either as existing only in the

entire series, all the members of which therefore would be without exception

conditioned and only the totality absolutely unconditioned — and in this case

the regressus is called infinite; or the absolutely unconditioned is only a part

of the series, to which the other members are subordinated, but which Is not
                                            48
itself submitted to any other condition. In the former case the series is a

parte priori unlimited (without beginning), that is, infinite, and nevertheless

completely given. But the regress in it is never completed, and can only be

called potentially infinite. In the second case there exists a first in the series.

This first is called, in relation to past time, the beginning of the world; in

relation to space, the limit of the world; in relation to the parts of a given

limited whole, the simple; in relation to causes, absolute spontaneity (liberty);

and in relation to the existence of changeable things, absolute physical

necessity.        48
               The absolute totality of the series of conditions to a given

conditioned is always unconditioned; because beyond it there exist no other

conditions, on which it might depend. But the absolute totality of such a

series is only an idea, or rather a problematical conception, the possibility of

which must be investigated- particularly in relation to the mode in which the

unconditioned, as the transcendental idea which is the real subject of inquiry,

may be contained therein.

              We possess two expressions, world and nature, which are generally

interchanged. The first denotes the mathematical total of all phenomena and

the totality of their synthesis — in its progress by means of composition, as
                                                            49
well as by division. And the world is termed nature, when it is regarded as a

dynamical whole — when our attention is not directed to the aggregation in

space and time, for the purpose of cogitating it as a quantity, but to the unity

in the existence of phenomena. In this case the condition of that which

happens is called a cause; the unconditioned causality of the cause in a

phenomenon is termed liberty; the conditioned cause is called in a more

limited sense a natural cause. The conditioned in existence is termed

contingent, and the unconditioned necessary. The unconditioned necessity of

phenomena may be called natural necessity.

        49
               Nature, understood adjective (formaliter), signifies the complex of

the determinations of a thing, connected according to an internal principle of

causality. On the other hand, we understand by nature, substantive

(materialiter), the sum total of phenomena, in so far as they, by virtue of an

internal principle of causality, are connected with each other throughout. In

the former sense we speak of the nature of liquid matter, of fire, etc., and

employ the word only adjective; while, if speaking of the objects of nature,

we have in our minds the idea of a subsisting whole.

              The ideas which we are at present engaged in discussing I have

called cosmological ideas; partly because by the term world is understood the

entire content of all phenomena, and our ideas are directed solely to the

unconditioned among phenomena; partly also, because world, in the

transcendental sense, signifies the absolute totality of the content of existing

things, and we are directing our attention only to the completeness of the

synthesis — although, properly, only in regression. In regard to the fact that

these ideas are all transcendent. and, although they do not transcend

phenomena as regards their mode, but are concerned solely with the world ofsense (and not with noumena), nevertheless carry their synthesis to a degree

far above all possible experience — it still seems to me that we can, with

perfect propriety, designate them cosmical conceptions. As regards the

distinction between the mathematically and the dynamically unconditioned

which is the aim of the regression of the synthesis, I should call the two

former, in a more limited signification, cosmical conceptions, the remaining

two transcendent physical conceptions. This distinction does not at present

seem to be of particular importance, but we shall afterwards find it to be of

some value.

 

 

                       Section II. Antithetic of Pure Reason.

 

 

              Thetic is the term applied to every collection of dogmatical

propositions. By antithetic I do not understand dogmatical assertions of the

opposite, but the self-contradiction of seemingly dogmatical cognitions

(thesis cum antithesis, in none of which we can discover any decided

superiority. Antithetic is not, therefore, occupied with one-sided statements,

but is engaged in considering the contradictory nature of the general

cognitions of reason and its causes. Transcendental antithetic is an

investigation into the antinomy of pure reason, its causes and result. If we

employ our reason not merely in the application of the principles of the

understanding to objects of experience, but venture with it beyond these

boundaries, there arise certain sophistical propositions or theorems. These

assertions have the following peculiarities: They can find neither

confirmation nor confutation in experience; and each is in itself not only self-

consistent, but possesses conditions of its necessity in the very nature of

reason — only that, unluckily, there exist just as valid and necessary grounds

for maintaining the contrary proposition.

              The questions which naturally arise in the consideration of this

dialectic of pure reason, are therefore: 1st. In what propositions is pure reason

unavoidably subject to an antinomy? 2nd. What are the causes of this

antinomy? 3rd. Whether and in what way can reason free itself from this self-

contradiction?

              A dialectical proposition or theorem of pure reason must, according

to what has been said, be distinguishable from all sophistical propositions, by

the fact that it is not an answer to an arbitrary question, which may be raised

at the mere pleasure of any person, but to one which human reason must

necessarily encounter in its progress. In the second place, a dialectical

proposition, with its opposite, does not carry the appearance of a merely

artificial illusion, which disappears as soon as it is investigated, but a natural

and unavoidable illusion, which, even when we are no longer deceived by it,

continues to mock us and, although rendered harmless, can never be

completely removed.              This dialectical doctrine will not relate to the unity of understanding

in empirical conceptions, but to the unity of reason in pure ideas. The

conditions of this doctrine are — inasmuch as it must, as a synthesis

according to rules, be conformable to the understanding, and at the same time

as the absolute unity of the synthesis, to the reason — that, if it is adequate to

the unity of reason, it is too great for the understanding, if according with the

understanding, it is too small for the reason. Hence arises a mutual

opposition, which cannot be avoided, do what we will.

              These sophistical assertions of dialectic open, as it were, a battle-

field, where that side obtains the victory which has been permitted to make

the attack, and he is compelled to yield who has been unfortunately obliged

to stand on the defensive. And hence, champions of ability, whether on the

right or on the wrong side, are certain to carry away the crown of victory, if

they only take care to have the right to make the last attack, and are not

obliged to sustain another onset from their opponent. We can easily believe

that this arena has been often trampled by the feet of combatants, that many

victories have been obtained on both sides, but that the last victory, decisive

of the affair between the contending parties, was won by him who fought for

the right, only if his adversary was forbidden to continue the tourney. As

impartial umpires, we must lay aside entirely the consideration whether the

combatants are fighting for the right or for the wrong side, for the true or for

the false, and allow the combat to be first decided. Perhaps, after they have

wearied more than injured each other, they will discover the nothingness of

their cause of quarrel and part good friends.

              This method of watching, or rather of originating, a conflict of

assertions, not for the purpose of finally deciding in favour of either side, but

to discover whether the object of the struggle is not a mere illusion, which

each strives in vain to reach, but which would be no gain even when reached

— this procedure, I say, may be termed the sceptical method. It is thoroughly

distinct from scepticism — the principle of a technical and scientific

ignorance, which undermines the foundations of all knowledge, in order, if

possible, to destroy our belief and confidence therein. For the sceptical

method aims at certainty, by endeavouring to discover in a conflict of this

kind, conducted honestly and intelligently on both sides, the point of

misunderstanding; just as wise legislators derive, from the embarrassment of

judges in lawsuits, information in regard to the defective and ill-defined partsof their statutes. The antinomy which reveals itself in the application of laws,

is for our limited wisdom the best criterion of legislation. For the attention of

reason, which in abstract speculation does not easily become conscious of its

errors, is thus roused to the momenta in the determination of its principles.

              But this sceptical method is essentially peculiar to transcendental

philosophy, and can perhaps be dispensed with in every other field of

investigation. In mathematics its use would be absurd; because in it no false

assertions can long remain hidden, inasmuch as its demonstrations must

always proceed under the guidance of pure intuition, and by means of an

always evident synthesis. In experimental philosophy, doubt and delay may

be very useful; but no misunderstanding is possible, which cannot be easily

removed; and in experience means of solving the difficulty and putting an

end to the dissension must at last be found, whether sooner or later. Moral

philosophy can always exhibit its principles, with their practical

consequences, in concreto — at least in possible experiences, and thus escape

the mistakes and ambiguities of abstraction. But transcendental propositions,

which lay claim to insight beyond the region of possible experience, cannot,

on the one hand, exhibit their abstract synthesis in any a priori intuition, nor,

on the other, expose a lurking error by the help of experience. Transcendental

reason, therefore, presents us with no other criterion than that of an attempt to

reconcile such assertions, and for this purpose to permit a free and
                                                                                      50
unrestrained conflict between them. And this we now proceed to arrange.

        50
               The antinomies stand in the order of the four transcendental ideas

above detailed.

                    First Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas.

 

                                        Thesis.

 

              The world has a beginning in time, and is also limited in regard to

space.

                                          Proof.

 

              Granted that the world has no beginning in time; up to every given

moment of time, an eternity must have elapsed, and therewith passed away an

infinite series of successive conditions or states of things in the world. Nowthe infinity of a series consists in the fact that it never can be completed by

means of a successive synthesis. It follows that an infinite series already

elapsed is impossible and that, consequently, a beginning of the world is a

necessary condition of its existence. And this was the first thing to be proved.

              As regards the second, let us take the opposite for granted. In this

case, the world must be an infinite given total of coexistent things. Now we

cannot cogitate the dimensions of a quantity, which is not given within
                                51
certain limits of an intuition, in any other way than by means of the

synthesis of its parts, and the total of such a quantity only by means of a

completed synthesis, or the repeated addition of unity to itself. Accordingly,

to cogitate the world, which fills all spaces, as a whole, the successive

synthesis of the parts of an infinite world must be looked upon as completed,

that is to say, an infinite time must be regarded as having elapsed in the

enumeration of all co-existing things; which is impossible. For this reason an

infinite aggregate of actual things cannot be considered as a given whole,

consequently, not as a contemporaneously given whole. The world is

consequently, as regards extension in space, not infinite, but enclosed in

limits. And this was the second thing to be proved.

        51
               We may consider an undetermined quantity as a whole, when it is

enclosed within limits, although we cannot construct or ascertain its totality

by measurement, that is, by the successive synthesis of its parts. For its limits

of themselves determine its completeness as a whole.

                                      Antithesis.

 

              The world has no beginning, and no limits in space, but is, in

relation both to time and space, infinite.

                                          Proof.

 

              For let it be granted that it has a beginning. A beginning is an

existence which is preceded by a time in which the thing does not exist. On

the above supposition, it follows that there must have been a time in which

the world did not exist, that is, a void time. But in a void time the origination

of a thing is impossible; because no part of any such time contains a

distinctive condition of being, in preference to that of non-being (whether the

supposed thing originate of itself, or by means of some other cause).Consequently, many series of things may have a beginning in the world, but

the world itself cannot have a beginning, and is, therefore, in relation to past

time, infinite.

              As regards the second statement, let us first take the opposite for

granted — that the world is finite and limited in space; it follows that it must

exist in a void space, which is not limited. We should therefore meet not only

with a relation of things in space, but also a relation of things to space. Now,

as the world is an absolute whole, out of and beyond which no object of

intuition, and consequently no correlate to which can be discovered, this

relation of the world to a void space is merely a relation to no object. But

such a relation, and consequently the limitation of the world by void space, is

nothing. Consequently, the world, as regards space, is not limited, that is, it is
                                  52
infinite in regard to extension.

        52
               Space is merely the form of external intuition (formal intuition),

and not a real object which can be externally perceived. Space, prior to all

things which determine it (fill or limit it), or, rather, which present an

empirical intuition conformable to it, is, under the title of absolute space,

nothing but the mere possibility of external phenomena, in so far as they

either exist in themselves, or can annex themselves to given intuitions.

Empirical intuition is therefore not a composition of phenomena and space

(of perception and empty intuition). The one is not the correlate of the other

in a synthesis, but they are vitally connected in the same empirical intuition,

as matter and form. If we wish to set one of these two apart from the other —

space from phenomena — there arise all sorts of empty determinations of

external intuition, which are very far from being possible perceptions. For

example, motion or rest of the world in an infinite empty space, or a

determination of the mutual relation of both, cannot possibly be perceived,

and is therefore merely the predicate of a notional entity.

                        Observations on the First Antinomy.

 

                                    On the Thesis.

 

              In bringing forward these conflicting arguments, I have not been on

the search for sophisms, for the purpose of availing myself of special

pleading, which takes advantage of the carelessness of the opposite party,

appeals to a misunderstood statute, and erects its unrighteous claims upon anunfair interpretation. Both proofs originate fairly from the nature of the case,

and the advantage presented by the mistakes of the dogmatists of both parties

has been completely set aside.

              The thesis might also have been unfairly demonstrated, by the

introduction of an erroneous conception of the infinity of a given quantity. A

quantity is infinite, if a greater than itself cannot possibly exist. The quantity

is measured by the number of given units- which are taken as a standard —

contained in it. Now no number can be the greatest, because one or more

units can always be added. It follows that an infinite given quantity,

consequently an infinite world (both as regards time and extension) is

impossible. It is, therefore, limited in both respects. In this manner I might

have conducted my proof; but the conception given in it does not agree with

the true conception of an infinite whole. In this there is no representation of

its quantity, it is not said how large it is; consequently its conception is not

the conception of a maximum. We cogitate in it merely its relation to an

arbitrarily assumed unit, in relation to which it is greater than any number.

Now, just as the unit which is taken is greater or smaller, the infinite will be

greater or smaller; but the infinity, which consists merely in the relation to

this given unit, must remain always the same, although the absolute quantity

of the whole is not thereby cognized.

              The true (transcendental) conception of infinity is: that the

successive synthesis of unity in the measurement of a given quantum can
                      53
never be completed. Hence it follows, without possibility of mistake, that an

eternity of actual successive states up to a given (the present) moment cannot

have elapsed, and that the world must therefore have a beginning.

        53
               The quantum in this sense contains a congeries of given units,

which is greater than any number — and this is the mathematical conception

of the infinite.

              In regard to the second part of the thesis, the difficulty as to an

infinite and yet elapsed series disappears; for the manifold of a world infinite

in extension is contemporaneously given. But, in order to cogitate the total of

this manifold, as we cannot have the aid of limits constituting by themselves

this total in intuition, we are obliged to give some account of our conception,

which in this case cannot proceed from the whole to the determined quantity

of the parts, but must demonstrate the possibility of a whole by means of asuccessive synthesis of the parts. But as this synthesis must constitute a series

that cannot be completed, it is impossible for us to cogitate prior to it, and

consequently not by means of it, a totality. For the conception of totality itself

is in the present case the representation of a completed synthesis of the parts;

and this completion, and consequently its conception, is impossible.

                                  On the Antithesis.

 

              The proof in favour of the infinity of the cosmical succession and the

cosmical content is based upon the consideration that, in the opposite case, a

void time and a void space must constitute the limits of the world. Now I am

not unaware, that there are some ways of escaping this conclusion. It may, for

example, be alleged, that a limit to the world, as regards both space and time,

is quite possible, without at the same time holding the existence of an

absolute time before the beginning of the world, or an absolute space

extending beyond the actual world — which is impossible. I am quite well

satisfied with the latter part of this opinion of the philosophers of the

Leibnitzian school. Space is merely the form of external intuition, but not a

real object which can itself be externally intuited; it is not a correlate of

phenomena, it is the form of phenomena itself. Space, therefore, cannot be

regarded as absolutely and in itself something determinative of the existence

of things, because it is not itself an object, but only the form of possible

objects. Consequently, things, as phenomena, determine space; that is to say,

they render it possible that, of all the possible predicates of space (size and

relation), certain may belong to reality. But we cannot affirm the converse,

that space, as something self-subsistent, can determine real things in regard to
                                                                                54
size or shape, for it is in itself not a real thing. Space (filled or void) may

therefore be limited by phenomena, but phenomena cannot be limited by an

empty space without them. This is true of time also. All this being granted, it

is nevertheless indisputable, that we must assume these two nonentities, void

space without and void time before the world, if we assume the existence of

cosmical limits, relatively to space or time.

        54
               It is evident that what is meant here is, that empty space, in so far

as it is limited by phenomena — space, that is, within the world- does not at

least contradict transcendental principles, and may therefore, as regards them,

be admitted, although its possibility cannot on that account be affirmed.

              For, as regards the subterfuge adopted by those who endeavour toevade the consequence — that, if the world is limited as to space and time,

the infinite void must determine the existence of actual things in regard to

their dimensions — it arises solely from the fact that instead of a sensuous

world, an intelligible world — of which nothing is known — is cogitated;

instead of a real beginning (an existence, which is preceded by a period in

which nothing exists), an existence which presupposes no other condition

than that of time; and, instead of limits of extension, boundaries of the

universe. But the question relates to the mundus phaenomenon, and its

quantity; and in this case we cannot make abstraction of the conditions of

sensibility, without doing away with the essential reality of this world itself.

The world of sense, if it is limited, must necessarily lie in the infinite void. If

this, and with it space as the a priori condition of the possibility of

phenomena, is left out of view, the whole world of sense disappears. In our

problem is this alone considered as given. The mundus intelligibilis is

nothing but the general conception of a world, in which abstraction has been

made of all conditions of intuition, and in relation to which no synthetical

proposition — either affirmative or negative — is possible.

                    Second Conflict of Transcendental Ideas.

 

                                        Thesis.

 

              Every composite substance in the world consists of simple parts; and

there exists nothing that is not either itself simple, or composed of simple

parts.

                                          Proof.

 

              For, grant that composite substances do not consist of simple parts;

in this case, if all combination or composition were annihilated in thought, no

composite part, and (as, by the supposition, there do not exist simple parts)

no simple part would exist. Consequently, no substance; consequently,

nothing would exist. Either, then, it is impossible to annihilate composition in

thought; or, after such annihilation, there must remain something that subsists

without composition, that is, something that is simple. But in the former case

the composite could not itself consist of substances, because with substances

composition is merely a contingent relation, apart from which they must still

exist as self-subsistent beings. Now, as this case contradicts the supposition,the second must contain the truth- that the substantial composite in the world

consists of simple parts.

              It follows, as an immediate inference, that the things in the world are

all, without exception, simple beings — that composition is merely an

external condition pertaining to them — and that, although we never can

separate and isolate the elementary substances from the state of composition,

reason must cogitate these as the primary subjects of all composition, and

consequently, as prior thereto — and as simple substances.

                                      Antithesis.

 

              No composite thing in the world consists of simple parts; and there

does not exist in the world any simple substance.

                                          Proof.

 

              Let it be supposed that a composite thing (as substance) consists of

simple parts. Inasmuch as all external relation, consequently all composition

of substances, is possible only in space; the space, occupied by that which is

composite, must consist of the same number of parts as is contained in the

composite. But space does not consist of simple parts, but of spaces.

Therefore, every part of the composite must occupy a space. But the

absolutely primary parts of what is composite are simple. It follows that what

is simple occupies a space. Now, as everything real that occupies a space,

contains a manifold the parts of which are external to each other, and is

consequently composite — and a real composite, not of accidents (for these

cannot exist external to each other apart from substance), but of substances

— it follows that the simple must be a substantial composite, which is self-

contradictory.

              The second proposition of the antithesis — that there exists in the

world nothing that is simple — is here equivalent to the following: The

existence of the absolutely simple cannot be demonstrated from any

experience or perception either external or internal; and the absolutely simple

is a mere idea, the objective reality of which cannot be demonstrated in any

possible experience; it is consequently, in the exposition of phenomena,

without application and object. For, let us take for granted that an object may

be found in experience for this transcendental idea; the empirical intuition ofsuch an object must then be recognized to contain absolutely no manifold

with its parts external to each other, and connected into unity. Now, as we

cannot reason from the non-consciousness of such a manifold to the

impossibility of its existence in the intuition of an object, and as the proof of

this impossibility is necessary for the establishment and proof of absolute

simplicity; it follows that this simplicity cannot be inferred from any

perception whatever. As, therefore, an absolutely simple object cannot be

given in any experience, and the world of sense must be considered as the

sum total of all possible experiences: nothing simple exists in the world.

              This second proposition in the antithesis has a more extended aim

than the first. The first merely banishes the simple from the intuition of the

composite; while the second drives it entirely out of nature. Hence we were

unable to demonstrate it from the conception of a given object of external

intuition (of the composite), but we were obliged to prove it from the relation

of a given object to a possible experience in general.

                      Observations on the Second Antinomy.

 

                                        Thesis.

 

              When I speak of a whole, which necessarily consists of simple parts,

I understand thereby only a substantial whole, as the true composite; that is to

say, I understand that contingent unity of the manifold which is given as

perfectly isolated (at least in thought), placed in reciprocal connection, and

thus constituted a unity. Space ought not to be called a compositum but a

totum, for its parts are possible in the whole, and not the whole by means of

the parts. It might perhaps be called a compositum ideale, but not a

compositum reale. But this is of no importance. As space is not a composite

of substances (and not even of real accidents), if I abstract all composition

therein — nothing, not even a point, remains; for a point is possible only as

the limit of a space — consequently of a composite. Space and time,

therefore, do not consist of simple parts. That which belongs only to the

condition or state of a substance, even although it possesses a quantity

(motion or change, for example), likewise does not consist of simple parts.

That is to say, a certain degree of change does not originate from the addition

of many simple changes. Our inference of the simple from the composite is

valid only of self-subsisting things. But the accidents of a state are not self-subsistent. The proof, then, for the necessity of the simple, as the component

part of all that is substantial and composite, may prove a failure, and the

whole case of this thesis be lost, if we carry the proposition too far, and wish

to make it valid of everything that is composite without distinction — as

indeed has really now and then happened. Besides, I am here speaking only

of the simple, in so far as it is necessarily given in the composite — the latter

being capable of solution into the former as its component parts. The proper

signification of the word monas (as employed by Leibnitz) ought to relate to

the simple, given immediately as simple substance (for example, in

consciousness), and not as an element of the composite. As an clement, the

term atomus would be more appropriate. And as I wish to prove the existence

of simple substances, only in relation to, and as the elements of, the

composite, I might term the antithesis of the second Antinomy,

transcendental Atomistic. But as this word has long been employed to

designate a particular theory of corporeal phenomena (moleculae), and thus

presupposes a basis of empirical conceptions, I prefer calling it the dialectical

principle of Monadology.

                                      Antithesis.

 

              Against the assertion of the infinite subdivisibility of matter whose

ground of proof is purely mathematical, objections have been alleged by the

Monadists. These objections lay themselves open, at first sight, to suspicion,

from the fact that they do not recognize the clearest mathematical proofs as

propositions relating to the constitution of space, in so far as it is really the

formal condition of the possibility of all matter, but regard them merely as

inferences from abstract but arbitrary conceptions, which cannot have any

application to real things. just as if it were possible to imagine another mode

of intuition than that given in the primitive intuition of space; and just as if its

a priori determinations did not apply to everything, the existence of which is

possible, from the fact alone of its filling space. If we listen to them, we shall

find ourselves required to cogitate, in addition to the mathematical point,

which is simple — not, however, a part, but a mere limit of space- physical

points, which are indeed likewise simple, but possess the peculiar property,

as parts of space, of filling it merely by their aggregation. I shall not repeat

here the common and clear refutations of this absurdity, which are to be

found everywhere in numbers: every one knows that it is impossible to

undermine the evidence of mathematics by mere discursive conceptions; Ishall only remark that, if in this case philosophy endeavours to gain an

advantage over mathematics by sophistical artifices, it is because it forgets

that the discussion relates solely to Phenomena and their conditions. It is not

sufficient to find the conception of the simple for the pure conception of the

composite, but we must discover for the intuition of the composite (matter),

the intuition of the simple. Now this, according to the laws of sensibility, and

consequently in the case of objects of sense, is utterly impossible. In the case

of a whole composed of substances, which is cogitated solely by the pure

understanding, it may be necessary to be in possession of the simple before

composition is possible. But this does not hold good of the Totum

substantiale phaenomenon, which, as an empirical intuition in space,

possesses the necessary property of containing no simple part, for the very

reason that no part of space is simple. Meanwhile, the Monadists have been

subtle enough to escape from this difficulty, by presupposing intuition and

the dynamical relation of substances as the condition of the possibility of

space, instead of regarding space as the condition of the possibility of the

objects of external intuition, that is, of bodies. Now we have a conception of

bodies only as phenomena, and, as such, they necessarily presuppose space as

the condition of all external phenomena. The evasion is therefore in vain; as,

indeed, we have sufficiently shown in our Aesthetic. If bodies were things in

themselves, the proof of the Monadists would be unexceptionable.

              The second dialectical assertion possesses the peculiarity of having

opposed to it a dogmatical proposition, which, among all such sophistical

statements, is the only one that undertakes to prove in the case of an object of

experience, that which is properly a transcendental idea — the absolute

simplicity of substance. The proposition is that the object of the internal

sense, the thinking Ego, is an absolute simple substance. Without at present

entering upon this subject — as it has been considered at length in a former

chapter- I shall merely remark that, if something is cogitated merely as an

object, without the addition of any synthetical determination of its intuition

— as happens in the case of the bare representation, I— it is certain that no

manifold and no composition can be perceived in such a representation. As,

moreover, the predicates whereby I cogitate this object are merely intuitions

of the internal sense, there cannot be discovered in them anything to prove

the existence of a manifold whose parts are external to each other, and,

consequently, nothing to prove the existence of real composition.

Consciousness, therefore, is so constituted that, inasmuch as the thinkingsubject is at the same time its own object, it cannot divide itself — although it

can divide its inhering determinations. For every object in relation to itself is

absolute unity. Nevertheless, if the subject is regarded externally, as an object

of intuition, it must, in its character of phenomenon, possess the property of

composition. And it must always be regarded in this manner, if we wish to

know whether there is or is not contained in it a manifold whose parts are

external to each other.

                  Third Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas.

 

                                        Thesis.

 

              Causality according to the laws of nature, is not the only causality

operating to originate the phenomena of the world. A causality of freedom is

also necessary to account fully for these phenomena.

                                          Proof.

 

              Let it be supposed, that there is no other kind of causality than that

according to the laws of nature. Consequently, everything that happens

presupposes a previous condition, which it follows with absolute certainty, in

conformity with a rule. But this previous condition must itself be something

that has happened (that has arisen in time, as it did not exist before), for, if it

has always been in existence, its consequence or effect would not thus

originate for the first time, but would likewise have always existed. The

causality, therefore, of a cause, whereby something happens, is itself a thing

that has happened. Now this again presupposes, in conformity with the law of

nature, a previous condition and its causality, and this another anterior to the

former, and so on. If, then, everything happens solely in accordance with the

laws of nature, there cannot be any real first beginning of things, but only a

subaltern or comparative beginning. There cannot, therefore, be a

completeness of series on the side of the causes which originate the one from

the other. But the law of nature is that nothing can happen without a

sufficient a priori determined cause. The proposition therefore — if all

causality is possible only in accordance with the laws of nature — is, when

stated in this unlimited and general manner, self-contradictory. It follows that

this cannot be the only kind of causality.

              From what has been said, it follows that a causality must beadmitted, by means of which something happens, without its cause being

determined according to necessary laws by some other cause preceding. That

is to say, there must exist an absolute spontaneity of cause, which of itself

originates a series of phenomena which proceeds according to natural laws —

consequently transcendental freedom, without which even in the course of

nature the succession of phenomena on the side of causes is never complete.

                                      Antithesis.

 

              There is no such thing as freedom, but everything in the world

happens solely according to the laws of nature.

                                          Proof.

 

              Granted, that there does exist freedom in the transcendental sense, as

a peculiar kind of causality, operating to produce events in the world — a

faculty, that is to say, of originating a state, and consequently a series of

consequences from that state. In this case, not only the series originated by

this spontaneity, but the determination of this spontaneity itself to the

production of the series, that is to say, the causality itself must have an

absolute commencement, such that nothing can precede to determine this

action according to unvarying laws. But every beginning of action

presupposes in the acting cause a state of inaction; and a dynamically primal

beginning of action presupposes a state, which has no connection — as

regards causality — with the preceding state of the cause — which does not,

that is, in any wise result from it. Transcendental freedom is therefore

opposed to the natural law of cause and effect, and such a conjunction of

successive states in effective causes is destructive of the possibility of unity

in experience and for that reason not to be found in experience — is

consequently a mere fiction of thought.

              We have, therefore, nothing but nature to which we must look for

connection and order in cosmical events. Freedom — independence of the

laws of nature — is certainly a deliverance from restraint, but it is also a

relinquishing of the guidance of law and rule. For it cannot be alleged that,

instead of the laws of nature, laws of freedom may be introduced into the

causality of the course of nature. For, if freedom were determined according

to laws, it would be no longer freedom, but merely nature. Nature, therefore,

and transcendental freedom are distinguishable as conformity to law andlawlessness. The former imposes upon understanding the difficulty of

seeking the origin of events ever higher and higher in the series of causes,

inasmuch as causality is always conditioned thereby; while it compensates

this labour by the guarantee of a unity complete and in conformity with law.

The latter, on the contrary, holds out to the understanding the promise of a

point of rest in the chain of causes, by conducting it to an unconditioned

causality, which professes to have the power of spontaneous origination, but

which, in its own utter blindness, deprives it of the guidance of rules, by

which alone a completely connected experience is possible.

                        Observations on the Third Antinomy.

 

                                    On the Thesis.

 

              The transcendental idea of freedom is far from constituting the entire

content of the psychological conception so termed, which is for the most part

empirical. It merely presents us with the conception of spontaneity of action,

as the proper ground for imputing freedom to the cause of a certain class of

objects. It is, however, the true stumbling-stone to philosophy, which meets

with unconquerable difficulties in the way of its admitting this kind of

unconditioned causality. That element in the question of the freedom of the

will, which bas for so long a time placed speculative reason in such

perplexity, is properly only transcendental, and concerns the question,

whether there must be held to exist a faculty of spontaneous origination of a

series of successive things or states. How such a faculty is possible is not a

necessary inquiry; for in the case of natural causality itself, we are obliged to

content ourselves with the a priori knowledge that such a causality must be

presupposed, although we are quite incapable of comprehending how the

being of one thing is possible through the being of another, but must for this

information look entirely to experience. Now we have demonstrated this

necessity of a free first beginning of a series of phenomena, only in so far as

it is required for the comprehension of an origin of the world, all following

states being regarded as a succession according to laws of nature alone. But,

as there has thus been proved the existence of a faculty which can of itself

originate a series in time — although we are unable to explain how it can

exist — we feel ourselves authorized to admit, even in the midst of the

natural course of events, a beginning, as regards causality, of different

successions of phenomena, and at the same time to attribute to all substancesa faculty of free action. But we ought in this case not to allow ourselves to

fall into a common misunderstanding, and to suppose that, because a

successive series in the world can only have a comparatively first beginning

— another state or condition of things always preceding — an absolutely first

beginning of a series in the course of nature is impossible. For we are not

speaking here of an absolutely first beginning in relation to time, but as

regards causality alone. When, for example, I, completely of my own free

will, and independently of the necessarily determinative influence of natural

causes, rise from my chair, there commences with this event, including its

material consequences in infinitum, an absolutely new series; although, in

relation to time, this event is merely the continuation of a preceding series.

For this resolution and act of mine do not form part of the succession of

effects in nature, and are not mere continuations of it; on the contrary, the

determining causes of nature cease to operate in reference to this event,

which certainly succeeds the acts of nature, but does not proceed from them.

For these reasons, the action of a free agent must be termed, in regard to

causality, if not in relation to time, an absolutely primal beginning of a series

of phenomena.

              The justification of this need of reason to rest upon a free act as the

first beginning of the series of natural causes is evident from the fact, that all

philosophers of antiquity (with the exception of the Epicurean school) felt

themselves obliged, when constructing a theory of the motions of the

universe, to accept a prime mover, that is, a freely acting cause, which

spontaneously and prior to all other causes evolved this series of states. They

always felt the need of going beyond mere nature, for the purpose of making

a first beginning comprehensible.

                                  On the Antithesis.

 

              The assertor of the all-sufficiency of nature in regard to causality

(transcendental Physiocracy), in opposition to the doctrine of freedom, would

defend his view of the question somewhat in the following manner. He would

say, in answer to the sophistical arguments of the opposite party: If you do

not accept a mathematical first, in relation to time, you have no need to seek a

dynamical first, in regard to causality. Who compelled you to imagine an

absolutely primal condition of the world, and therewith an absolute beginning

of the gradually progressing successions of phenomena — and, as somefoundation for this fancy of yours, to set bounds to unlimited nature?

Inasmuch as the substances in the world have always existed — at least the

unity of experience renders such a supposition quite necessary — there is no

difficulty in believing also, that the changes in the conditions of these

substances have always existed; and, consequently, that a first beginning,

mathematical or dynamical, is by no means required. The possibility of such

an infinite derivation, without any initial member from which all the others

result, is certainly quite incomprehensible. But, if you are rash enough to

deny the enigmatical secrets of nature for this reason, you will find

yourselves obliged to deny also the existence of many fundamental properties

of natural objects (such as fundamental forces), which you can just as little

comprehend; and even the possibility of so simple a conception as that of

change must present to you insuperable difficulties. For if experience did not

teach you that it was real, you never could conceive a priori the possibility of

this ceaseless sequence of being and non-being.

              But if the existence of a transcendental faculty of freedom is granted

— a faculty of originating changes in the world — this faculty must at least

exist out of and apart from the world; although it is certainly a bold

assumption, that, over and above the complete content of all possible

intuitions, there still exists an object which cannot be presented in any

possible perception. But, to attribute to substances in the world itself such a

faculty, is quite inadmissible; for, in this case; the connection of phenomena

reciprocally determining and determined according to general laws, which is

termed nature, and along with it the criteria of empirical truth, which enable

us to distinguish experience from mere visionary dreaming, would almost

entirely disappear. In proximity with such a lawless faculty of freedom, a

system of nature is hardly cogitable; for the laws of the latter would be

continually subject to the intrusive influences of the former, and the course of

phenomena, which would otherwise proceed regularly and uniformly, would

become thereby confused and disconnected.

                  Fourth Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas.

 

                                        Thesis.

 

              There exists either in, or in connection with the world — either as a

part of it, or as the cause of it-an absolutely necessary being.                                          Proof.

 

              The world of sense, as the sum total of all phenomena, contains a

series of changes. For, without such a series, the mental representation of the

series of time itself, as the condition of the possibility of the sensuous world,
                                55
could not be presented to us. But every change stands under its condition,

which precedes it in time and renders it necessary. Now the existence of a

given condition presupposes a complete series of conditions up to the

absolutely unconditioned, which alone is absolutely necessary. It follows that

something that is absolutely necessary must exist, if change exists as its

consequence. But this necessary thing itself belongs to the sensuous world.

For suppose it to exist out of and apart from it, the series of cosmical changes

would receive from it a beginning, and yet this necessary cause would not

itself belong to the world of sense. But this is impossible. For, as the

beginning of a series in time is determined only by that which precedes it in

time, the supreme condition of the beginning of a series of changes must exist

in the time in which this series itself did not exist; for a beginning supposes a

time preceding, in which the thing that begins to be was not in existence. The

causality of the necessary cause of changes, and consequently the cause itself,

must for these reasons belong to time — and to phenomena, time being

possible only as the form of phenomena. Consequently, it cannot be cogitated

as separated from the world of sense — the sum total of all phenomena.

There is, therefore, contained in the world, something that is absolutely

necessary — whether it be the whole cosmical series itself, or only a part of

it.

        55
               Objectively, time, as the formal condition of the possibility of

change, precedes all changes; but subjectively, and in consciousness, the

representation of time, like every other, is given solely by occasion of

perception.

                                      Antithesis.

 

              An absolutely necessary being does not exist, either in the world, or

out of it — as its cause.

                                          Proof.

 

              Grant that either the world itself is necessary, or that there iscontained in it a necessary existence. Two cases are possible. First, there

must either be in the series of cosmical changes a beginning, which is

unconditionally necessary, and therefore uncaused- which is at variance with

the dynamical law of the determination of all phenomena in time; or,

secondly, the series itself is without beginning, and, although contingent and

conditioned in all its parts, is nevertheless absolutely necessary and

unconditioned as a whole — which is self-contradictory. For the existence of

an aggregate cannot be necessary, if no single part of it possesses necessary

existence.

              Grant, on the other band, that an absolutely necessary cause exists

out of and apart from the world. This cause, as the highest member in the
                                                                            56
series of the causes of cosmical changes, must originate or begin the

existence of the latter and their series. In this case it must also begin to act,

and its causality would therefore belong to time, and consequently to the sum

total of phenomena, that is, to the world. It follows that the cause cannot be

out of the world; which is contradictory to the hypothesis. Therefore, neither

in the world, nor out of it (but in causal connection with it), does there exist

any absolutely necessary being.

        56
               The word begin is taken in two senses. The first is active — the

cause being regarded as beginning a series of conditions as its effect (infit).

The second is passive — the causality in the cause itself beginning to operate

(fit). I reason here from the first to the second.

                        Observations on the Fourth Antinomy.

 

                                    On the Thesis.

 

              To demonstrate the existence of a necessary being, I cannot be

permitted in this place to employ any other than the cosmological argument,

which ascends from the conditioned in phenomena to the unconditioned in

conception — the unconditioned being considered the necessary condition of

the absolute totality of the series. The proof, from the mere idea of a supreme

being, belongs to another principle of reason and requires separate

discussion.

              The pure cosmological proof demonstrates the existence of a

necessary being, but at the same time leaves it quite unsettled, whether thisbeing is the world itself, or quite distinct from it. To establish the truth of the

latter view, principles are requisite, which are not cosmological and do not

proceed in the series of phenomena. We should require to introduce into our

proof conceptions of contingent beings — regarded merely as objects of the

understanding, and also a principle which enables us to connect these, by

means of mere conceptions, with a necessary being. But the proper place for

all such arguments is a transcendent philosophy, which has unhappily not yet

been established.

              But, if we begin our proof cosmologically, by laying at the

foundation of it the series of phenomena, and the regress in it according to

empirical laws of causality, we are not at liberty to break off from this mode

of demonstration and to pass over to something which is not itself a member

of the series. The condition must be taken in exactly the same signification as

the relation of the conditioned to its condition in the series has been taken, for

the series must conduct us in an unbroken regress to this supreme condition.

But if this relation is sensuous, and belongs to the possible empirical

employment of understanding, the supreme condition or cause must close the

regressive series according to the laws of sensibility and consequently, must

belong to the series of time. It follows that this necessary existence must be

regarded as the highest member of the cosmical series.

              Certain philosophers have, nevertheless, allowed themselves the

liberty of making such a saltus (metabasis eis allo gonos). From the changes

in the world they have concluded their empirical contingency, that is, their

dependence on empirically-determined causes, and they thus admitted an

ascending series of empirical conditions: and in this they are quite right. But

as they could not find in this series any primal beginning or any highest

member, they passed suddenly from the empirical conception of contingency

to the pure category, which presents us with a series — not sensuous, but

intellectual — whose completeness does certainly rest upon the existence of

an absolutely necessary cause. Nay, more, this intellectual series is not tied to

any sensuous conditions; and is therefore free from the condition of time,

which requires it spontaneously to begin its causality in time. But such a

procedure is perfectly inadmissible, as will be made plain from what follows.

              In the pure sense of the categories, that is contingent the

contradictory opposite of which is possible. Now we cannot reason from

empirical contingency to intellectual. The opposite of that which is changed— the opposite of its state — is actual at another time, and is therefore

possible. Consequently, it is not the contradictory opposite of the former

state. To be that, it is necessary that, in the same time in which the preceding

state existed, its opposite could have existed in its place; but such a cognition

is not given us in the mere phenomenon of change. A body that was in

motion = A, comes into a state of rest = non-A. Now it cannot be concluded

from the fact that a state opposite to the state A follows it, that the

contradictory opposite of A is possible; and that A is therefore contingent. To

prove this, we should require to know that the state of rest could have existed

in the very same time in which the motion took place. Now we know nothing

more than that the state of rest was actual in the time that followed the state

of motion; consequently, that it was also possible. But motion at one time,

and rest at another time, are not contradictorily opposed to each other. It

follows from what has been said that the succession of opposite

determinations, that is, change, does not demonstrate the fact of contingency

as represented in the conceptions of the pure understanding; and that it

cannot, therefore, conduct us to the fact of the existence of a necessary being.

Change proves merely empirical contingency, that is to say, that the new state

could not have existed without a cause, which belongs to the preceding time.

This cause — even although it is regarded as absolutely necessary — must be

presented to us in time, and must belong to the series of phenomena.

                                  On the Antithesis.

 

              The difficulties which meet us, in our attempt to rise through the

series of phenomena to the existence of an absolutely necessary supreme

cause, must not originate from our inability to establish the truth of our mere

conceptions of the necessary existence of a thing. That is to say, our

objections not be ontological, but must be directed against the causal

connection with a series of phenomena of a condition which is itself

unconditioned. In one word, they must be cosmological and relate to

empirical laws. We must show that the regress in the series of causes (in the

world of sense) cannot conclude with an empirically unconditioned

condition, and that the cosmological argument from the contingency of the

cosmical state — a contingency alleged to arise from change — does not

justify us in accepting a first cause, that is, a prime originator of the cosmical

series.              The reader will observe in this antinomy a very remarkable contrast.

The very same grounds of proof which established in the thesis the existence

of a supreme being, demonstrated in the antithesis — and with equal

strictness — the non-existence of such a being. We found, first, that a

necessary being exists, because the whole time past contains the series of all

conditions, and with it, therefore, the unconditioned (the necessary);

secondly, that there does not exist any necessary being, for the same reason,

that the whole time past contains the series of all conditions — which are

themselves, therefore, in the aggregate, conditioned. The cause of this

seeming incongruity is as follows. We attend, in the first argument, solely to

the absolute totality of the series of conditions, the one of which determines

the other in time, and thus arrive at a necessary unconditioned. In the second,

we consider, on the contrary, the contingency of everything that is

determined in the series of time- for every event is preceded by a time, in

which the condition itself must be determined as conditioned — and thus

everything that is unconditioned or absolutely necessary disappears. In both,

the mode of proof is quite in accordance with the common procedure of

human reason, which often falls into discord with itself, from considering an

object from two different points of view. Herr von Mairan regarded the

controversy between two celebrated astronomers, which arose from a similar

difficulty as to the choice of a proper standpoint, as a phenomenon of

sufficient importance to warrant a separate treatise on the subject. The one

concluded: the moon revolves on its own axis, because it constantly presents

the same side to the earth; the other declared that the moon does not revolve

on its own axis, for the same reason. Both conclusions were perfectly correct,

according to the point of view from which the motions of the moon were

considered.

 

 

    Section III. Of the Interest of Reason in these Self-contradictions.

 

 

              We have thus completely before us the dialectical procedure of the

cosmological ideas. No possible experience can present us with an object

adequate to them in extent. Nay, more, reason itself cannot cogitate them asaccording with the general laws of experience. And yet they are not arbitrary

fictions of thought. On the contrary, reason, in its uninterrupted progress in

the empirical synthesis, is necessarily conducted to them, when it endeavours

to free from all conditions and to comprehend in its unconditioned totality

that which can only be determined conditionally in accordance with the laws

of experience. These dialectical propositions are so many attempts to solve

four natural and unavoidable problems of reason. There are neither more, nor

can there be less, than this number, because there are no other series of

synthetical hypotheses, limiting a priori the empirical synthesis.

              The brilliant claims of reason striving to extend its dominion beyond

the limits of experience, have been represented above only in dry formulae,

which contain merely the grounds of its pretensions. They have, besides, in

conformity with the character of a transcendental philosophy, been freed

from every empirical element; although the full splendour of the promises

they hold out, and the anticipations they excite, manifests itself only when in

connection with empirical cognitions. In the application of them, however,

and in the advancing enlargement of the employment of reason, while

struggling to rise from the region of experience and to soar to those sublime

ideas, philosophy discovers a value and a dignity, which, if it could but make

good its assertions, would raise it far above all other departments of human

knowledge — professing, as it does, to present a sure foundation for our

highest hopes and the ultimate aims of all the exertions of reason. The

questions: whether the world has a beginning and a limit to its extension in

space; whether there exists anywhere, or perhaps, in my own thinking Self,

an indivisible and indestructible unity — or whether nothing but what is

divisible and transitory exists; whether I am a free agent, or, like other

beings, am bound in the chains of nature and fate; whether, finally, there is a

supreme cause of the world, or all our thought and speculation must end with

nature and the order of external things — are questions for the solution of

which the mathematician would willingly exchange his whole science; for in

it there is no satisfaction for the highest aspirations and most ardent desires of

humanity. Nay, it may even be said that the true value of mathematics- that

pride of human reason — consists in this: that she guides reason to the

knowledge of nature — in her greater as well as in her less manifestations —

in her beautiful order and regularity — guides her, moreover, to an insight

into the wonderful unity of the moving forces in the operations of nature, far

beyond the expectations of a philosophy building only on experience; andthat she thus encourages philosophy to extend the province of reason beyond

all experience, and at the same time provides it with the most excellent

materials for supporting its investigations, in so far as their nature admits, by

adequate and accordant intuitions.

              Unfortunately for speculation — but perhaps fortunately for the

practical interests of humanity — reason, in the midst of her highest

anticipations, finds herself hemmed in by a press of opposite and

contradictory conclusions, from which neither her honour nor her safety will

permit her to draw back. Nor can she regard these conflicting trains of

reasoning with indifference as mere passages at arms, still less can she

command peace; for in the subject of the conflict she has a deep interest.

There is no other course left open to her than to reflect with herself upon the

origin of this disunion in reason — whether it may not arise from a mere

misunderstanding. After such an inquiry, arrogant claims would have to be

given up on both sides; but the sovereignty of reason over understanding and

sense would be based upon a sure foundation.

              We shall at present defer this radical inquiry and, in the meantime,

consider for a little what side in the controversy we should most willingly

take, if we were obliged to become partisans at all. As, in this case, we leave

out of sight altogether the logical criterion of truth, and merely consult our

own interest in reference to the question, these considerations, although

inadequate to settle the question of right in either party, will enable us to

comprehend how those who have taken part in the struggle, adopt the one

view rather than the other — no special insight into the subject, however,

having influenced their choice. They will, at the same time, explain to us

many other things by the way — for example, the fiery zeal on the one side

and the cold maintenance of their cause on the other; why the one party has

met with the warmest approbations, and the other has always been repulsed

by irreconcilable prejudices.

              There is one thing, however, that determines the proper point of

view, from which alone this preliminary inquiry can be instituted and carried

on with the proper completeness — and that is the comparison of the

principles from which both sides, thesis and antithesis, proceed. My readers

would remark in the propositions of the antithesis a complete uniformity in

the mode of thought and a perfect unity of principle. Its principle was that of

pure empiricism, not only in the explication of the phenomena in the world,but also in the solution of the transcendental ideas, even of that of the

universe itself. The affirmations of the thesis, on the contrary, were based, in

addition to the empirical mode of explanation employed in the series of

phenomena, on intellectual propositions; and its principles were in so far not

simple. I shall term the thesis, in view of its essential characteristic, the

dogmatism of pure reason.

              On the side of Dogmatism, or of the thesis, therefore, in the

determination of the cosmological ideas, we find:

              1. A practical interest, which must be very dear to every right-

thinking man. That the word has a beginning — that the nature of my

thinking self is simple, and therefore indestructible — that I am a free agent,

and raised above the compulsion of nature and her laws — and, finally, that

the entire order of things, which form the world, is dependent upon a

Supreme Being, from whom the whole receives unity and connection —

these are so many foundation-stones of morality and religion. The antithesis

deprives us of all these supports — or, at least, seems so to deprive us.

              2. A speculative interest of reason manifests itself on this side. For,

if we take the transcendental ideas and employ them in the manner which the

thesis directs, we can exhibit completely a priori the entire chain of

conditions, and understand the derivation of the conditioned — beginning

from the unconditioned. This the antithesis does not do; and for this reason

does not meet with so welcome a reception. For it can give no answer to our

question respecting the conditions of its synthesis — except such as must be

supplemented by another question, and so on to infinity. According to it, we

must rise from a given beginning to one still higher; every part conducts us to

a still smaller one; every event is preceded by another event which is its

cause; and the conditions of existence rest always upon other and still higher

conditions, and find neither end nor basis in some self-subsistent thing as the

primal being.

              3. This side has also the advantage of popularity; and this constitutes

no small part of its claim to favour. The common understanding does not find

the least difficulty in the idea of the unconditioned beginning of all synthesis

— accustomed, as it is, rather to follow our consequences than to seek for a

proper basis for cognition. In the conception of an absolute first, moreover —

the possibility of which it does not inquire into — it is highly gratified to finda firmly-established point of departure for its attempts at theory; while in the

restless and continuous ascent from the conditioned to the condition, always

with one foot in the air, it can find no satisfaction.

              On the side of the antithesis, or Empiricism, in the determination of

the cosmological ideas:

              1. We cannot discover any such practical interest arising from pure

principles of reason as morality and religion present. On the contrary, pure

empiricism seems to empty them of all their power and influence. If there

does not exist a Supreme Being distinct from the world — if the world is

without beginning, consequently without a Creator — if our wills are not

free, and the soul is divisible and subject to corruption just like matter — the

ideas and principles of morality lose all validity and fall with the

transcendental ideas which constituted their theoretical support.

              2. But empiricism, in compensation, holds out to reason, in its

speculative interests, certain important advantages, far exceeding any that the

dogmatist can promise us. For, when employed by the empiricist,

understanding is always upon its proper ground of investigation — the field

of possible experience, the laws of which it can explore, and thus extend its

cognition securely and with clear intelligence without being stopped by limits

in any direction. Here can it and ought it to find and present to intuition its

proper object — not only in itself, but in all its relations; or, if it employ

conceptions, upon this ground it can always present the corresponding images

in clear and unmistakable intuitions. It is quite unnecessary for it to renounce

the guidance of nature, to attach itself to ideas, the objects of which it cannot

know; because, as mere intellectual entities, they cannot be presented in any

intuition. On the contrary, it is not even permitted to abandon its proper

occupation, under the pretence that it has been brought to a conclusion (for it

never can be), and to pass into the region of idealizing reason and

transcendent conceptions, which it is not required to observe and explore the

laws of nature, but merely to think and to imagine — secure from being

contradicted by facts, because they have not been called as witnesses, but

passed by, or perhaps subordinated to the so-called higher interests and

considerations of pure reason.

              Hence the empiricist will never allow himself to accept any epoch of

nature for the first — the absolutely primal state; he will not believe that therecan be limits to his outlook into her wide domains, nor pass from the objects

of nature, which he can satisfactorily explain by means of observation and

mathematical thought — which he can determine synthetically in intuition, to

those which neither sense nor imagination can ever present in concreto; he

will not concede the existence of a faculty in nature, operating independently

of the laws of nature — a concession which would introduce uncertainty into

the procedure of the understanding, which is guided by necessary laws to the

observation of phenomena; nor, finally, will he permit himself to seek a cause

beyond nature, inasmuch as we know nothing but it, and from it alone receive

an objective basis for all our conceptions and instruction in the unvarying

laws of things.

              In truth, if the empirical philosopher had no other purpose in the

establishment of his antithesis than to check the presumption of a reason

which mistakes its true destination, which boasts of its insight and its

knowledge, just where all insight and knowledge cease to exist, and regards

that which is valid only in relation to a practical interest, as an advancement

of the speculative interests of the mind (in order, when it is convenient for

itself, to break the thread of our physical investigations, and, under pretence

of extending our cognition, connect them with transcendental ideas, by means

of which we really know only that we know nothing)— if, I say, the

empiricist rested satisfied with this benefit, the principle advanced by him

would be a maxim recommending moderation in the pretensions of reason

and modesty in its affirmations, and at the same time would direct us to the

right mode of extending the province of the understanding, by the help of the

only true teacher, experience. In obedience to this advice, intellectual

hypotheses and faith would not be called in aid of our practical interests; nor

should we introduce them under the pompous titles of science and insight.

For speculative cognition cannot find an objective basis any other where than

in experience; and, when we overstep its limits our synthesis, which requires

ever new cognitions independent of experience, has no substratum of

intuition upon which to build.

              But if — as often happens — empiricism, in relation to ideas,

becomes itself dogmatic and boldly denies that which is above the sphere of

its phenomenal cognition, it falls itself into the error of intemperance — an

error which is here all the more reprehensible, as thereby the practical interest

of reason receives an irreparable injury.                                                                              57
              And this constitutes the opposition between Epicureanism and

Platonism.

        57
               It is, however, still a matter of doubt whether Epicurus ever

propounded these principles as directions for the objective employment of the

understanding. If, indeed, they were nothing more than maxims for the

speculative exercise of reason, he gives evidence therein a more genuine

philosophic spirit than any of the philosophers of antiquity. That, in the

explanation of phenomena, we must proceed as if the field of inquiry had

neither limits in space nor commencement in time; that we must be satisfied

with the teaching of experience in reference to the material of which the

world is posed; that we must not look for any other mode of the origination of

events than that which is determined by the unalterable laws of nature; and

finally, that we not employ the hypothesis of a cause distinct from the world

to account for a phenomenon or for the world itself — are principles for the

extension of speculative philosophy, and the discovery of the true sources of

the principles of morals, which, however little conformed to in the present

day, are undoubtedly correct. At the same time, any one desirous of ignoring,

in mere speculation, these dogmatical propositions, need not for that reason

be accused of denying them.

              Both Epicurus and Plato assert more in their systems than they

know. The former encourages and advances science — although to the

prejudice of the practical; the latter presents us with excellent principles for

the investigation of the practical, but, in relation to everything regarding

which we can attain to speculative cognition, permits reason to append

idealistic explanations of natural phenomena, to the great injury of physical

investigation.

              3. In regard to the third motive for the preliminary choice of a party

in this war of assertions, it seems very extraordinary that empiricism should

be utterly unpopular. We should be inclined to believe that the common

understanding would receive it with pleasure — promising as it does to

satisfy it without passing the bounds of experience and its connected order;

while transcendental dogmatism obliges it to rise to conceptions which far

surpass the intelligence and ability of the most practised thinkers. But in this,

in truth, is to be found its real motive. For the common understanding thus

finds itself in a situation where not even the most learned can have the

advantage of it. If it understands little or nothing about these transcendentalconceptions, no one can boast of understanding any more; and although it

may not express itself in so scholastically correct a manner as others, it can

busy itself with reasoning and arguments without end, wandering among

mere ideas, about which one can always be very eloquent, because we know

nothing about them; while, in the observation and investigation of nature, it

would be forced to remain dumb and to confess its utter ignorance. Thus

indolence and vanity form of themselves strong recommendations of these

principles. Besides, although it is a hard thing for a philosopher to assume a

principle, of which he can give to himself no reasonable account, and still

more to employ conceptions, the objective reality of which cannot be

established, nothing is more usual with the common understanding. It wants

something which will allow it to go to work with confidence. The difficulty

of even comprehending a supposition does not disquiet it, because — not

knowing what comprehending means — it never even thinks of the

supposition it may be adopting as a principle; and regards as known that with

which it has become familiar from constant use. And, at last, all speculative

interests disappear before the practical interests which it holds dear; and it

fancies that it understands and knows what its necessities and hopes incite it

to assume or to believe. Thus the empiricism of transcendentally idealizing

reason is robbed of all popularity; and, however prejudicial it may be to the

highest practical principles, there is no fear that it will ever pass the limits of

the schools, or acquire any favour or influence in society or with the

multitude a

              Human reason is by nature architectonic. That is to say, it regards all

cognitions as parts of a possible system, and hence accepts only such

principles as at least do not incapacitate a cognition to which we may have

attained from being placed along with others in a general system. But the

propositions of the antithesis are of a character which renders the completion

of an edifice of cognitions impossible. According to these, beyond one state

or epoch of the world there is always to be found one more ancient; in every

part always other parts themselves divisible; preceding every event another,

the origin of which must itself be sought still higher; and everything in

existence is conditioned, and still not dependent on an unconditioned and

primal existence. As, therefore, the antithesis will not concede the existence

of a first beginning which might be available as a foundation, a complete

edifice of cognition, in the presence of such hypothesis, is utterly impossible.

Thus the architectonic interest of reason, which requires a unity — notempirical, but a priori and rational — forms a natural recommendation for the

assertions of the thesis in our antinomy.

              But if any one could free himself entirely from all considerations of

interest, and weigh without partiality the assertions of reason, attending only

to their content, irrespective of the consequences which follow from them;

such a person, on the supposition that he knew no other way out of the

confusion than to settle the truth of one or other of the conflicting doctrines,

would live in a state of continual hesitation. Today, he would feel convinced

that the human will is free; to-morrow, considering the indissoluble chain of

nature, he would look on freedom as a mere illusion and declare nature to be

all-in-all. But, if he were called to action, the play of the merely speculative

reason would disappear like the shapes of a dream, and practical interest

would dictate his choice of principles. But, as it well befits a reflective and

inquiring being to devote certain periods of time to the examination of its

own reason — to divest itself of all partiality, and frankly to communicate its

observations for the judgement and opinion of others; so no one can be

blamed for, much less prevented from, placing both parties on their trial, with

permission to end themselves, free from intimidation, before intimidation,

before a sworn jury of equal condition with themselves — the condition of

weak and fallible men.

 

Section IV. Of the necessity imposed upon Pure Reason of presenting a

                    Solution of its Transcendental Problems.

 

 

              To avow an ability to solve all problems and to answer all questions

would be a profession certain to convict any philosopher of extravagant

boasting and self-conceit, and at once to destroy the confidence that might

otherwise have been reposed in him. There are, however, sciences so

constituted that every question arising within their sphere must necessarily be

capable of receiving an answer from the knowledge already possessed, for

the answer must be received from the same sources whence the question

arose. In such sciences it is not allowable to excuse ourselves on the plea of

necessary and unavoidable ignorance; a solution is absolutely requisite. The

rule of right and wrong must help us to the knowledge of what is right orwrong in all possible cases; otherwise, the idea of obligation or duty would

be utterly null, for we cannot have any obligation to that which we cannot

know. On the other hand, in our investigations of the phenomena of nature,

much must remain uncertain, and many questions continue insoluble; because

what we know of nature is far from being sufficient to explain all the

phenomena that are presented to our observation. Now the question is:

“Whether there is in transcendental philosophy any question, relating to an

object presented to pure reason, which is unanswerable by this reason; and

whether we must regard the subject of the question as quite uncertain, so far

as our knowledge extends, and must give it a place among those subjects, of

which we have just so much conception as is sufficient to enable us to raise a

question — faculty or materials failing us, however, when we attempt an

answer. the world

              Now I maintain that, among all speculative cognition, the peculiarity

of transcendental philosophy is that there is no question, relating to an object

presented to pure reason, which is insoluble by this reason; and that the

profession of unavoidable ignorance- the problem being alleged to be beyond

the reach of our faculties- cannot free us from the obligation to present a

complete and satisfactory answer. For the very conception which enables us

to raise the question must give us the power of answering it; inasmuch as the

object, as in the case of right and wrong, is not to be discovered out of the

conception.

              But, in transcendental philosophy, it is only the cosmological

questions to which we can demand a satisfactory answer in relation to the

constitution of their object; and the philosopher is not permitted to avail

himself of the pretext of necessary ignorance and impenetrable obscurity.

These questions relate solely to the cosmological ideas. For the object must

be given in experience, and the question relates to the adequateness of the

object to an idea. If the object is transcendental and therefore itself unknown;

if the question, for example, is whether the object — the something, the

phenomenon of which (internal — in ourselves) is thought — that is to say,

the soul, is in itself a simple being; or whether there is a cause of all things,

which is absolutely necessary — in such cases we are seeking for our idea an

object, of which we may confess that it is unknown to us, though we must not
                                                58
on that account assert that it is impossible. The cosmological ideas alone

posses the peculiarity that we can presuppose the object of them and theempirical synthesis requisite for the conception of that object to be given; and

the question, which arises from these ideas, relates merely to the progress of

this synthesis, in so far as it must contain absolute totality — which,

however, is not empirical, as it cannot be given in any experience. Now, as

the question here is solely in regard to a thing as the object of a possible

experience and not as a thing in itself, the answer to the transcendental

cosmological question need not be sought out of the idea, for the question

does not regard an object in itself. The question in relation to a possible

experience is not, “What can be given in an experience in concreto” but

“what is contained in the idea, to which the empirical synthesis must

approximate.” The question must therefore be capable of solution from the

idea alone. For the idea is a creation of reason itself, which therefore cannot

disclaim the obligation to answer or refer us to the unknown object.

        58
               The question, “What is the constitution of a transcendental

object?” is unanswerable — we are unable to say what it is; but we can

perceive that the question itself is nothing; because it does not relate to any

object that can be presented to us. For this reason, we must consider all the

questions raised in transcendental psychology as answerable and as really

answered; for they relate to the transcendental subject of all internal

phenomena, which is not itself phenomenon and consequently not given as an

object, in which, moreover, none of the categories — and it is to them that

the question is properly directed — find any conditions of its application.

Here, therefore, is a case where no answer is the only proper answer. For a

question regarding the constitution of a something which cannot be cogitated

by any determined predicate, being completely beyond the sphere of objects

and experience, is perfectly null and void.

              It is not so extraordinary, as it at first sight appears, that a science

should demand and expect satisfactory answers to all the questions that may

arise within its own sphere (questiones domesticae), although, up to a certain

time, these answers may not have been discovered. There are, in addition to

transcendental philosophy, only two pure sciences of reason; the one with a

speculative, the other with a practical content — pure mathematics and pure

ethics. Has any one ever heard it alleged that, from our complete and

necessary ignorance of the conditions, it is uncertain what exact relation the

diameter of a circle bears to the circle in rational or irrational numbers? By

the former the sum cannot be given exactly, by the latter only approximately;and therefore we decide that the impossibility of a solution of the question is

evident. Lambert presented us with a demonstration of this. In the general

principles of morals there can be nothing uncertain, for the propositions are

either utterly without meaning, or must originate solely in our rational

conceptions. On the other hand, there must be in physical science an infinite

number of conjectures, which can never become certainties; because the

phenomena of nature are not given as objects dependent on our conceptions.

The key to the solution of such questions cannot, therefore, be found in our

conceptions, or in pure thought, but must lie without us and for that reason is

in many cases not to be discovered; and consequently a satisfactory

explanation cannot be expected. The questions of transcendental analytic,

which relate to the deduction of our pure cognition, are not to be regarded as

of the same kind as those mentioned above; for we are not at present treating

of the certainty of judgements in relation to the origin of our conceptions, but

only of that certainty in relation to objects.

              We cannot, therefore, escape the responsibility of at least a critical

solution of the questions of reason, by complaints of the limited nature of our

faculties, and the seemingly humble confession that it is beyond the power of

our reason to decide, whether the world has existed from all eternity or had a

beginning — whether it is infinitely extended, or enclosed within certain

limits — whether anything in the world is simple, or whether everything must

be capable of infinite divisibility — whether freedom can originate

phenomena, or whether everything is absolutely dependent on the laws and

order of nature — and, finally, whether there exists a being that is completely

unconditioned and necessary, or whether the existence of everything is

conditioned and consequently dependent on something external to itself, and

therefore in its own nature contingent. For all these questions relate to an

object, which can be given nowhere else than in thought. This object is the

absolutely unconditioned totality of the synthesis of phenomena. If the

conceptions in our minds do not assist us to some certain result in regard to

these problems, we must not defend ourselves on the plea that the object

itself remains hidden from and unknown to us. For no such thing or object

can be given — it is not to be found out of the idea in our minds. We must

seek the cause of our failure in our idea itself, which is an insoluble problem

and in regard to which we obstinately assume that there exists a real object

corresponding and adequate to it. A clear explanation of the dialectic which

lies in our conception, will very soon enable us to come to a satisfactorydecision in regard to such a question.

              The pretext that we are unable to arrive at certainty in regard to these

problems may be met with this question, which requires at least a plain

answer: “From what source do the ideas originate, the solution of which

involves you in such difficulties? Are you seeking for an explanation of

certain phenomena; and do you expect these ideas to give you the principles

or the rules of this explanation?” Let it be granted, that all nature was laid

open before you; that nothing was hid from your senses and your

consciousness. Still, you could not cognize in concreto the object of your

ideas in any experience. For what is demanded is not only this full and

complete intuition, but also a complete synthesis and the consciousness of its

absolute totality; and this is not possible by means of any empirical cognition.

It follows that your question — your idea — is by no means necessary for the

explanation of any phenomenon; and the idea cannot have been in any sense

given by the object itself. For such an object can never be presented to us,

because it cannot be given by any possible experience. Whatever perceptions

you may attain to, you are still surrounded by conditions — in space, or in

time — and you cannot discover anything unconditioned; nor can you decide

whether this unconditioned is to be placed in an absolute beginning of the

synthesis, or in an absolute totality of the series without beginning. A whole,

in the empirical signification of the term, is always merely comparative. The

absolute whole of quantity (the universe), of division, of derivation, of the

condition of existence, with the question — whether it is to be produced by

finite or infinite synthesis, no possible experience can instruct us concerning.

You will not, for example, be able to explain the phenomena of a body in the

least degree better, whether you believe it to consist of simple, or of

composite parts; for a simple phenomenon — and just as little an infinite

series of composition — can never be presented to your perception.

Phenomena require and admit of explanation, only in so far as the conditions

of that explanation are given in perception; but the sum total of that which is

given in phenomena, considered as an absolute whole, is itself a perception

— and we cannot therefore seek for explanations of this whole beyond itself,

in other perceptions. The explanation of this whole is the proper object of the

transcendental problems of pure reason.

              Although, therefore, the solution of these problems is unattainable

through experience, we must not permit ourselves to say that it is uncertainhow the object of our inquiries is constituted. For the object is in our own

mind and cannot be discovered in experience; and we have only to take care

that our thoughts are consistent with each other, and to avoid falling into the

amphiboly of regarding our idea as a representation of an object empirically

given, and therefore to be cognized according to the laws of experience. A

dogmatical solution is therefore not only unsatisfactory but impossible. The

critical solution, which may be a perfectly certain one, does not consider the

question objectively, but proceeds by inquiring into the basis of the cognition

upon which the question rests.

 

 

 Section V. Sceptical Exposition of the Cosmological Problems presented

                        in the four Transcendental Ideas.

 

 

              We should be quite willing to desist from the demand of a

dogmatical answer to our questions, if we understood beforehand that, be the

answer what it may, it would only serve to increase our ignorance, to throw

us from one incomprehensibility into another, from one obscurity into

another still greater, and perhaps lead us into irreconcilable contradictions. If

a dogmatical affirmative or negative answer is demanded, is it at all prudent

to set aside the probable grounds of a solution which lie before us and to take

into consideration what advantage we shall gain, if the answer is to favour the

one side or the other? If it happens that in both cases the answer is mere

nonsense, we have in this an irresistible summons to institute a critical

investigation of the question, for the purpose of discovering whether it is

based on a groundless presupposition and relates to an idea, the falsity of

which would be more easily exposed in its application and consequences than

in the mere representation of its content. This is the great utility of the

sceptical mode of treating the questions addressed by pure reason to itself. By

this method we easily rid ourselves of the confusions of dogmatism, and

establish in its place a temperate criticism, which, as a genuine cathartic, will

successfully remove the presumptuous notions of philosophy and their

consequence — the vain pretension to universal science.

              If, then, I could understand the nature of a cosmological idea and

perceive, before I entered on the discussion of the subject at all, that,

whatever side of the question regarding the unconditioned of the regressive

synthesis of phenomena it favoured — it must either be too great or too small

for every conception of the understanding — I would be able to comprehend

how the idea, which relates to an object of experience — an experience which

must be adequate to and in accordance with a possible conception of the

understanding — must be completely void and without significance,

inasmuch as its object is inadequate, consider it as we may. And this is

actually the case with all cosmological conceptions, which, for the reason

above mentioned, involve reason, so long as it remains attached to them, in

an unavoidable antinomy. For suppose:              First, that the world has no beginning — in this case it is too large

for our conception; for this conception, which consists in a successive

regress, cannot overtake the whole eternity that has elapsed. Grant that it has

a beginning, it is then too small for the conception of the understanding. For,

as a beginning presupposes a time preceding, it cannot be unconditioned; and

the law of the empirical employment of the understanding imposes the

necessity of looking for a higher condition of time; and the world is,

therefore, evidently too small for this law.

              The same is the case with the double answer to the question

regarding the extent, in space, of the world. For, if it is infinite and unlimited,

it must be too large for every possible empirical conception. If it is finite and

limited, we have a right to ask: “What determines these limits?” Void space is

not a self-subsistent correlate of things, and cannot be a final condition —

and still less an empirical condition, forming a part of a possible experience.

For how can we have any experience or perception of an absolute void? But

the absolute totality of the empirical synthesis requires that the unconditioned

be an empirical conception. Consequently, a finite world is too small for our

conception.

              Secondly, if every phenomenon (matter) in space consists of an

infinite number of parts, the regress of the division is always too great for our

conception; and if the division of space must cease with some member of the

division (the simple), it is too small for the idea of the unconditioned. For the

member at which we have discontinued our division still admits a regress to

many more parts contained in the object.

              Thirdly, suppose that every event in the world happens in

accordance with the laws of nature; the causality of a cause must itself be an

event and necessitates a regress to a still higher cause, and consequently the

unceasing prolongation of the series of conditions a parte priori. Operative

nature is therefore too large for every conception we can form in the

synthesis of cosmical events.

              If we admit the existence of spontaneously produced events, that is,

of free agency, we are driven, in our search for sufficient reasons, on an

unavoidable law of nature and are compelled to appeal to the empirical law of

causality, and we find that any such totality of connection in our synthesis is

too small for our necessary empirical conception.              Fourthly, if we assume the existence of an absolutely necessary

being — whether it be the world or something in the world, or the cause of

the world — we must place it in a time at an infinite distance from any given

moment; for, otherwise, it must be dependent on some other and higher

existence. Such an existence is, in this case, too large for our empirical

conception, and unattainable by the continued regress of any synthesis.

              But if we believe that everything in the world — be it condition or

conditioned — is contingent; every given existence is too small for our

conception. For in this case we are compelled to seek for some other

existence upon which the former depends.

              We have said that in all these cases the cosmological idea is either

too great or too small for the empirical regress in a synthesis, and

consequently for every possible conception of the understanding. Why did we

not express ourselves in a manner exactly the reverse of this and, instead of

accusing the cosmological idea of over stepping or of falling short of its true

aim, possible experience, say that, in the first case, the empirical conception

is always too small for the idea, and in the second too great, and thus attach

the blame of these contradictions to the empirical regress? The reason is this.

Possible experience can alone give reality to our conceptions; without it a

conception is merely an idea, without truth or relation to an object. Hence a

possible empirical conception must be the standard by which we are to judge

whether an idea is anything more than an idea and fiction of thought, or

whether it relates to an object in the world. If we say of a thing that in relation

to some other thing it is too large or too small, the former is considered as

existing for the sake of the latter, and requiring to be adapted to it. Among the

trivial subjects of discussion in the old schools of dialectics was this question:

“If a ball cannot pass through a hole, shall we say that the ball is too large or

the hole too small?” In this case it is indifferent what expression we employ;

for we do not know which exists for the sake of the other. On the other hand,

we cannot say: “The man is too long for his coat”; but: “The coat is too short

for the man.”

              We are thus led to the well-founded suspicion that the cosmological

ideas, and all the conflicting sophistical assertions connected with them, are

based upon a false and fictitious conception of the mode in which the object

of these ideas is presented to us; and this suspicion will probably direct us

how to expose the illusion that has so long led us astray from the truth. 

 

 Section VI. Transcendental Idealism as the Key to the Solution of Pure

                                Cosmological Dialectic.

 

 

              In the transcendental aesthetic we proved that everything intuited in

space and time, all objects of a possible experience, are nothing but

phenomena, that is, mere representations; and that these, as presented to us —

as extended bodies, or as series of changes — have no self-subsistent

existence apart from human thought. This doctrine I call Transcendental
        59
Idealism. The realist in the transcendental sense regards these modifications

of our sensibility, these mere representations, as things subsisting in

themselves.

        59
               I have elsewhere termed this theory formal idealism, to distinguish

it from material idealism, which doubts or denies the existence of external

things. To avoid ambiguity, it seems advisable in many cases to employ this

term instead of that mentioned in the text.

              It would be unjust to accuse us of holding the long-decried theory of

empirical idealism, which, while admitting the reality of space, denies, or at

least doubts, the existence of bodies extended in it, and thus leaves us without

a sufficient criterion of reality and illusion. The supporters of this theory find

no difficulty in admitting the reality of the phenomena of the internal sense in

time; nay, they go the length of maintaining that this internal experience is of

itself a sufficient proof of the real existence of its object as a thing in itself.

              Transcendental idealism allows that the objects of external intuition

— as intuited in space, and all changes in time — as represented by the

internal sense, are real. For, as space is the form of that intuition which we

call external, and, without objects in space, no empirical representation could

be given us, we can and ought to regard extended bodies in it as real. The

case is the same with representations in time. But time and space, with all

phenomena therein, are not in themselves things. They are nothing but

representations and cannot exist out of and apart from the mind. Nay, the

sensuous internal intuition of the mind (as the object of consciousness), the

determination of which is represented by the succession of different states in

time, is not the real, proper self, as it exists in itself — not the transcendentalsubject — but only a phenomenon, which is presented to the sensibility of

this, to us, unknown being. This internal phenomenon cannot be admitted to

be a self-subsisting thing; for its condition is time, and time cannot be the

condition of a thing in itself. But the empirical truth of phenomena in space

and time is guaranteed beyond the possibility of doubt, and sufficiently

distinguished from the illusion of dreams or fancy — although both have a

proper and thorough connection in an experience according to empirical laws.

The objects of experience then are not things in themselves, but are given

only in experience, and have no existence apart from and independently of

experience. That there may be inhabitants in the moon, although no one has

ever observed them, must certainly be admitted; but this assertion means

only, that we may in the possible progress of experience discover them at

some future time. For that which stands in connection with a perception

according to the laws of the progress of experience is real. They are therefore

really existent, if they stand in empirical connection with my actual or real

consciousness, although they are not in themselves real, that is, apart from the

progress of experience.

              There is nothing actually given — we can be conscious of nothing as

real, except a perception and the empirical progression from it to other

possible perceptions. For phenomena, as mere representations, are real only

in perception; and perception is, in fact, nothing but the reality of an

empirical representation, that is, a phenomenon. To call a phenomenon a real

thing prior to perception means either that we must meet with this

phenomenon in the progress of experience, or it means nothing at all. For I

can say only of a thing in itself that it exists without relation to the senses and

experience. But we are speaking here merely of phenomena in space and

time, both of which are determinations of sensibility, and not of things in

themselves. It follows that phenomena are not things in themselves, but are

mere representations, which if not given in us — in perception — are non-

existent.

              The faculty of sensuous intuition is properly a receptivity — a

capacity of being affected in a certain manner by representations, the relation

of which to each other is a pure intuition of space and time- the pure forms of

sensibility. These representations, in so far as they are connected and

determinable in this relation (in space and time) according to laws of the

unity of experience, are called objects. The non-sensuous cause of theserepresentations is completely unknown to us and hence cannot be intuited as

an object. For such an object could not be represented either in space or in

time; and without these conditions intuition or representation is impossible.

We may, at the same time, term the non-sensuous cause of phenomena the

transcendental object — but merely as a mental correlate to sensibility,

considered as a receptivity. To this transcendental object we may attribute the

whole connection and extent of our possible perceptions, and say that it is

given and exists in itself prior to all experience. But the phenomena,

corresponding to it, are not given as things in themselves, but in experience

alone. For they are mere representations, receiving from perceptions alone

significance and relation to a real object, under the condition that this or that

perception — indicating an object — is in complete connection with all

others in accordance with the rules of the unity of experience. Thus we can

say: “The things that really existed in past time are given in the

transcendental object of experience.” But these are to me real objects, only in

so far as I can represent to my own mind, that a regressive series of possible

perceptions- following the indications of history, or the footsteps of cause

and effect — in accordance with empirical laws — that, in one word, the

course of the world conducts us to an elapsed series of time as the condition

of the present time. This series in past time is represented as real, not in itself,

but only in connection with a possible experience. Thus, when I say that

certain events occurred in past time, I merely assert the possibility of

prolonging the chain of experience, from the present perception, upwards to

the conditions that determine it according to time.

              If I represent to myself all objects existing in all space and time, I do

not thereby place these in space and time prior to all experience; on the

contrary, such a representation is nothing more than the notion of a possible

experience, in its absolute completeness. In experience alone are those

objects, which are nothing but representations, given. But, when I say they

existed prior to my experience, this means only that I must begin with the

perception present to me and follow the track indicated until I discover them

in some part or region of experience. The cause of the empirical condition of

this progression — and consequently at what member therein I must stop, and

at what point in the regress I am to find this member — is transcendental, and

hence necessarily incognizable. But with this we have not to do; our concern

is only with the law of progression in experience, in which objects, that is,

phenomena, are given. It is a matter of indifference, whether I say, “I may inthe progress of experience discover stars, at a hundred times greater distance

than the most distant of those now visible,” or, “Stars at this distance may be

met in space, although no one has, or ever will discover them.” For, if they

are given as things in themselves, without any relation to possible experience,

they are for me non-existent, consequently, are not objects, for they are not

contained in the regressive series of experience. But, if these phenomena

must be employed in the construction or support of the cosmological idea of

an absolute whole, and when we are discussing a question that oversteps the

limits of possible experience, the proper distinction of the different theories

of the reality of sensuous objects is of great importance, in order to avoid the

illusion which must necessarily arise from the misinterpretation of our

empirical conceptions.

 

 

         Section VII. Critical Solution of the Cosmological Problem.

 

 

              The antinomy of pure reason is based upon the following dialectical

argument: “If that which is conditioned is given, the whole series of its

conditions is also given; but sensuous objects are given as conditioned;

consequently...” This syllogism, the major of which seems so natural and

evident, introduces as many cosmological ideas as there are different kinds of

conditions in the synthesis of phenomena, in so far as these conditions

constitute a series. These ideas require absolute totality in the series, and thus

place reason in inextricable embarrassment. Before proceeding to expose the

fallacy in this dialectical argument, it will be necessary to have a correct

understanding of certain conceptions that appear in it.

              In the first place, the following proposition is evident, and

indubitably certain: “If the conditioned is given, a regress in the series of all

its conditions is thereby imperatively required.” For the very conception of a

conditioned is a conception of something related to a condition, and, if this

condition is itself conditioned, to another condition — and so on through all

the members of the series. This proposition is, therefore, analytical and has

nothing to fear from transcendental criticism. It is a logical postulate of

reason: to pursue, as far as possible, the connection of a conception with its

conditions.

              If, in the second place, both the conditioned and the condition are

things in themselves, and if the former is given, not only is the regress to the

latter requisite, but the latter is really given with the former. Now, as this is

true of all the members of the series, the entire series of conditions, and with

them the unconditioned, is at the same time given in the very fact of the

conditioned, the existence of which is possible only in and through that

series, being given. In this case, the synthesis of the conditioned with its

condition, is a synthesis of the understanding merely, which represents things

as they are, without regarding whether and how we can cognize them. But if I

have to do with phenomena, which, in their character of mere representations,

are not given, if I do not attain to a cognition of them (in other words, to

themselves, for they are nothing more than empirical cognitions), I am notentitled to say: “If the conditioned is given, all its conditions (as phenomena)

are also given.” I cannot, therefore, from the fact of a conditioned being

given, infer the absolute totality of the series of its conditions. For

phenomena are nothing but an empirical synthesis in apprehension or

perception, and are therefore given only in it. Now, in speaking of

phenomena it does not follow that, if the conditioned is given, the synthesis

which constitutes its empirical condition is also thereby given and

presupposed; such a synthesis can be established only by an actual regress in

the series of conditions. But we are entitled to say in this case that a regress to

the conditions of a conditioned, in other words, that a continuous empirical

synthesis is enjoined; that, if the conditions are not given, they are at least

required; and that we are certain to discover the conditions in this regress.

              We can now see that the major, in the above cosmological syllogism,

takes the conditioned in the transcendental signification which it has in the

pure category, while the minor speaks of it in the empirical signification

which it has in the category as applied to phenomena. There is, therefore, a

dialectical fallacy in the syllogism — a sophisma figurae dictionis. But this

fallacy is not a consciously devised one, but a perfectly natural illusion of the

common reason of man. For, when a thing is given as conditioned, we

presuppose in the major its conditions and their series, unperceived, as it

were, and unseen; because this is nothing more than the logical requirement

of complete and satisfactory premisses for a given conclusion. In this case,

time is altogether left out in the connection of the conditioned with the

condition; they are supposed to be given in themselves, and

contemporaneously. It is, moreover, just as natural to regard phenomena (in

the minor) as things in themselves and as objects presented to the pure

understanding, as in the major, in which complete abstraction was made of all

conditions of intuition. But it is under these conditions alone that objects are

given. Now we overlooked a remarkable distinction between the conceptions.

The synthesis of the conditioned with its condition, and the complete series of

the latter (in the major) are not limited by time, and do not contain the

conception of succession. On the contrary, the empirical synthesis and the

series of conditions in the phenomenal world — subsumed in the minor —

are necessarily successive and given in time alone. It follows that I cannot

presuppose in the minor, as I did in the major, the absolute totality of the

synthesis and of the series therein represented; for in the major all the

members of the series are given as things in themselves — without anylimitations or conditions of time, while in the minor they are possible only in

and through a successive regress, which cannot exist, except it be actually

carried into execution in the world of phenomena.

              After this proof of the viciousness of the argument commonly

employed in maintaining cosmological assertions, both parties may now be

justly dismissed, as advancing claims without grounds or title. But the

process has not been ended by convincing them that one or both were in the

wrong and had maintained an assertion which was without valid grounds of

proof. Nothing seems to be clearer than that, if one maintains: “The world has

a beginning,” and another: “The world has no beginning,” one of the two

must be right. But it is likewise clear that, if the evidence on both sides is

equal, it is impossible to discover on what side the truth lies; and the

controversy continues, although the parties have been recommended to peace

before the tribunal of reason. There remains, then, no other means of settling

the question than to convince the parties, who refute each other with such

conclusiveness and ability, that they are disputing about nothing, and that a

transcendental illusion has been mocking them with visions of reality where

there is none. The mode of adjusting a dispute which cannot be decided upon

its own merits, we shall now proceed to lay before our readers.

              Zeno of Elea, a subtle dialectician, was severely reprimanded by

Plato as a sophist, who, merely from the base motive of exhibiting his skill in

discussion, maintained and subverted the same proposition by arguments as

powerful and convincing on the one side as on the other. He maintained, for

example, that God (who was probably nothing more, in his view, than the

world) is neither finite nor infinite, neither in motion nor in rest, neither

similar nor dissimilar to any other thing. It seemed to those philosophers who

criticized his mode of discussion that his purpose was to deny completely

both of two self-contradictory propositions — which is absurd. But I cannot

believe that there is any justice in this accusation. The first of these

propositions I shall presently consider in a more detailed manner. With

regard to the others, if by the word of God he understood merely the

Universe, his meaning must have been — that it cannot be permanently

present in one place — that is, at rest — nor be capable of changing its place

— that is, of moving- because all places are in the universe, and the universe

itself is, therefore, in no place. Again, if the universe contains in itself

everything that exists, it cannot be similar or dissimilar to any other thing,because there is, in fact, no other thing with which it can be compared. If two

opposite judgements presuppose a contingent impossible, or arbitrary

condition, both — in spite of their opposition (which is, however, not

properly or really a contradiction)— fall away; because the condition, which

ensured the validity of both, has itself disappeared.

              If we say: “Everybody has either a good or a bad smell,” we have

omitted a third possible judgement — it has no smell at all; and thus both

conflicting statements may be false. If we say: “It is either good-smelling or

not good-smelling (vel suaveolens vel non-suaveolens),” both judgements are

contradictorily opposed; and the contradictory opposite of the former

judgement — some bodies are not good-smelling — embraces also those

bodies which have no smell at all. In the preceding pair of opposed

judgements (per disparata), the contingent condition of the conception of

body (smell) attached to both conflicting statements, instead of having been

omitted in the latter, which is consequently not the contradictory opposite of

the former.

              If, accordingly, we say: “The world is either infinite in extension, or

it is not infinite (non est infinitus)”; and if the former proposition is false, its

contradictory opposite — the world is not infinite — must be true. And thus I

should deny the existence of an infinite, without, however affirming the

existence of a finite world. But if we construct our proposition thus: “The

world is either infinite or finite (non-infinite),” both statements may be false.

For, in this case, we consider the world as per se determined in regard to

quantity, and while, in the one judgement, we deny its infinite and

consequently, perhaps, its independent existence; in the other, we append to

the world, regarded as a thing in itself, a certain determination — that of

finitude; and the latter may be false as well as the former, if the world is not

given as a thing in itself, and thus neither as finite nor as infinite in quantity.

This kind of opposition I may be allowed to term dialectical; that of

contradictories may be called analytical opposition. Thus then, of two

dialectically opposed judgements both may be false, from the fact, that the

one is not a mere contradictory of the other, but actually enounces more than

is requisite for a full and complete contradiction.

              When we regard the two propositions —“The world is infinite in

quantity,” and, “The world is finite in quantity,” as contradictory opposites,

we are assuming that the world — the complete series of phenomena — is athing in itself. For it remains as a permanent quantity, whether I deny the

infinite or the finite regress in the series of its phenomena. But if we dismiss

this assumption — this transcendental illusion — and deny that it is a thing in

itself, the contradictory opposition is metamorphosed into a merely dialectical

one; and the world, as not existing in itself — independently of the regressive

series of my representations — exists in like manner neither as a whole which

is infinite nor as a whole which is finite in itself. The universe exists for me

only in the empirical regress of the series of phenomena and not per se. If,

then, it is always conditioned, it is never completely or as a whole; and it is,

therefore, not an unconditioned whole and does not exist as such, either with

an infinite, or with a finite quantity.

              What we have here said of the first cosmological idea — that of the

absolute totality of quantity in phenomena — applies also to the others. The

series of conditions is discoverable only in the regressive synthesis itself, and

not in the phenomenon considered as a thing in itself — given prior to all

regress. Hence I am compelled to say: “The aggregate of parts in a given

phenomenon is in itself neither finite nor infinite; and these parts are given

only in the regressive synthesis of decomposition — a synthesis which is

never given in absolute completeness, either as finite, or as infinite.” The

same is the case with the series of subordinated causes, or of the conditioned

up to the unconditioned and necessary existence, which can never be

regarded as in itself, ind in its totality, either as finite or as infinite; because,

as a series of subordinate representations, it subsists only in the dynamical

regress and cannot be regarded as existing previously to this regress, or as a

self-subsistent series of things.

              Thus the antinomy of pure reason in its cosmological ideas

disappears. For the above demonstration has established the fact that it is

merely the product of a dialectical and illusory opposition, which arises from

the application of the idea of absolute totality — admissible only as a

condition of things in themselves — to phenomena, which exist only in our

representations, and — when constituting a series — in a successive regress.

This antinomy of reason may, however, be really profitable to our speculative

interests, not in the way of contributing any dogmatical addition, but as

presenting to us another material support in our critical investigations. For it

furnishes us with an indirect proof of the transcendental ideality of

phenomena, if our minds were not completely satisfied with the direct proofset forth in the Trancendental Aesthetic. The proof would proceed in the

following dilemma. If the world is a whole existing in itself, it must be either

finite or infinite. But it is neither finite nor infinite — as has been shown, on

the one side, by the thesis, on the other, by the antithesis. Therefore the world

— the content of all phenomena — is not a whole existing in itself. It follows

that phenomena are nothing, apart from our representations. And this is what

we mean by transcendental ideality.

              This remark is of some importance. It enables us to see that the

proofs of the fourfold antinomy are not mere sophistries — are not fallacious,

but grounded on the nature of reason, and valid — under the supposition that

phenomena are things in themselves. The opposition of the judgements which

follow makes it evident that a fallacy lay in the initial supposition, and thus

helps us to discover the true constitution of objects of sense. This

transcendental dialectic does not favour scepticism, although it presents us

with a triumphant demonstration of the advantages of the sceptical method,

the great utility of which is apparent in the antinomy, where the arguments of

reason were allowed to confront each other in undiminished force. And

although the result of these conflicts of reason is not what we expected —

although we have obtained no positive dogmatical addition to metaphysical

science — we have still reaped a great advantage in the correction of our

judgements on these subjects of thought.

 

 

   Section VIII. Regulative Principle of Pure Reason in relation to the

                                  Cosmological Ideas.

 

 

              The cosmological principle of totality could not give us any certain

knowledge in regard to the maximum in the series of conditions in the world

of sense, considered as a thing in itself. The actual regress in the series is the

only means of approaching this maximum. This principle of pure reason,

therefore, may still be considered as valid — not as an axiom enabling us to

cogitate totality in the object as actual, but as a problem for the

understanding, which requires it to institute and to continue, in conformity

with the idea of totality in the mind, the regress in the series of the conditions

of a given conditioned. For in the world of sense, that is, in space and time,

every condition which we discover in our investigation of phenomena is itself

conditioned; because sensuous objects are not things in themselves (in which

case an absolutely unconditioned might be reached in the progress of

cognition), but are merely empirical representations the conditions of which

must always be found in intuition. The principle of reason is therefore

properly a mere rule — prescribing a regress in the series of conditions for

given phenomena, and prohibiting any pause or rest on an absolutely

unconditioned. It is, therefore, not a principle of the possibility of experience

or of the empirical cognition of sensuous objects — consequently not a

principle of the understanding; for every experience is confined within certain

proper limits determined by the given intuition. Still less is it a constitutive

principle of reason authorizing us to extend our conception of the sensuous

world beyond all possible experience. It is merely a principle for the

enlargement and extension of experience as far as is possible for human

faculties. It forbids us to consider any empirical limits as absolute. It is,

hence, a principle of reason, which, as a rule, dictates how we ought to

proceed in our empirical regress, but is unable to anticipate or indicate prior

to the empirical regress what is given in the object itself. I have termed it for

this reason a regulative principle of reason; while the principle of the absolute

totality of the series of conditions, as existing in itself and given in the object,

is a constitutive cosmological principle. This distinction will at once

demonstrate the falsehood of the constitutive principle, and prevent us fromattributing (by a transcendental subreptio) objective reality to an idea, which

is valid only as a rule.

              In order to understand the proper meaning of this rule of pure reason,

we must notice first that it cannot tell us what the object is, but only how the

empirical regress is to be proceeded with in order to attain to the complete

conception of the object. If it gave us any information in respect to the former

statement, it would be a constitutive principle — a principle impossible from

the nature of pure reason. It will not therefore enable us to establish any such

conclusions as: “The series of conditions for a given conditioned is in itself

finite.” or, “It is infinite.” For, in this case, we should be cogitating in the

mere idea of absolute totality, an object which is not and cannot be given in

experience; inasmuch as we should be attributing a reality objective and

independent of the empirical synthesis, to a series of phenomena. This idea of

reason cannot then be regarded as valid — except as a rule for the regressive

synthesis in the series of conditions, according to which we must proceed

from the conditioned, through all intermediate and subordinate conditions, up

to the unconditioned; although this goal is unattained and unattainable. For

the absolutely unconditioned cannot be discovered in the sphere of

experience.

              We now proceed to determine clearly our notion of a synthesis

which can never be complete. There are two terms commonly employed for

this purpose. These terms are regarded as expressions of different and

distinguishable notions, although the ground of the distinction has never been

clearly exposed. The term employed by the mathematicians is progressus in

infinitum. The philosophers prefer the expression progressus in indefinitum.

Without detaining the reader with an examination of the reasons for such a

distinction, or with remarks on the right or wrong use of the terms, I shall

endeavour clearly to determine these conceptions, so far as is necessary for

the purpose in this Critique.

              We may, with propriety, say of a straight line, that it may be

produced to infinity. In this case the distinction between a progressus in

infinitum and a progressus in indefinitum is a mere piece of subtlety. For,

although when we say, “Produce a straight line,” it is more correct to say in

indefinitum than in infinitum; because the former means, “Produce it as far as

you please,” the second, “You must not cease to produce it”; the expression

in infinitum is, when we are speaking of the power to do it, perfectly correct,for we can always make it longer if we please — on to infinity. And this

remark holds good in all cases, when we speak of a progressus, that is, an

advancement from the condition to the conditioned; this possible

advancement always proceeds to infinity. We may proceed from a given pair

in the descending line of generation from father to son, and cogitate a never-

ending line of descendants from it. For in such a case reason does not demand

absolute totality in the series, because it does not presuppose it as a condition

and as given (datum), but merely as conditioned, and as capable of being

given (dabile).

              Very different is the case with the problem: “How far the regress,

which ascends from the given conditioned to the conditions, must extend”;

whether I can say: “It is a regress in infinitum,” or only “in indefinitum”; and

whether, for example, setting out from the human beings at present alive in

the world, I may ascend in the series of their ancestors, in infinitum — mr

whether all that can be said is, that so far as I have proceeded, I have

discovered no empirical ground for considering the series limited, so that I

am justified, and indeed, compelled to search for ancestors still further back,

although I am not obliged by the idea of reason to presuppose them.

              My answer to this question is: “If the series is given in empirical

intuition as a whole, the regress in the series of its internal conditions

proceeds in infinitum; but, if only one member of the series is given, from

which the regress is to proceed to absolute totality, the regress is possible

only in indefinitum.” For example, the division of a portion of matter given

within certain limits — of a body, that is — proceeds in infinitum. For, as the

condition of this whole is its part, and the condition of the part a part of the

part, and so on, and as in this regress of decomposition an unconditioned

indivisible member of the series of conditions is not to be found; there are no

reasons or grounds in experience for stopping in the division, but, on the

contrary, the more remote members of the division are actually and

empirically given prior to this division. That is to say, the division proceeds

to infinity. On the other hand, the series of ancestors of any given human

being is not given, in its absolute totality, in any experience, and yet the

regress proceeds from every genealogical member of this series to one still

higher, and does not meet with any empirical limit presenting an absolutely

unconditioned member of the series. But as the members of such a series are

not contained in the empirical intuition of the whole, prior to the regress, thisregress does not proceed to infinity, but only in indefinitum, that is, we are

called upon to discover other and higher members, which are themselves

always conditioned.

              In neither case — the regressus in infinitum, nor the regressus in

indefinitum, is the series of conditions to be considered as actually infinite in

the object itself. This might be true of things in themselves, but it cannot be

asserted of phenomena, which, as conditions of each other, are only given in

the empirical regress itself. Hence, the question no longer is, “What is the

quantity of this series of conditions in itself — is it finite or infinite?” for it is

nothing in itself; but, “How is the empirical regress to be commenced, and

how far ought we to proceed with it?” And here a signal distinction in the

application of this rule becomes apparent. If the whole is given empirically, it

is possible to recede in the series of its internal conditions to infinity. But if

the whole is not given, and can only be given by and through the empirical

regress, I can only say: “It is possible to infinity, to proceed to still higher

conditions in the series.” In the first case, I am justified in asserting that more

members are empirically given in the object than I attain to in the regress (of

decomposition). In the second case, I am justified only in saying, that I can

always proceed further in the regress, because no member of the series. is

given as absolutely conditioned, and thus a higher member is possible, and an

inquiry with regard to it is necessary. In the one case it is necessary to find

other members of the series, in the other it is necessary to inquire for others,

inasmuch as experience presents no absolute limitation of the regress. For,

either you do not possess a perception which absolutely limits your empirical

regress, and in this case the regress cannot be regarded as complete; or, you

do possess such a limitative perception, in which case it is not a part of your

series (for that which limits must be distinct from that which is limited by it),

and it is incumbent you to continue your regress up to this condition, and so

on.

              These remarks will be placed in their proper light by their

application in the following section.

 

 

Section IX. Of the Empirical Use of the Regulative Principle of Reason

                    with regard to the Cosmological Ideas. 

 

              We have shown that no transcendental use can be made either of the

conceptions of reason or of understanding. We have shown, likewise, that the

demand of absolute totality in the series of conditions in the world of sense

arises from a transcendental employment of reason, resting on the opinion

that phenomena are to be regarded as things in themselves. It follows that we

are not required to answer the question respecting the absolute quantity of a

series — whether it is in itself limited or unlimited. We are only called upon

to determine how far we must proceed in the empirical regress from condition

to condition, in order to discover, in conformity with the rule of reason, a full

and correct answer to the questions proposed by reason itself.

              This principle of reason is hence valid only as a rule for the

extension of a possible experience — its invalidity as a principle constitutive

of phenomena in themselves having been sufficiently demonstrated. And

thus, too, the antinomial conflict of reason with itself is completely put an

end to; inasmuch as we have not only presented a critical solution of the

fallacy lurking in the opposite statements of reason, but have shown the true

meaning of the ideas which gave rise to these statements. The dialectical

principle of reason has, therefore, been changed into a doctrinal principle. But

in fact, if this principle, in the subjective signification which we have shown

to be its only true sense, may be guaranteed as a principle of the unceasing

extension of the employment of our understanding, its influence and value

are just as great as if it were an axiom for the a priori determination of

objects. For such an axiom could not exert a stronger influence on the

extension and rectification of our knowledge, otherwise than by procuring for

the principles of the understanding the most widely expanded employment in

the field of experience.I. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the Composition of

                            Phenomena in the Universe.

 

 

              Here, as well as in the case of the other cosmological problems, the

ground of the regulative principle of reason is the proposition that in our

empirical regress no experience of an absolute limit, and consequently no

experience of a condition, which is itself absolutely unconditioned, is

discoverable. And the truth of this proposition itself rests upon the

consideration that such an experience must represent to us phenomena as

limited by nothing or the mere void, on which our continued regress by

means of perception must abut — which is impossible.

              Now this proposition, which declares that every condition attained in

the empirical regress must itself be considered empirically conditioned,

contains the rule in terminis, which requires me, to whatever extent I may

have proceeded in the ascending series, always to look for some higher

member in the series — whether this member is to become known to me

through experience, or not.

              Nothing further is necessary, then, for the solution of the first

cosmological problem, than to decide, whether, in the regress to the

unconditioned quantity of the universe (as regards space and time), this never

limited ascent ought to be called a regressus in infinitum or indefinitum.

              The general representation which we form in our minds of the series

of all past states or conditions of the world, or of all the things which at

present exist in it, is itself nothing more than a possible empirical regress,

which is cogitated — although in an undetermined manner — in the mind,

and which gives rise to the conception of a series of conditions for a given
      60
object. Now I have a conception of the universe, but not an intuition — that

is, not an intuition of it as a whole. Thus I cannot infer the magnitude of the

regress from the quantity or magnitude of the world, and determine the

former by means of the latter; on the contrary, I must first of all form a

conception of the quantity or magnitude of the world from the magnitude of

the empirical regress. But of this regress I know nothing more than that I

ought to proceed from every given member of the series of conditions to onestill higher. But the quantity of the universe is not thereby determined, and

we cannot affirm that this regress proceeds in infinitum. Such an affirmation

would anticipate the members of the series which have not yet been reached,

and represent the number of them as beyond the grasp of any empirical

synthesis; it would consequently determine the cosmical quantity prior to the

regress (although only in a negative manner)— which is impossible. For the

world is not given in its totality in any intuition: consequently, its quantity

cannot be given prior to the regress. It follows that we are unable to make any

declaration respecting the cosmical quantity in itself — not even that the

regress in it is a regress in infinitum; we must only endeavour to attain to a

conception of the quantity of the universe, in conformity with the rule which

determines the empirical regress in it. But this rule merely requires us never

to admit an absolute limit to our series — how far soever we may have

proceeded in it, but always, on the contrary, to subordinate every

phenomenon to some other as its condition, and consequently to proceed to

this higher phenomenon. Such a regress is, therefore, the regressus in

indefinitum, which, as not determining a quantity in the object, is clearly

distinguishable from the regressus in infinitum.

        60
               The cosmical series can neither be greater nor smaller than the

possible empirical regress, upon which its conception is based. And as this

regress cannot be a determinate infinite regress, still less a determinate finite

(absolutely limited), it is evident that we cannot regard the world as either

finite or infinite, because the regress, which gives us the representation of the

world, is neither finite nor infinite.

              It follows from what we have said that we are not justified in

declaring the world to be infinite in space, or as regards past time. For this

conception of an infinite given quantity is empirical; but we cannot apply the

conception of an infinite quantity to the world as an object of the senses. I

cannot say, “The regress from a given perception to everything limited either

in space or time, proceeds in infinitum,” for this presupposes an infinite

cosmical quantity; neither can I say, “It is finite,” for an absolute limit is

likewise impossible in experience. It follows that I am not entitled to make

any assertion at all respecting the whole object of experience — the world of

sense; I must limit my declarations to the rule according to which experience

or empirical knowledge is to be attained.

              To the question, therefore, respecting the cosmical quantity, the firstand negative answer is: “The world has no beginning in time, and no absolute

limit in space.”

              For, in the contrary case, it would be limited by a void time on the

one hand, and by a void space on the other. Now, since the world, as a

phenomenon, cannot be thus limited in itself for a phenomenon is not a thing

in itself; it must be possible for us to have a perception of this limitation by a

void time and a void space. But such a perception — such an experience is

impossible; because it has no content. Consequently, an absolute cosmical
                                                                  61
limit is empirically, and therefore absolutely, impossible.

        61
               The reader will remark that the proof presented above is very

different from the dogmatical demonstration given in the antithesis of the first

antinomy. In that demonstration, it was taken for granted that the world is a

thing in itself — given in its totality prior to all regress, and a determined

position in space and time was denied to it — if it was not considered as

occupying all time and all space. Hence our conclusion differed from that

given above; for we inferred in the antithesis the actual infinity of the world.

              From this follows the affirmative answer: “The regress in the series

of phenomena — as a determination of the cosmical quantity, proceeds in

indefinitum.” This is equivalent to saying: “The world of sense has no

absolute quantity, but the empirical regress (through which alone the world of

sense is presented to us on the side of its conditions) rests upon a rule, which

requires it to proceed from every member of the series, as conditioned, to one

still more remote (whether through personal experience, or by means of

history, or the chain of cause and effect), and not to cease at any point in this

extension of the possible empirical employment of the understanding.” And

this is the proper and only use which reason can make of its principles.

              The above rule does not prescribe an unceasing regress in one kind

of phenomena. It does not, for example, forbid us, in our ascent from an

individual human being through the line of his ancestors, to expect that we

shall discover at some point of the regress a primeval pair, or to admit, in the

series of heavenly bodies, a sun at the farthest possible distance from some

centre. All that it demands is a perpetual progress from phenomena to

phenomena, even although an actual perception is not presented by them (as

in the case of our perceptions being so weak as that we are unable to become

conscious of them), since they, nevertheless, belong to possible experience.              Every beginning is in time, and all limits to extension are in space.

But space and time are in the world of sense. Consequently phenomena in the

world are conditionally limited, but the world itself is not limited, either

conditionally or unconditionally.

              For this reason, and because neither the world nor the cosmical

series of conditions to a given conditioned can be completely given, our

conception of the cosmical quantity is given only in and through the regress

and not prior to it — in a collective intuition. But the regress itself is really

nothing more than the determining of the cosmical quantity, and cannot

therefore give us any determined conception of it — still less a conception of

a quantity which is, in relation to a certain standard, infinite. The regress does

not, therefore, proceed to infinity (an infinity given), but only to an indefinite

extent, for or the of presenting to us a quantity — realized only in and

through the regress itself.II. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the Division of a

                              Whole given in Intuition.

 

 

              When I divide a whole which is given in intuition, I proceed from a

conditioned to its conditions. The division of the parts of the whole

(subdivisio or decompositio) is a regress in the series of these conditions. The

absolute totality of this series would be actually attained and given to the

mind, if the regress could arrive at simple parts. But if all the parts in a

continuous decomposition are themselves divisible, the division, that is to

say, the regress, proceeds from the conditioned to its conditions in infinitum;

because the conditions (the parts) are themselves contained in the

conditioned, and, as the latter is given in a limited intuition, the former are all

given along with it. This regress cannot, therefore, be called a regressus in

indefinitum, as happened in the case of the preceding cosmological idea, the

regress in which proceeded from the conditioned to the conditions not given

contemporaneously and along with it, but discoverable only through the

empirical regress. We are not, however, entitled to affirm of a whole of this

kind, which is divisible in infinitum, that it consists of an infinite number of

parts. For, although all the parts are contained in the intuition of the whole,

the whole division is not contained therein. The division is contained only in

the progressing decomposition — in the regress itself, which is the condition

of the possibility and actuality of the series. Now, as this regress is infinite,

all the members (parts) to which it attains must be contained in the given

whole as an aggregate. But the complete series of division is not contained

therein. For this series, being infinite in succession and always incomplete,

cannot represent an infinite number of members, and still less a composition

of these members into a whole.

              To apply this remark to space. Every limited part of space presented

to intuition is a whole, the parts of which are always spaces — to whatever

extent subdivided. Every limited space is hence divisible to infinity.

              Let us again apply the remark to an external phenomenon enclosed

in limits, that is, a body. The divisibility of a body rests upon the divisibility

of space, which is the condition of the possibility of the body as an extendedwhole. A body is consequently divisible to infinity, though it does not, for

that reason, consist of an infinite number of parts.

              It certainly seems that, as a body must be cogitated as substance in

space, the law of divisibility would not be applicable to it as substance. For

we may and ought to grant, in the case of space, that division or

decomposition, to any extent, never can utterly annihilate composition (that is

to say, the smallest part of space must still consist of spaces); otherwise space

would entirely cease to exist- which is impossible. But, the assertion on the

other band that when all composition in matter is annihilated in thought,

nothing remains, does not seem to harmonize with the conception of

substance, which must be properly the subject of all composition and must

remain, even after the conjunction of its attributes in space- which constituted

a body — is annihilated in thought. But this is not the case with substance in

the phenomenal world, which is not a thing in itself cogitated by the pure

category. Phenomenal substance is not an absolute subject; it is merely a

permanent sensuous image, and nothing more than an intuition, in which the

unconditioned is not to be found.

              But, although this rule of progress to infinity is legitimate and

applicable to the subdivision of a phenomenon, as a mere occupation or

filling of space, it is not applicable to a whole consisting of a number of

distinct parts and constituting a quantum discretum — that is to say, an

organized body. It cannot be admitted that every part in an organized whole

is itself organized, and that, in analysing it to infinity, we must always meet

with organized parts; although we may allow that the parts of the matter

which we decompose in infinitum, may be organized. For the infinity of the

division of a phenomenon in space rests altogether on the fact that the

divisibility of a phenomenon is given only in and through this infinity, that is,

an undetermined number of parts is given, while the parts themselves are

given and determined only in and through the subdivision; in a word, the

infinity of the division necessarily presupposes that the whole is not already

divided in se. Hence our division determines a number of parts in the whole

— a number which extends just as far as the actual regress in the division;

while, on the other hand, the very notion of a body organized to infinity

represents the whole as already and in itself divided. We expect, therefore, to

find in it a determinate, but at the same time, infinite, number of parts —

which is self-contradictory. For we should thus have a whole containing aseries of members which could not be completed in any regress — which is

infinite, and at the same time complete in an organized composite. Infinite

divisibility is applicable only to a quantum continuum, and is based entirely

on the infinite divisibility of space, But in a quantum discretum the multitude

of parts or units is always determined, and hence always equal to some

number. To what extent a body may be organized, experience alone can

inform us; and although, so far as our experience of this or that body has

extended, we may not have discovered any inorganic part, such parts must

exist in possible experience. But how far the transcendental division of a

phenomenon must extend, we cannot know from experience — it is a

question which experience cannot answer; it is answered only by the

principle of reason which forbids us to consider the empirical regress, in the

analysis of extended body, as ever absolutely complete.

  Concluding Remark on the Solution of the Transcendental Mathematical

      Ideas- and Introductory to the Solution of the Dynamical Ideas.

 

              We presented the antinomy of pure reason in a tabular form, and we

endeavoured to show the ground of this self-contradiction on the part of

reason, and the only means of bringing it to a conclusion- znamely, by

declaring both contradictory statements to be false. We represented in these

antinomies the conditions of phenomena as belonging to the conditioned

according to relations of space and time- which is the usual supposition of the

common understanding. In this respect, all dialectical representations of

totality, in the series of conditions to a given conditioned, were perfectly

homogeneous. The condition was always a member of the series along with

the conditioned, and thus the homogeneity of the whole series was assured. In

this case the regress could never be cogitated as complete; or, if this was the

case, a member really conditioned was falsely regarded as a primal member,

consequently as unconditioned. In such an antinomy, therefore, we did not

consider the object, that is, the conditioned, but the series of conditions

belonging to the object, and the magnitude of that series. And thus arose the

difficulty — a difficulty not to be settled by any decision regarding the claims

of the two parties, but simply by cutting the knot — by declaring the series

proposed by reason to be either too long or too short for the understanding,

which could in neither case make its conceptions adequate with the ideas.

              But we have overlooked, up to this point, an essential differenceexisting between the conceptions of the understanding which reason

endeavours to raise to the rank of ideas — two of these indicating a

mathematical, and two a dynamical synthesis of phenomena. Hitherto, it was

necessary to signalize this distinction; for, just as in our general

representation of all transcendental ideas, we considered them under

phenomenal conditions, so, in the two mathematical ideas, our discussion is

concerned solely with an object in the world of phenomena. But as we are

now about to proceed to the consideration of the dynamical conceptions of

the understanding, and their adequateness with ideas, we must not lose sight

of this distinction. We shall find that it opens up to us an entirely new view of

the conflict in which reason is involved. For, while in the first two

antinomies, both parties were dismissed, on the ground of having advanced

statements based upon false hypothesis; in the present case the hope appears

of discovering a hypothesis which may be consistent with the demands of

reason, and, the judge completing the statement of the grounds of claim,

which both parties had left in an unsatisfactory state, the question may be

settled on its own merits, not by dismissing the claimants, but by a

comparison of the arguments on both sides. If we consider merely their

extension, and whether they are adequate with ideas, the series of conditions

may be regarded as all homogeneous. But the conception of the

understanding which lies at the basis of these ideas, contains either a

synthesis of the homogeneous (presupposed in every quantity — in its

composition as well as in its division) or of the heterogeneous, which is the

case in the dynamical synthesis of cause and effect, as well as of the

necessary and the contingent.

              Thus it happens that in the mathematical series of phenomena no

other than a sensuous condition is admissible — a condition which is itself a

member of the series; while the dynamical series of sensuous conditions

admits a heterogeneous condition, which is not a member of the series, but,

as purely intelligible, lies out of and beyond it. And thus reason is satisfied,

and an unconditioned placed at the head of the series of phenomena, without

introducing confusion into or discontinuing it, contrary to the principles of

the understanding.

              Now, from the fact that the dynamical ideas admit a condition of

phenomena which does not form a part of the series of phenomena, arises a

result which we should not have expected from an antinomy. In former cases,the result was that both contradictory dialectical statements were declared to

be false. In the present case, we find the conditioned in the dynamical series

connected with an empirically unconditioned, but non-sensuous condition;

and thus satisfaction is done to the understanding on the one hand and to the
                      62
reason on the other. While, moreover, the dialectical arguments for

unconditioned totality in mere phenomena fall to the ground, both

propositions of reason may be shown to be true in their proper signification.

This could not happen in the case of the cosmological ideas which demanded

a mathematically unconditioned unity; for no condition could be placed at the

head of the series of phenomena, except one which was itself a phenomenon

and consequently a member of the series.

        62
               For the understanding cannot admit among phenomena a condition

which is itself empirically unconditioned. But if it is possible to cogitate an

intelligible condition — one which is not a member of the series of

phenomena — for a conditioned phenomenon, without breaking the series of

empirical conditions, such a condition may be admissible as empirically

unconditioned, and the empirical regress continue regular, unceasing, and

intact.III. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the Deduction of

                      Cosmical Events from their Causes.

 

 

              There are only two modes of causality cogitable — the causality of

nature or of freedom. The first is the conjunction of a particular state with

another preceding it in the world of sense, the former following the latter by

virtue of a law. Now, as the causality of phenomena is subject to conditions

of time, and the preceding state, if it had always existed, could not have

produced an effect which would make its first appearance at a particular time,

the causality of a cause must itself be an effect — must itself have begun to

be, and therefore, according to the principle of the understanding, itself

requires a cause.

              We must understand, on the contrary, by the term freedom, in the

cosmological sense, a faculty of the spontaneous origination of a state; the

causality of which, therefore, is not subordinated to another cause

determining it in time. Freedom is in this sense a pure transcendental idea,

which, in the first place, contains no empirical element; the object of which,

in the second place, cannot be given or determined in any experience,

because it is a universal law of the very possibility of experience, that

everything which happens must have a cause, that consequently the causality

of a cause, being itself something that has happened, must also have a cause.

In this view of the case, the whole field of experience, how far soever it may

extend, contains nothing that is not subject to the laws of nature. But, as we

cannot by this means attain to an absolute totality of conditions in reference

to the series of causes and effects, reason creates the idea of a spontaneity,

which can begin to act of itself, and without any external cause determining it

to action, according to the natural law of causality.

              It is especially remarkable that the practical conception of freedom is

based upon the transcendental idea, and that the question of the possibility of

the former is difficult only as it involves the consideration of the truth of the

latter. Freedom, in the practical sense, is the independence of the will of

coercion by sensuous impulses. A will is sensuous, in so far as it is

pathologically affected (by sensuous impulses); it is termed animal (arbitriumbrutum), when it is pathologically necessitated. The human will is certainly

an arbitrium sensitivum, not brutum, but liberum; because sensuousness does

not necessitate its action, a faculty existing in man of self-determination,

independently of all sensuous coercion.

              It is plain that, if all causality in the world of sense were natural —

and natural only — every event would be determined by another according to

necessary laws, and that, consequently, phenomena, in so far as they

determine the will, must necessitate every action as a natural effect from

themselves; and thus all practical freedom would fall to the ground with the

transcendental idea. For the latter presupposes that although a certain thing

has not happened, it ought to have happened, and that, consequently, its

phenomenal cause was not so powerful and determinative as to exclude the

causality of our will — a causality capable of producing effects

independently of and even in opposition to the power of natural causes, and

capable, consequently, of spontaneously originating a series of events.

              Here, too, we find it to be the case, as we generally found in the self-

contradictions and perplexities of a reason which strives to pass the bounds of

possible experience, that the problem is properly not physiological, but

transcendental. The question of the possibility of freedom does indeed

concern psychology; but, as it rests upon dialectical arguments of pure

reason, its solution must engage the attention of transcendental philosophy.

Before attempting this solution, a task which transcendental philosophy

cannot decline, it will be advisable to make a remark with regard to its

procedure in the settlement of the question.

              If phenomena were things in themselves, and time and space forms

of the existence of things, condition and conditioned would always be

members of the same series; and thus would arise in the present case the

antinomy common to all transcendental ideas — that their series is either too

great or too small for the understanding. The dynamical ideas, which we are

about to discuss in this and the following section, possess the peculiarity of

relating to an object, not considered as a quantity, but as an existence; and

thus, in the discussion of the present question, we may make abstraction of

the quantity of the series of conditions, and consider merely the dynamical

relation of the condition to the conditioned. The question, then, suggests

itself, whether freedom is possible; and, if it is, whether it can consist with

the universality of the natural law of causality; and, consequently, whetherwe enounce a proper disjunctive proposition when we say: “Every effect

must have its origin either in nature or in freedom,” or whether both cannot

exist together in the same event in different relations. The principle of an

unbroken connection between all events in the phenomenal world, in

accordance with the unchangeable laws of nature, is a well-established

principle of transcendental analytic which admits of no exception. The

question, therefore, is: “Whether an effect, determined according to the laws

of nature, can at the same time be produced by a free agent, or whether

freedom and nature mutually exclude each other?” And here, the common but

fallacious hypothesis of the absolute reality of phenomena manifests its

injurious influence in embarrassing the procedure of reason. For if

phenomena are things in themselves, freedom is impossible. In this case,

nature is the complete and all-sufficient cause of every event; and condition

and conditioned, cause and effect are contained in the same series, and

necessitated by the same law. If, on the contrary, phenomena are held to be,

as they are in fact, nothing more than mere representations, connected with

each other in accordance with empirical laws, they must have a ground which

is not phenomenal. But the causality of such an intelligible cause is not

determined or determinable by phenomena; although its effects, as

phenomena, must be determined by other phenomenal existences. This cause

and its causality exist therefore out of and apart from the series of

phenomena; while its effects do exist and are discoverable in the series of

empirical conditions. Such an effect may therefore be considered to be free in

relation to its intelligible cause, and necessary in relation to the phenomena

from which it is a necessary consequence — a distinction which, stated in

this perfectly general and abstract manner, must appear in the highest degree

subtle and obscure. The sequel will explain. It is sufficient, at present, to

remark that, as the complete and unbroken connection of phenomena is an

unalterable law of nature, freedom is impossible — on the supposition that

phenomena are absolutely real. Hence those philosophers who adhere to the

common opinion on this subject can never succeed in reconciling the ideas of

nature and freedom.

    Possibility of Freedom in Harmony with the Universal Law of Natural

                                        Necessity.

 

              That element in a sensuous object which is not itself sensuous, I may

be allowed to term intelligible. If, accordingly, an object which must beregarded as a sensuous phenomenon possesses a faculty which is not an

object of sensuous intuition, but by means of which it is capable of being the

cause of phenomena, the causality of an object or existence of this kind may

be regarded from two different points of view. It may be considered to be

intelligible, as regards its action — the action of a thing which is a thing in

itself, and sensuous, as regards its effects — the effects of a phenomenon

belonging to the sensuous world. We should accordingly, have to form both

an empirical and an intellectual conception of the causality of such a faculty

or power — both, however, having reference to the same effect. This twofold

manner of cogitating a power residing in a sensuous object does not run

counter to any of the conceptions which we ought to form of the world of

phenomena or of a possible experience. Phenomena — not being things in

themselves — must have a transcendental object as a foundation, which

determines them as mere representations; and there seems to be no reason

why we should not ascribe to this transcendental object, in addition to the

property of self-phenomenization, a causality whose effects are to be met

with in the world of phenomena, although it is not itself a phenomenon. But

every effective cause must possess a character, that is to say, a law of its

causality, without which it would cease to be a cause. In the above case, then,

every sensuous object would possess an empirical character, which

guaranteed that its actions, as phenomena, stand in complete and harmonious

connection, conformably to unvarying natural laws, with all other

phenomena, and can be deduced from these, as conditions, and that they do

thus, in connection with these, constitute a series in the order of nature. This

sensuous object must, in the second place, possess an intelligible character,

which guarantees it to be the cause of those actions, as phenomena, although

it is not itself a phenomenon nor subordinate to the conditions of the world of

sense. The former may be termed the character of the thing as a phenomenon,

the latter the character of the thing as a thing in itself.

              Now this active subject would, in its character of intelligible subject,

be subordinate to no conditions of time, for time is only a condition of

phenomena, and not of things in themselves. No action would begin or cease

to be in this subject; it would consequently be free from the law of all

determination of time — the law of change, namely, that everything which

happens must have a cause in the phenomena of a preceding state. In one

word, the causality of the subject, in so far as it is intelligible, would not form

part of the series of empirical conditions which determine and necessitate anevent in the world of sense. Again, this intelligible character of a thing cannot

be immediately cognized, because we can perceive nothing but phenomena,

but it must be capable of being cogitated in harmony with the empirical

character; for we always find ourselves compelled to place, in thought, a

transcendental object at the basis of phenomena although we can never know

what this object is in itself.

              In virtue of its empirical character, this subject would at the same

time be subordinate to all the empirical laws of causality, and, as a

phenomenon and member of the sensuous world, its effects would have to be

accounted for by a reference to preceding phenomena. Eternal phenomena

must be capable of influencing it; and its actions, in accordance with natural

laws, must explain to us how its empirical character, that is, the law of its

causality, is to be cognized in and by means of experience. In a word, all

requisites for a complete and necessary determination of these actions must

be presented to us by experience.

              In virtue of its intelligible character, on the other hand (although we

possess only a general conception of this character), the subject must be

regarded as free from all sensuous influences, and from all phenomenal

determination. Moreover, as nothing happens in this subject — for it is a

noumenon, and there does not consequently exist in it any change,

demanding the dynamical determination of time, and for the same reason no

connection with phenomena as causes — this active existence must in its

actions be free from and independent of natural necessity, for or necessity

exists only in the world of phenomena. It would be quite correct to say that it

originates or begins its effects in the world of sense from itself, although the

action productive of these effects does not begin in itself. We should not be in

this case affirming that these sensuous effects began to exist of themselves,

because they are always determined by prior empirical conditions — by

virtue of the empirical character, which is the phenomenon of the intelligible

character — and are possible only as constituting a continuation of the series

of natural causes. And thus nature and freedom, each in the complete and

absolute signification of these terms, can exist, without contradiction or

disagreement, in the same action to

  Exposition of the Cosmological Idea of Freedom in Harmony with the

                        Universal Law of Natural Necessity.

               I have thought it advisable to lay before the reader at first merely a

sketch of the solution of this transcendental problem, in order to enable him

to form with greater ease a clear conception of the course which reason must

adopt in the solution. I shall now proceed to exhibit the several momenta of

this solution, and to consider them in their order.

              The natural law that everything which happens must have a cause,

that the causality of this cause, that is, the action of the cause (which cannot

always have existed, but must be itself an event, for it precedes in time some

effect which it has originated), must have itself a phenomenal cause, by

which it is determined and, and, consequently, all events are empirically

determined in an order of nature — this law, I say, which lies at the

foundation of the possibility of experience, and of a connected system of

phenomena or nature is a law of the understanding, from which no departure,

and to which no exception, can be admitted. For to except even a single

phenomenon from its operation is to exclude it from the sphere of possible

experience and thus to admit it to be a mere fiction of thought or phantom of

the brain.

              Thus we are obliged to acknowledge the existence of a chain of

causes, in which, however, absolute totality cannot be found. But we need not

detain ourselves with this question, for it has already been sufficiently

answered in our discussion of the antinomies into which reason falls, when it

attempts to reach the unconditioned in the series of phenomena. If we permit

ourselves to be deceived by the illusion of transcendental idealism, we shall

find that neither nature nor freedom exists. Now the question is: “Whether,

admitting the existence of natural necessity in the world of phenomena, it is

possible to consider an effect as at the same time an effect of nature and an

effect of freedom — or, whether these two modes of causality are

contradictory and incompatible?”

              No phenomenal cause can absolutely and of itself begin a series.

Every action, in so far as it is productive of an event, is itself an event or

occurrence, and presupposes another preceding state, in which its cause

existed. Thus everything that happens is but a continuation of a series, and an

absolute beginning is impossible in the sensuous world. The actions of

natural causes are, accordingly, themselves effects, and presuppose causes

preceding them in time. A primal action which forms an absolute beginning,

is beyond the causal power of phenomena.              Now, is it absolutely necessary that, granting that all effects are

phenomena, the causality of the cause of these effects must also be a

phenomenon and belong to the empirical world? Is it not rather possible that,

although every effect in the phenomenal world must be connected with an

empirical cause, according to the universal law of nature, this empirical

causality may be itself the effect of a non-empirical and intelligible causality

— its connection with natural causes remaining nevertheless intact? Such a

causality would be considered, in reference to phenomena, as the primal

action of a cause, which is in so far, therefore, not phenomenal, but, by

reason of this faculty or power, intelligible; although it must, at the same

time, as a link in the chain of nature, be regarded as belonging to the

sensuous world.

              A belief in the reciprocal causality of phenomena is necessary, if we

are required to look for and to present the natural conditions of natural

events, that is to say, their causes. This being admitted as unexceptionably

valid, the requirements of the understanding, which recognizes nothing but

nature in the region of phenomena, are satisfied, and our physical

explanations of physical phenomena may proceed in their regular course,

without hindrance and without opposition. But it is no stumbling-block in the

way, even assuming the idea to be a pure fiction, to admit that there are some

natural causes in the possession of a faculty which is not empirical, but

intelligible, inasmuch as it is not determined to action by empirical

conditions, but purely and solely upon grounds brought forward by the

understanding — this action being still, when the cause is phenomenized, in

perfect accordance with the laws of empirical causality. Thus the acting

subject, as a causal phenomenon, would continue to preserve a complete

connection with nature and natural conditions; and the phenomenon only of

the subject (with all its phenomenal causality) would contain certain

conditions, which, if we ascend from the empirical to the transcendental

object, must necessarily be regarded as intelligible. For, if we attend, in our

inquiries with regard to causes in the world of phenomena, to the directions

of nature alone, we need not trouble ourselves about the relation in which the

transcendental subject, which is completely unknown to us, stands to these

phenomena and their connection in nature. The intelligible ground of

phenomena in this subject does not concern empirical questions. It has to do

only with pure thought; and, although the effects of this thought and action of

the pure understanding are discoverable in phenomena, these phenomenamust nevertheless be capable of a full and complete explanation, upon purely

physical grounds and in accordance with natural laws. And in this case we

attend solely to their empirical and omit all consideration of their intelligible

character (which is the transcendental cause of the former) as completely

unknown, except in so far as it is exhibited by the latter as its empirical

symbol. Now let us apply this to experience. Man is a phenomenon of the

sensuous world and, at the same time, therefore, a natural cause, the causality

of which must be regulated by empirical laws. As such, he must possess an

empirical character, like all other natural phenomena. We remark this

empirical character in his actions, which reveal the presence of certain

powers and faculties. If we consider inanimate or merely animal nature, we

can discover no reason for ascribing to ourselves any other than a faculty

which is determined in a purely sensuous manner. But man, to whom nature

reveals herself only through sense, cognizes himself not only by his senses,

but also through pure apperception; and this in actions and internal

determinations, which he cannot regard as sensuous impressions. He is thus

to himself, on the one hand, a phenomenon, but on the other hand, in respect

of certain faculties, a purely intelligible object — intelligible, because its

action cannot be ascribed to sensuous receptivity. These faculties are

understanding and reason. The latter, especially, is in a peculiar manner

distinct from all empirically-conditioned faculties, for it employs ideas alone

in the consideration of its objects, and by means of these determines the

understanding, which then proceeds to make an empirical use of its own

conceptions, which, like the ideas of reason, are pure and non-empirical.

              That reason possesses the faculty of causality, or that at least we are

compelled so to represent it, is evident from the imperatives, which in the

sphere of the practical we impose on many of our executive powers. The

words I ought express a species of necessity, and imply a connection with

grounds which nature does not and cannot present to the mind of man.

Understanding knows nothing in nature but that which is, or has been, or will

be. It would be absurd to say that anything in nature ought to be other than it

is in the relations of time in which it stands; indeed, the ought, when we

consider merely the course of nature, bas neither application nor meaning.

The question, “What ought to happen in the sphere of nature?” is just as

absurd as the question, “What ought to be the properties of a circle?” All that

we are entitled to ask is, “What takes place in nature?” or, in the latter case,

“What are the properties of a circle?”              But the idea of an ought or of duty indicates a possible action, the

ground of which is a pure conception; while the ground of a merely natural

action is, on the contrary, always a phenomenon. This action must certainly

be possible under physical conditions, if it is prescribed by the moral

imperative ought; but these physical or natural conditions do not concern the

determination of the will itself, they relate to its effects alone, and the

consequences of the effect in the world of phenomena. Whatever number of

motives nature may present to my will, whatever sensuous impulses — the

moral ought it is beyond their power to produce. They may produce a

volition, which, so far from being necessary, is always conditioned — a

volition to which the ought enunciated by reason, sets an aim and a standard,

gives permission or prohibition. Be the object what it may, purely sensuous

— as pleasure, or presented by pure reason — as good, reason will not yield

to grounds which have an empirical origin. Reason will not follow the order

of things presented by experience, but, with perfect spontaneity, rearranges

them according to ideas, with which it compels empirical conditions to agree.

It declares, in the name of these ideas, certain actions to be necessary which

nevertheless have not taken place and which perhaps never will take place;

and yet presupposes that it possesses the faculty of causality in relation to

these actions. For, in the absence of this supposition, it could not expect its

ideas to produce certain effects in the world of experience.

              Now, let us stop here and admit it to be at least possible that reason

does stand in a really causal relation to phenomena. In this case it must —

pure reason as it is — exhibit an empirical character. For every cause

supposes a rule, according to which certain phenomena follow as effects from

the cause, and every rule requires uniformity in these effects; and this is the

proper ground of the conception of a cause — as a faculty or power. Now this

conception (of a cause) may be termed the empirical character of reason; and

this character is a permanent one, while the effects produced appear, in

conformity with the various conditions which accompany and partly limit

them, in various forms.

              Thus the volition of every man has an empirical character, which is

nothing more than the causality of his reason, in so far as its effects in the

phenomenal world manifest the presence of a rule, according to which we are

enabled to examine, in their several kinds and degrees, the actions of this

causality and the rational grounds for these actions, and in this way to decideupon the subjective principles of the volition. Now we learn what this

empirical character is only from phenomenal effects, and from the rule of

these which is presented by experience; and for this reason all the actions of

man in the world of phenomena are determined by his empirical character,

and the co-operative causes of nature. If, then, we could investigate all the

phenomena of human volition to their lowest foundation in the mind, there

would be no action which we could not anticipate with certainty, and

recognize to be absolutely necessary from its preceding conditions. So far as

relates to this empirical character, therefore, there can be no freedom; and it

is only in the light of this character that we can consider the human will,

when we confine ourselves to simple observation and, as is the case in

anthropology, institute a physiological investigation of the motive causes of

human actions.

              But when we consider the same actions in relation to reason — not

for the purpose of explaining their origin, that is, in relation to speculative

reason, but to practical reason, as the producing cause of these actions — we

shall discover a rule and an order very different from those of nature and

experience. For the declaration of this mental faculty may be that what has

and could not but take place in the course of nature, ought not to have taken

place. Sometimes, too, we discover, or believe that we discover, that the ideas

of reason did actually stand in a causal relation to certain actions of man; and

that these actions have taken place because they were determined, not by

empirical causes, but by the act of the will upon grounds of reason.

              Now, granting that reason stands in a causal relation to phenomena;

can an action of reason be called free, when we know that, sensuously, in its

empirical character, it is completely determined and absolutely necessary?

But this empirical character is itself determined by the intelligible character.

The latter we cannot cognize; we can only indicate it by means of

phenomena, which enable us to have an immediate cognition only of the
                      63
empirical character. An action, then, in so far as it is to be ascribed to an

intelligible cause, does not result from it in accordance with empirical laws.

That is to say, not the conditions of pure reason, but only their effects in the

internal sense, precede the act. Pure reason, as a purely intelligible faculty, is

not subject to the conditions of time. The causality of reason in its intelligible

character does not begin to be; it does not make its appearance at a certain

time, for the purpose of producing an effect. If this were not the case, thecausality of reason would be subservient to the natural law of phenomena,

which determines them according to time, and as a series of causes and

effects in time; it would consequently cease to be freedom and become a part

of nature. We are therefore justified in saying: “If reason stands in a causal

relation to phenomena, it is a faculty which originates the sensuous condition

of an empirical series of effects.” For the condition, which resides in the

reason, is non-sensuous, and therefore cannot be originated, or begin to be.

And thus we find — what we could not discover in any empirical series — a

condition of a successive series of events itself empirically unconditioned.

For, in the present case, the condition stands out of and beyond the series of

phenomena — it is intelligible, and it consequently cannot be subjected to

any sensuous condition, or to any time-determination by a preceding cause.

        63
               The real morality of actions — their merit or demerit, and even

that of our own conduct, is completely unknown to us. Our estimates can

relate only to their empirical character. How much is the result of the action

of free will, how much is to be ascribed to nature and to blameless error, or to

a happy constitution of temperament (merito fortunae), no one can discover,

nor, for this reason, determine with perfect justice.

              But, in another respect, the same cause belongs also to the series of

phenomena. Man is himself a phenomenon. His will has an empirical

character, which is the empirical cause of all his actions. There is no

condition — determining man and his volition in conformity with this

character — which does not itself form part of the series of effects in nature,

and is subject to their law — the law according to which an empirically

undetermined cause of an event in time cannot exist. For this reason no given

action can have an absolute and spontaneous origination, all actions being

phenomena, and belonging to the world of experience. But it cannot be said

of reason, that the state in which it determines the will is always preceded by

some other state determining it. For reason is not a phenomenon, and

therefore not subject to sensuous conditions; and, consequently, even in

relation to its causality, the sequence or conditions of time do not influence

reason, nor can the dynamical law of nature, which determines the sequence

of time according to certain rules, be applied to it.

              Reason is consequently the permanent condition of all actions of the

human will. Each of these is determined in the empirical character of the

man, even before it has taken place. The intelligible character, of which theformer is but the sensuous schema, knows no before or after; and every

action, irrespective of the time-relation in which it stands with other

phenomena, is the immediate effect of the intelligible character of pure

reason, which, consequently, enjoys freedom of action, and is not

dynamically determined either by internal or external preceding conditions.

This freedom must not be described, in a merely negative manner, as

independence of empirical conditions, for in this case the faculty of reason

would cease to be a cause of phenomena; but it must be regarded, positively,

as a faculty which can spontaneously originate a series of events. At the same

time, it must not be supposed that any beginning can take place in reason; on

the contrary, reason, as the unconditioned condition of all action of the will,

admits of no time-conditions, although its effect does really begin in a series

of phenomena — a beginning which is not, however, absolutely primal.

              I shall illustrate this regulative principle of reason by an example,

from its employment in the world of experience; proved it cannot be by any

amount of experience, or by any number of facts, for such arguments cannot

establish the truth of transcendental propositions. Let us take a voluntary

action — for example, a falsehood — by means of which a man has

introduced a certain degree of confusion into the social life of humanity,

which is judged according to the motives from which it originated, and the

blame of which and of the evil consequences arising from it, is imputed to the

offender. We at first proceed to examine the empirical character of the

offence, and for this purpose we endeavour to penetrate to the sources of that

character, such as a defective education, bad company, a shameless and

wicked disposition, frivolity, and want of reflection — not forgetting also the

occasioning causes which prevailed at the moment of the transgression. In

this the procedure is exactly the same as that pursued in the investigation of

the series of causes which determine a given physical effect. Now, although

we believe the action to have been determined by all these circumstances, we

do not the less blame the offender. We do not blame him for his unhappy

disposition, nor for the circumstances which influenced him, nay, not even

for his former course of life; for we presuppose that all these considerations

may be set aside, that the series of preceding conditions may be regarded as

having never existed, and that the action may be considered as completely

unconditioned in relation to any state preceding, just as if the agent

commenced with it an entirely new series of effects. Our blame of the

offender is grounded upon a law of reason, which requires us to regard thisfaculty as a cause, which could have and ought to have otherwise determined

the behaviour of the culprit, independently of all empirical conditions. This

causality of reason we do not regard as a co-operating agency, but as

complete in itself. It matters not whether the sensuous impulses favoured or

opposed the action of this causality, the offence is estimated according to its

intelligible character — the offender is decidedly worthy of blame, the

moment he utters a falsehood. It follows that we regard reason, in spite of the

empirical conditions of the act, as completely free, and therefore, therefore,

as in the present case, culpable.

              The above judgement is complete evidence that we are accustomed

to think that reason is not affected by sensuous conditions, that in it no

change takes place — although its phenomena, in other words, the mode in

which it appears in its effects, are subject to change — that in it no preceding

state determines the following, and, consequently, that it does not form a

member of the series of sensuous conditions which necessitate phenomena

according to natural laws. Reason is present and the same in all human

actions and at all times; but it does not itself exist in time, and therefore does

not enter upon any state in which it did not formerly exist. It is, relatively to

new states or conditions, determining, but not determinable. Hence we cannot

ask: “Why did not reason determine itself in a different manner?” The

question ought to be thus stated: “Why did not reason employ its power of

causality to determine certain phenomena in a different manner?” “But this is

a question which admits of no answer. For a different intelligible character

would have exhibited a different empirical character; and, when we say that,

in spite of the course which his whole former life has taken, the offender

could have refrained from uttering the falsehood, this means merely that the

act was subject to the power and authority- permissive or prohibitive — of

reason. Now, reason is not subject in its causality to any conditions of

phenomena or of time; and a difference in time may produce a difference in

the relation of phenomena to each other — for these are not things and

therefore not causes in themselves — but it cannot produce any difference in

the relation in which the action stands to the faculty of reason.

              Thus, then, in our investigation into free actions and the causal

power which produced them, we arrive at an intelligible cause, beyond

which, however, we cannot go; although we can recognize that it is free, that

is, independent of all sensuous conditions, and that, in this way, it may be thesensuously unconditioned condition of phenomena. But for what reason the

intelligible character generates such and such phenomena and exhibits such

and such an empirical character under certain circumstances, it is beyond the

power of our reason to decide. The question is as much above the power and

the sphere of reason as the following would be: “Why does the transcendental

object of our external sensuous intuition allow of no other form than that of

intuition in space?” But the problem, which we were called upon to solve,

does not require us to entertain any such questions. The problem was merely

this — whether freedom and natural necessity can exist without opposition in

the same action. To this question we have given a sufficient answer; for we

have shown that, as the former stands in a relation to a different kind of

condition from those of the latter, the law of the one does not affect the law

of the other and that, consequently, both can exist together in independence

of and without interference with each other.

              The reader must be careful to remark that my intention in the above

remarks has not been to prove the actual existence of freedom, as a faculty in

which resides the cause of certain sensuous phenomena. For, not to mention

that such an argument would not have a transcendental character, nor have

been limited to the discussion of pure conceptions — all attempts at inferring

from experience what cannot be cogitated in accordance with its laws, must

ever be unsuccessful. Nay, more, I have not even aimed at demonstrating the

possibility of freedom; for this too would have been a vain endeavour,

inasmuch as it is beyond the power of the mind to cognize the possibility of a

reality or of a causal power by the aid of mere a priori conceptions. Freedom

has been considered in the foregoing remarks only as a transcendental idea,

by means of which reason aims at originating a series of conditions in the

world of phenomena with the help of that which is sensuously unconditioned,

involving itself, however, in an antinomy with the laws which itself

prescribes for the conduct of the understanding. That this antinomy is based

upon a mere illusion, and that nature and freedom are at least not opposed —

this was the only thing in our power to prove, and the question which it was

our task to solve.IV. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the Dependence

                            of Phenomenal Existences.

 

 

              In the preceding remarks, we considered the changes in the world of

sense as constituting a dynamical series, in which each member is

subordinated to another — as its cause. Our present purpose is to avail

ourselves of this series of states or conditions as a guide to an existence

which may be the highest condition of all changeable phenomena, that is, to a

necessary being. Our endeavour to reach, not the unconditioned causality, but

the unconditioned existence, of substance. The series before us is therefore a

series of conceptions, and not of intuitions (in which the one intuition is the

condition of the other).

              But it is evident that, as all phenomena are subject to change and

conditioned in their existence, the series of dependent existences cannot

embrace an unconditioned member, the existence of which would be

absolutely necessary. It follows that, if phenomena were things in themselves,

and — as an immediate consequence from this supposition- condition and

conditioned belonged to the same series of phenomena, the existence of a

necessary being, as the condition of the existence of sensuous phenomena,

would be perfectly impossible.

              An important distinction, however, exists between the dynamical

and the mathematical regress. The latter is engaged solely with the

combination of parts into a whole, or with the division of a whole into its

parts; and therefore are the conditions of its series parts of the series, and to

be consequently regarded as homogeneous, and for this reason, as consisting,

without exception, of phenomena. If the former regress, on the contrary, the

aim of which is not to establish the possibility of an unconditioned whole

consisting of given parts, or of an unconditioned part of a given whole, but to

demonstrate the possibility of the deduction of a certain state from its cause,

or of the contingent existence of substance from that which exists necessarily,

it is not requisite that the condition should form part of an empirical series

along with the conditioned.

              In the case of the apparent antinomy with which we are at presentdealing, there exists a way of escape from the difficulty; for it is not

impossible that both of the contradictory statements may be true in different

relations. All sensuous phenomena may be contingent, and consequently

possess only an empirically conditioned existence, and yet there may also

exist a non-empirical condition of the whole series, or, in other words, a

necessary being. For this necessary being, as an intelligible condition, would

not form a member — not even the highest member — of the series; the

whole world of sense would be left in its empirically determined existence

uninterfered with and uninfluenced. This would also form a ground of

distinction between the modes of solution employed for the third and fourth

antinomies. For, while in the consideration of freedom in the former

antinomy, the thing itself — the cause (substantia phaenomenon)— was

regarded as belonging to the series of conditions, and only its causality to the

intelligible world — we are obliged in the present case to cogitate this

necessary being as purely intelligible and as existing entirely apart from the

world of sense (as an ens extramundanum); for otherwise it would be subject

to the phenomenal law of contingency and dependence.

              In relation to the present problem, therefore, the regulative principle

of reason is that everything in the sensuous world possesses an empirically

conditioned existence — that no property of the sensuous world possesses

unconditioned necessity — that we are bound to expect, and, so far as is

possible, to seek for the empirical condition of every member in the series of

conditions — and that there is no sufficient reason to justify us in deducing

any existence from a condition which lies out of and beyond the empirical

series, or in regarding any existence as independent and self-subsistent;

although this should not prevent us from recognizing the possibility of the

whole series being based upon a being which is intelligible, and for this

reason free from all empirical conditions.

              But it has been far from my intention, in these remarks, to prove the

existence of this unconditioned and necessary being, or even to evidence the

possibility of a purely intelligible condition of the existence or all sensuous

phenomena. As bounds were set to reason, to prevent it from leaving the

guiding thread of empirical conditions and losing itself in transcendent

theories which are incapable of concrete presentation; so it was my purpose,

on the other band, to set bounds to the law of the purely empirical

understanding, and to protest against any attempts on its part at deciding onthe possibility of things, or declaring the existence of the intelligible to be

impossible, merely on the ground that it is not available for the explanation

and exposition of phenomena. It has been shown, at the same time, that the

contingency of all the phenomena of nature and their empirical conditions is

quite consistent with the arbitrary hypothesis of a necessary, although purely

intelligible condition, that no real contradiction exists between them and that,

consequently, both may be true. The existence of such an absolutely

necessary being may be impossible; but this can never be demonstrated from

the universal contingency and dependence of sensuous phenomena, nor from

the principle which forbids us to discontinue the series at some member of it,

or to seek for its cause in some sphere of existence beyond the world of

nature. Reason goes its way in the empirical world, and follows, too, its

peculiar path in the sphere of the transcendental.

              The sensuous world contains nothing but phenomena, which are

mere representations, and always sensuously conditioned; things in

themselves are not, and cannot be, objects to us. It is not to be wondered at,

therefore, that we are not justified in leaping from some member of an

empirical series beyond the world of sense, as if empirical representations

were things in themselves, existing apart from their transcendental ground in

the human mind, and the cause of whose existence may be sought out of the

empirical series. This would certainly be the case with contingent things; but

it cannot be with mere representations of things, the contingency of which is

itself merely a phenomenon and can relate to no other regress than that which

determines phenomena, that is, the empirical. But to cogitate an intelligible

ground of phenomena, as free, moreover, from the contingency of the latter,

conflicts neither with the unlimited nature of the empirical regress, nor with

the complete contingency of phenomena. And the demonstration of this was

the only thing necessary for the solution of this apparent antinomy. For if the

condition of every conditioned — as regards its existence — is sensuous, and

for this reason a part of the same series, it must be itself conditioned, as was

shown in the antithesis of the fourth antinomy. The embarrassments into

which a reason, which postulates the unconditioned, necessarily falls, must,

therefore, continue to exist; or the unconditioned must be placed in the sphere

of the intelligible. In this way, its necessity does not require, nor does it even

permit, the presence of an empirical condition: and it is, consequently,

unconditionally necessary.              The empirical employment of reason is not affected by the

assumption of a purely intelligible being; it continues its operations on the

principle of the contingency of all phenomena, proceeding from empirical

conditions to still higher and higher conditions, themselves empirical. just as

little does this regulative principle exclude the assumption of an intelligible

cause, when the question regards merely the pure employment of reason — in

relation to ends or aims. For, in this case, an intelligible cause signifies

merely the transcendental and to us unknown ground of the possibility of

sensuous phenomena, and its existence, necessary and independent of all

sensuous conditions, is not inconsistent with the contingency of phenomena,

or with the unlimited possibility of regress which exists in the series of

empirical conditions.

            Concluding Remarks on the Antinomy of Pure Reason.

 

              So long as the object of our rational conceptions is the totality of

conditions in the world of phenomena, and the satisfaction, from this source,

of the requirements of reason, so long are our ideas transcendental and

cosmological. But when we set the unconditioned- which is the aim of all our

inquiries — in a sphere which lies out of the world of sense and possible

experience, our ideas become transcendent. They are then not merely

serviceable towards the completion of the exercise of reason (which remains

an idea, never executed, but always to be pursued); they detach themselves

completely from experience and construct for themselves objects, the

material of which has not been presented by experience, and the objective

reality of which is not based upon the completion of the empirical series, but

upon pure a priori conceptions. The intelligible object of these transcendent

ideas may be conceded, as a transcendental object. But we cannot cogitate it

as a thing determinable by certain distinct predicates relating to its internal

nature, for it has no connection with empirical conceptions; nor are we

justified in affirming the existence of any such object. It is, consequently, a

mere product of the mind alone. Of all the cosmological ideas, however, it is

that occasioning the fourth antinomy which compels us to venture upon this

step. For the existence of phenomena, always conditioned and never self-

subsistent, requires us to look for an object different from phenomena — an

intelligible object, with which all contingency must cease. But, as we have

allowed ourselves to assume the existence of a self-subsistent reality out of

the field of experience, and are therefore obliged to regard phenomena asmerely a contingent mode of representing intelligible objects employed by

beings which are themselves intelligences — no other course remains for us

than to follow an alogy and employ the same mode in forming some

conception of intelligible things, of which we have not the least knowledge,

which nature taught us to use in the formation of empirical conceptions.

Experience made us acquainted with the contingent. But we are at present

engaged in the discussion of things which are not objects of experience; and

must, therefore, deduce our knowledge of them from that which is necessary

absolutely and in itself, that is, from pure conceptions. Hence the first step

which we take out of the world of sense obliges us to begin our system of

new cognition with the investigation of a necessary being, and to deduce

from our conceptions of it all our conceptions of intelligible things. This we

propose to attempt in the following chapter.

 

 

                     Chapter III. The Ideal of Pure Reason.

 

 

                        Section I. Of the Ideal in General.

 

 

              We have seen that pure conceptions do not present objects to the

mind, except under sensuous conditions; because the conditions of objective

reality do not exist in these conceptions, which contain, in fact, nothing but

the mere form of thought. They may, however, when applied to phenomena,

be presented in concreto; for it is phenomena that present to them the

materials for the formation of empirical conceptions, which are nothing more

than concrete forms of the conceptions of the understanding. But ideas are

still further removed from objective reality than categories; for no

phenomenon can ever present them to the human mind in concreto. They

contain a certain perfection, attainable by no possible empirical cognition;

and they give to reason a systematic unity, to which the unity of experience

attempts to approximate, but can never completely attain.

              But still further removed than the idea from objective reality is the

Ideal, by which term I understand the idea, not in concreto, but in individuo

— as an individual thing, determinable or determined by the idea alone. The

idea of humanity in its complete perfection supposes not only the

advancement of all the powers and faculties, which constitute our conception

of human nature, to a complete attainment of their final aims, but also

everything which is requisite for the complete determination of the idea; for

of all contradictory predicates, only one can conform with the idea of the

perfect man. What I have termed an ideal was in Plato’s philosophy an idea

of the divine mind — an individual object present to its pure intuition, the

most perfect of every kind of possible beings, and the archetype of all

phenomenal existences.

              Without rising to these speculative heights, we are bound to confess

that human reason contains not only ideas, but ideals, which possess, not, like

those of Plato, creative, but certainly practical power — as regulative

principles, and form the basis of the perfectibility of certain actions. Moralconceptions are not perfectly pure conceptions of reason, because an

empirical element — of pleasure or pain — lies at the foundation of them. In

relation, however, to the principle, whereby reason sets bounds to a freedom

which is in itself without law, and consequently when we attend merely to

their form, they may be considered as pure conceptions of reason. Virtue and

wisdom in their perfect purity are ideas. But the wise man of the Stoics is an

ideal, that is to say, a human being existing only in thought and in complete

conformity with the idea of wisdom. As the idea provides a rule, so the ideal

serves as an archetype for the perfect and complete determination of the

copy. Thus the conduct of this wise and divine man serves us as a standard of

action, with which we may compare and judge ourselves, which may help us

to reform ourselves, although the perfection it demands can never be attained

by us. Although we cannot concede objective reality to these ideals, they are

not to be considered as chimeras; on the contrary, they provide reason with a

standard, which enables it to estimate, by comparison, the degree of

incompleteness in the objects presented to it. But to aim at realizing the ideal

in an example in the world of experience — to describe, for instance, the

character of the perfectly wise man in a romance — is impracticable. Nay

more, there is something absurd in the attempt; and the result must be little

edifying, as the natural limitations, which are continually breaking in upon

the perfection and completeness of the idea, destroy the illusion in the story

and throw an air of suspicion even on what is good in the idea, which hence

appears fictitious and unreal.

              Such is the constitution of the ideal of reason, which is always based

upon determinate conceptions, and serves as a rule and a model for limitation

or of criticism. Very different is the nature of the ideals of the imagination.

Of these it is impossible to present an intelligible conception; they are a kind

of monogram, drawn according to no determinate rule, and forming rather a

vague picture — the production of many diverse experiences — than a

determinate image. Such are the ideals which painters and physiognomists

profess to have in their minds, and which can serve neither as a model for

production nor as a standard for appreciation. They may be termed, though

improperly, sensuous ideals, as they are declared to be models of certain

possible empirical intuitions. They cannot, however, furnish rules or

standards for explanation or examination with

              In its ideals, reason aims at complete and perfect determinationaccording to a priori rules; and hence it cogitates an object, which must be

completely determinable in conformity with principles, although all empirical

conditions are absent, and the conception of the object is on this account

transcendent.

 Section II. Of the Transcendental Ideal (Prototypon Trancendentale).

 

 

              Every conception is, in relation to that which is not contained in it,

undetermined and subject to the principle of determinability. This principle is

that, of every two contradictorily opposed predicates, only one can belong to

a conception. It is a purely logical principle, itself based upon the principle of

contradiction; inasmuch as it makes complete abstraction of the content and

attends merely to the logical form of the cognition.

              But again, everything, as regards its possibility, is also subject to the

principle of complete determination, according to which one of all the

possible contradictory predicates of things must belong to it. This principle is

not based merely upon that of contradiction; for, in addition to the relation

between two contradictory predicates, it regards everything as standing in a

relation to the sum of possibilities, as the sum total of all predicates of things,

and, while presupposing this sum as an a priori condition, presents to the

mind everything as receiving the possibility of its individual existence from

the relation it bears to, and the share it possesses in, the aforesaid sum of
            64
possibilities. The principle of complete determination relates the content

and not to the logical form. It is the principle of the synthesis of all the

predicates which are required to constitute the complete conception of a

thing, and not a mere principle analytical representation, which enounces that

one of two contradictory predicates must belong to a conception. It contains,

moreover, a transcendental presupposition- that, namely, of the material for

all possibility, which must contain a priori the data for this or that particular

possibility.

        64
               Thus this principle declares everything to possess a relation to a

common correlate — the sum-total of possibility, which, if discovered to

exist in the idea of one individual thing, would establish the affinity of all

possible things, from the identity of the ground of their complete

determination. The determinability of every conception is subordinate to the

universality (Allgemeinheit, universalitas) of the principle of excluded

middle; the determination of a thing to the totality (Allheit, universitas) of all

possible predicates.              The proposition, Everything which exists is completely determined,

means not only that one of every pair of given contradictory attributes, but

that one of all possible attributes, is always predicable of the thing; in it the

predicates are not merely compared logically with each other, but the thing

itself is transcendentally compared with the sum-total of all possible

predicates. The proposition is equivalent to saying: “To attain to a complete

knowledge of a thing, it is necessary to possess a knowledge of everything

that is possible, and to determine it thereby in a positive or negative manner.”

The conception of complete determination is consequently a conception

which cannot be presented in its totality in concreto, and is therefore based

upon an idea, which has its seat in the reason — the faculty which prescribes

to the understanding the laws of its harmonious and perfect exercise relates

              Now, although this idea of the sum-total of all possibility, in so far

as it forms the condition of the complete determination of everything, is itself

undetermined in relation to the predicates which may constitute this sum-

total, and we cogitate in it merely the sum-total of all possible predicates —

we nevertheless find, upon closer examination, that this idea, as a primitive

conception of the mind, excludes a large number of predicates — those

deduced and those irreconcilable with others, and that it is evolved as a

conception completely determined a priori. Thus it becomes the conception

of an individual object, which is completely determined by and through the

mere idea, and must consequently be termed an ideal of pure reason.

              When we consider all possible predicates, not merely logically, but

transcendentally, that is to say, with reference to the content which may be

cogitated as existing in them a priori, we shall find that some indicate a

being, others merely a non-being. The logical negation expressed in the word

not does not properly belong to a conception, but only to the relation of one

conception to another in a judgement, and is consequently quite insufficient

to present to the mind the content of a conception. The expression not mortal

does not indicate that a non-being is cogitated in the object; it does not

concern the content at all. A transcendental negation, on the contrary,

indicates non-being in itself, and is opposed to transcendental affirmation, the

conception of which of itself expresses a being. Hence this affirmation

indicates a reality, because in and through it objects are considered to be

something — to be things; while the opposite negation, on the other band,

indicates a mere want, or privation, or absence, and, where such negationsalone are attached to a representation, the non-existence of anything

corresponding to the representation.

              Now a negation cannot be cogitated as determined, without

cogitating at the same time the opposite affirmation. The man born blind has

not the least notion of darkness, because he has none of light; the vagabond

knows nothing of poverty, because he has never known what it is to be in
        65
comfort; the ignorant man has no conception of his ignorance, because he

has no conception of knowledge. All conceptions of negatives are

accordingly derived or deduced conceptions; and realities contain the data,

and, so to speak, the material or transcendental content of the possibility and

complete determination of all things.

        65
               The investigations and calculations of astronomers have taught us

much that is wonderful; but the most important lesson we have received from

them is the discovery of the abyss of our ignorance in relation to the universe

— an ignorance the magnitude of which reason, without the information thus

derived, could never have conceived. This discovery of our deficiencies must

produce a great change in the determination of the aims of human reason.

              If, therefore, a transcendental substratum lies at the foundation of the

complete determination of things — a substratum which is to form the fund

from which all possible predicates of things are to be supplied, this

substratum cannot be anything else than the idea of a sum-total of reality

(omnitudo realitatis). In this view, negations are nothing but limitations — a

term which could not, with propriety, be applied to them, if the unlimited (the

all) did not form the true basis of our conception.

              This conception of a sum-total of reality is the conception of a thing

in itself, regarded as completely determined; and the conception of an ens

realissimum is the conception of an individual being, inasmuch as it is

determined by that predicate of all possible contradictory predicates, which

indicates and belongs to being. It is, therefore, a transcendental ideal which

forms the basis of the complete determination of everything that exists, and is

the highest material condition of its possibility — a condition on which must

rest the cogitation of all objects with respect to their content. Nay, more, this

ideal is the only proper ideal of which the human mind is capable; because in

this case alone a general conception of a thing is completely determined by

and through itself, and cognized as the representation of an individuum.              The logical determination of a conception is based upon a

disjunctive syllogism, the major of which contains the logical division of the

extent of a general conception, the minor limits this extent to a certain part,

while the conclusion determines the conception by this part. The general

conception of a reality cannot be divided a priori, because, without the aid of

experience, we cannot know any determinate kinds of reality, standing under

the former as the genus. The transcendental principle of the complete

determination of all things is therefore merely the representation of the sum-

total of all reality; it is not a conception which is the genus of all predicates

under itself, but one which comprehends them all within itself. The complete

determination of a thing is consequently based upon the limitation of this

total of reality, so much being predicated of the thing, while all that remains

over is excluded — a procedure which is in exact agreement with that of the

disjunctive syllogism and the determination of the objects in the conclusion

by one of the members of the division. It follows that reason, in laying the

transcendental ideal at the foundation of its determination of all possible

things, takes a course in exact analogy with that which it pursues in

disjunctive syllogisms — a proposition which formed the basis of the

systematic division of all transcendental ideas, according to which they are

produced in complete parallelism with the three modes of syllogistic

reasoning employed by the human mind.

              It is self-evident that reason, in cogitating the necessary complete

determination of things, does not presuppose the existence of a being

corresponding to its ideal, but merely the idea of the ideal- for the purpose of

deducing from the unconditional totality of complete determination, The ideal

is therefore the prototype of all things, which, as defective copies (ectypa),

receive from it the material of their possibility, and approximate to it more or

less, though it is impossible that they can ever attain to its perfection.

              The possibility of things must therefore be regarded as derived-

except that of the thing which contains in itself all reality, which must be

considered to be primitive and original. For all negations- and they are the

only predicates by means of which all other things can be distinguished from

the ens realissimum — are mere limitations of a greater and a higher — nay,

the highest reality; and they consequently presuppose this reality, and are, as

regards their content, derived from it. The manifold nature of things is only

an infinitely various mode of limiting the conception of the highest reality,which is their common substratum; just as all figures are possible only as

different modes of limiting infinite space. The object of the ideal of reason —

an object existing only in reason itself — is also termed the primal being (ens

originarium); as having no existence superior to him, the supreme being (ens

summum); and as being the condition of all other beings, which rank under it,

the being of all beings (ens entium). But none of these terms indicate the

objective relation of an actually existing object to other things, but merely

that of an idea to conceptions; and all our investigations into this subject still

leave us in perfect uncertainty with regard to the existence of this being.

              A primal being cannot be said to consist of many other beings with

an existence which is derivative, for the latter presuppose the former, and

therefore cannot be constitutive parts of it. It follows that the ideal of the

primal being must be cogitated as simple.

              The deduction of the possibility of all other things from this primal

being cannot, strictly speaking, be considered as a limitation, or as a kind of

division of its reality; for this would be regarding the primal being as a mere

aggregate — which has been shown to be impossible, although it was so

represented in our first rough sketch. The highest reality must be regarded

rather as the ground than as the sum-total of the possibility of all things, and

the manifold nature of things be based, not upon the limitation of the primal

being itself, but upon the complete series of effects which flow from it. And

thus all our powers of sense, as well as all phenomenal reality, phenomenal

reality, may be with propriety regarded as belonging to this series of effects,

while they could not have formed parts of the idea, considered as an

aggregate. Pursuing this track, and hypostatizing this idea, we shall find

ourselves authorized to determine our notion of the Supreme Being by means

of the mere conception of a highest reality, as one, simple, all-sufficient,

eternal, and so on — in one word, to determine it in its unconditioned

completeness by the aid of every possible predicate. The conception of such a

being is the conception of God in its transcendental sense, and thus the ideal

of pure reason is the object-matter of a transcendental theology.

              But, by such an employment of the transcendental idea, we should

be over stepping the limits of its validity and purpose. For reason placed it, as

the conception of all reality, at the basis of the complete determination of

things, without requiring that this conception be regarded as the conception

of an objective existence. Such an existence would be purely fictitious, andthe hypostatizing of the content of the idea into an ideal, as an individual

being, is a step perfectly unauthorized. Nay, more, we are not even called

upon to assume the possibility of such an hypothesis, as none of the

deductions drawn from such an ideal would affect the complete determination

of things in general — for the sake of which alone is the idea necessary.

              It is not sufficient to circumscribe the procedure and the dialectic of

reason; we must also endeavour to discover the sources of this dialectic, that

we may have it in our power to give a rational explanation of this illusion, as

a phenomenon of the human mind. For the ideal, of which we are at present

speaking, is based, not upon an arbitrary, but upon a natural, idea. The

question hence arises: How happens it that reason regards the possibility of

all things as deduced from a single possibility, that, to wit, of the highest

reality, and presupposes this as existing in an individual and primal being?

              The answer is ready; it is at once presented by the procedure of

transcendental analytic. The possibility of sensuous objects is a relation of

these objects to thought, in which something (the empirical form) may be

cogitated a priori; while that which constitutes the matter — the reality of the

phenomenon (that element which corresponds to sensation)— must be given

from without, as otherwise it could not even be cogitated by, nor could its

possibility be presentable to the mind. Now, a sensuous object is completely

determined, when it has been compared with all phenomenal predicates, and

represented by means of these either positively or negatively. But, as that

which constitutes the thing itself — the real in a phenomenon, must be given,

and that, in which the real of all phenomena is given, is experience, one, sole,

and all-embracing- the material of the possibility of all sensuous objects must

be presupposed as given in a whole, and it is upon the limitation of this whole

that the possibility of all empirical objects, their distinction from each other

and their complete determination, are based. Now, no other objects are

presented to us besides sensuous objects, and these can be given only in

connection with a possible experience; it follows that a thing is not an object

to us, unless it presupposes the whole or sum-total of empirical reality as the

condition of its possibility. Now, a natural illusion leads us to consider this

principle, which is valid only of sensuous objects, as valid with regard to

things in general. And thus we are induced to hold the empirical principle of

our conceptions of the possibility of things, as phenomena, by leaving out

this limitative condition, to be a transcendental principle of the possibility ofthings in general.

              We proceed afterwards to hypostatize this idea of the sum-total of all

reality, by changing the distributive unity of the empirical exercise of the

understanding into the collective unity of an empirical whole — a dialectical

illusion, and by cogitating this whole or sum of experience as an individual

thing, containing in itself all empirical reality. This individual thing or being

is then, by means of the above-mentioned transcendental subreption,

substituted for our notion of a thing which stands at the head of the

possibility of all things, the real conditions of whose complete determination
          66
it presents.

        66
               This ideal of the ens realissimum — although merely a mental

representation — is first objectivized, that is, has an objective existence

attributed to it, then hypostatized, and finally, by the natural progress of

reason to the completion of unity, personified, as we shall show presently.

For the regulative unity of experience is not based upon phenomena

themselves, but upon the connection of the variety of phenomena by the

understanding in a consciousness, and thus the unity of the supreme reality

and the complete determinability of all things, seem to reside in a supreme

understanding, and, consequently, in a conscious intelligence.Section III. Of the Arguments employed by Speculative Reason in Proof

                      of the Existence of a Supreme Being.

 

 

              Notwithstanding the pressing necessity which reason feels, to form

some presupposition that shall serve the understanding as a proper basis for

the complete determination of its conceptions, the idealistic and factitious

nature of such a presupposition is too evident to allow reason for a moment to

persuade itself into a belief of the objective existence of a mere creation of its

own thought. But there are other considerations which compel reason to seek

out some resting place in the regress from the conditioned to the

unconditioned, which is not given as an actual existence from the mere

conception of it, although it alone can give completeness to the series of

conditions. And this is the natural course of every human reason, even of the

most uneducated, although the path at first entered it does not always

continue to follow. It does not begin from conceptions, but from common

experience, and requires a basis in actual existence. But this basis is insecure,

unless it rests upon the immovable rock of the absolutely necessary. And this

foundation is itself unworthy of trust, if it leave under and above it empty

space, if it do not fill all, and leave no room for a why or a wherefore, if it be

not, in one word, infinite in its reality.

              If we admit the existence of some one thing, whatever it may be, we

must also admit that there is something which exists necessarily. For what is

contingent exists only under the condition of some other thing, which is its

cause; and from this we must go on to conclude the existence of a cause

which is not contingent, and which consequently exists necessarily and

unconditionally. Such is the argument by which reason justifies its advances

towards a primal being.

              Now reason looks round for the conception of a being that may be

admitted, without inconsistency, to be worthy of the attribute of absolute

necessity, not for the purpose of inferring a priori, from the conception of

such a being, its objective existence (for if reason allowed itself to take this

course, it would not require a basis in given and actual existence, but merely

the support of pure conceptions), but for the purpose of discovering, amongall our conceptions of possible things, that conception which possesses no

element inconsistent with the idea of absolute necessity. For that there must

be some absolutely necessary existence, it regards as a truth already

established. Now, if it can remove every existence incapable of supporting

the attribute of absolute necessity, excepting one — this must be the

absolutely necessary being, whether its necessity is comprehensible by us,

that is, deducible from the conception of it alone, or not.

              Now that, the conception of which contains a therefore to every

wherefore, which is not defective in any respect whatever, which is all-

sufficient as a condition, seems to be the being of which we can justly

predicate absolute necessity — for this reason, that, possessing the conditions

of all that is possible, it does not and cannot itself require any condition. And

thus it satisfies, in one respect at least, the requirements of the conception of

absolute necessity. In this view, it is superior to all other conceptions, which,

as deficient and incomplete, do not possess the characteristic of independence

of all higher conditions. It is true that we cannot infer from this that what

does not contain in itself the supreme and complete condition — the

condition of all other things — must possess only a conditioned existence;

but as little can we assert the contrary, for this supposed being does not

possess the only characteristic which can enable reason to cognize by means

of an a priori conception the unconditioned and necessary nature of its

existence.

              The conception of an ens realissimum is that which best agrees with

the conception of an unconditioned and necessary being. The former

conception does not satisfy all the requirements of the latter; but we have no

choice, we are obliged to adhere to it, for we find that we cannot do without

the existence of a necessary being; and even although we admit it, we find it

out of our power to discover in the whole sphere of possibility any being that

can advance wellgrounded claims to such a distinction.

              The following is, therefore, the natural course of human reason. It

begins by persuading itself of the existence of some necessary being. In this

being it recognizes the characteristics of unconditioned existence. It then

seeks the conception of that which is independent of all conditions, and finds

it in that which is itself the sufficient condition of all other things — in other

words, in that which contains all reality. But the unlimited all is an absolute

unity, and is conceived by the mind as a being one and supreme; and thusreason concludes that the Supreme Being, as the primal basis of all things,

possesses an existence which is absolutely necessary.

              This conception must be regarded as in some degree satisfactory, if

we admit the existence of a necessary being, and consider that there exists a

necessity for a definite and final answer to these questions. In such a case, we

cannot make a better choice, or rather we have no choice at all, but feel

ourselves obliged to declare in favour of the absolute unity of complete

reality, as the highest source of the possibility of things. But if there exists no

motive for coming to a definite conclusion, and we may leave the question

unanswered till we have fully weighed both sides — in other words, when we

are merely called upon to decide how much we happen to know about the

question, and how much we merely flatter ourselves that we know- the above

conclusion does not appear to be so great advantage, but, on the contrary,

seems defective in the grounds upon which it is supported.

              For, admitting the truth of all that has been said, that, namely, the

inference from a given existence (my own, for example) to the existence of

an unconditioned and necessary being is valid and unassailable; that, in the

second place, we must consider a being which contains all reality, and

consequently all the conditions of other things, to be absolutely

unconditioned; and admitting too, that we have thus discovered the

conception of a thing to which may be attributed, without inconsistency,

absolute necessity — it does not follow from all this that the conception of a

limited being, in which the supreme reality does not reside, is therefore

incompatible with the idea of absolute necessity. For, although I do not

discover the element of the unconditioned in the conception of such a being

— an element which is manifestly existent in the sum-total of all conditions

— I am not entitled to conclude that its existence is therefore conditioned;

just as I am not entitled to affirm, in a hypothetical syllogism, that where a

certain condition does not exist (in the present, completeness, as far as pure

conceptions are concerned), the conditioned does not exist either. On the

contrary, we are free to consider all limited beings as likewise

unconditionally necessary, although we are unable to infer this from the

general conception which we have of them. Thus conducted, this argument is

incapable of giving us the least notion of the properties of a necessary being,

and must be in every respect without result.

              This argument continues, however, to possess a weight and anauthority, which, in spite of its objective insufficiency, it has never been

divested of. For, granting that certain responsibilities lie upon us, which, as

based on the ideas of reason, deserve to be respected and submitted to,

although they are incapable of a real or practical application to our nature, or,

in other words, would be responsibilities without motives, except upon the

supposition of a Supreme Being to give effect and influence to the practical

laws: in such a case we should be bound to obey our conceptions, which,

although objectively insufficient, do, according to the standard of reason,

preponderate over and are superior to any claims that may be advanced from

any other quarter. The equilibrium of doubt would in this case be destroyed

by a practical addition; indeed, Reason would be compelled to condemn

herself, if she refused to comply with the demands of the judgement, no

superior to which we know — however defective her understanding of the

grounds of these demands might be.

              This argument, although in fact transcendental, inasmuch as it rests

upon the intrinsic insufficiency of the contingent, is so simple and natural,

that the commonest understanding can appreciate its value. We see things

around us change, arise, and pass away; they, or their condition, must

therefore have a cause. The same demand must again be made of the cause

itself — as a datum of experience. Now it is natural that we should place the

highest causality just where we place supreme causality, in that being, which

contains the conditions of all possible effects, and the conception of which is

so simple as that of an all-embracing reality. This highest cause, then, we

regard as absolutely necessary, because we find it absolutely necessary to rise

to it, and do not discover any reason for proceeding beyond it. Thus, among

all nations, through the darkest polytheism glimmer some faint sparks of

monotheism, to which these idolaters have been led, not from reflection and

profound thought, but by the study and natural progress of the common

understanding.

              There are only three modes of proving the existence of a Deity, on

the grounds of speculative reason.

              All the paths conducting to this end begin either from determinate

experience and the peculiar constitution of the world of sense, and rise,

according to the laws of causality, from it to the highest cause existing apart

from the world — or from a purely indeterminate experience, that is, some

empirical existence — or abstraction is made of all experience, and theexistence of a supreme cause is concluded from a priori conceptions alone.

The first is the physicotheological argument, the second the cosmological, the

third the ontological. More there are not, and more there cannot be.

              I shall show it is as unsuccessful on the one path — the empirical- as

on the other — the transcendental — and that it stretches its wings in vain, to

soar beyond the world of sense by the mere might of speculative thought. As

regards the order in which we must discuss those arguments, it will be

exactly the reverse of that in which reason, in the progress of its

development, attains to them — the order in which they are placed above. For

it will be made manifest to the reader that, although experience presents the

occasion and the starting-point, it is the transcendental idea of reason which

guides it in its pilgrimage and is the goal of all its struggles. I shall therefore

begin with an examination of the transcendental argument, and afterwards

inquire what additional strength has accrued to this mode of proof from the

addition of the empirical element.Section IV. Of the Impossibility of an Ontological Proof of the Existence

                                        of God.

 

 

              It is evident from what has been said that the conception of an

absolutely necessary being is a mere idea, the objective reality of which is far

from being established by the mere fact that it is a need of reason. On the

contrary, this idea serves merely to indicate a certain unattainable perfection,

and rather limits the operations than, by the presentation of new objects,

extends the sphere of the understanding. But a strange anomaly meets us at

the very threshold; for the inference from a given existence in general to an

absolutely necessary existence seems to be correct and unavoidable, while the

conditions of the understanding refuse to aid us in forming any conception of

such a being.

              Philosophers have always talked of an absolutely necessary being,

and have nevertheless declined to take the trouble of conceiving whether —

and how — a being of this nature is even cogitable, not to mention that its

existence is actually demonstrable. A verbal definition of the conception is

certainly easy enough: it is something the non-existence of which is

impossible. But does this definition throw any light upon the conditions

which render it impossible to cogitate the non-existence of a thing —

conditions which we wish to ascertain, that we may discover whether we

think anything in the conception of such a being or not? For the mere fact that

I throw away, by means of the word unconditioned, all the conditions which

the understanding habitually requires in order to regard anything as

necessary, is very far from making clear whether by means of the conception

of the unconditionally necessary I think of something, or really of nothing at

all.

              Nay, more, this chance-conception, now become so current, many

have endeavoured to explain by examples which seemed to render any

inquiries regarding its intelligibility quite needless. Every geometrical

proposition — a triangle has three angles — it was said, is absolutely

necessary; and thus people talked of an object which lay out of the sphere of

our understanding as if it were perfectly plain what the conception of such abeing meant.

              All the examples adduced have been drawn, without exception, from

judgements, and not from things. But the unconditioned necessity of a

judgement does not form the absolute necessity of a thing. On the contrary,

the absolute necessity of a judgement is only a conditioned necessity of a

thing, or of the predicate in a judgement. The proposition above-mentioned

does not enounce that three angles necessarily exist, but, upon condition that

a triangle exists, three angles must necessarily exist — in it. And thus this

logical necessity has been the source of the greatest delusions. Having

formed an a priori conception of a thing, the content of which was made to

embrace existence, we believed ourselves safe in concluding that, because

existence belongs necessarily to the object of the conception (that is, under

the condition of my positing this thing as given), the existence of the thing is

also posited necessarily, and that it is therefore absolutely necessary —

merely because its existence has been cogitated in the conception.

              If, in an identical judgement, I annihilate the predicate in thought,

and retain the subject, a contradiction is the result; and hence I say, the

former belongs necessarily to the latter. But if I suppress both subject and

predicate in thought, no contradiction arises; for there is nothing at all, and

therefore no means of forming a contradiction. To suppose the existence of a

triangle and not that of its three angles, is self-contradictory; but to suppose

the non-existence of both triangle and angles is perfectly admissible. And so

is it with the conception of an absolutely necessary being. Annihilate its

existence in thought, and you annihilate the thing itself with all its predicates;

how then can there be any room for contradiction? Externally, there is

nothing to give rise to a contradiction, for a thing cannot be necessary

externally; nor internally, for, by the annihilation or suppression of the thing

itself, its internal properties are also annihilated. God is omnipotent — that is

a necessary judgement. His omnipotence cannot be denied, if the existence of

a Deity is posited — the existence, that is, of an infinite being, the two

conceptions being identical. But when you say, God does not exist, neither

omnipotence nor any other predicate is affirmed; they must all disappear with

the subject, and in this judgement there cannot exist the least self-

contradiction.

              You have thus seen that when the predicate of a judgement is

annihilated in thought along with the subject, no internal contradiction canarise, be the predicate what it may. There is no possibility of evading the

conclusion — you find yourselves compelled to declare: There are certain

subjects which cannot be annihilated in thought. But this is nothing more than

saying: There exist subjects which are absolutely necessary — the very

hypothesis which you are called upon to establish. For I find myself unable to

form the slightest conception of a thing which when annihilated in thought

with all its predicates, leaves behind a contradiction; and contradiction is the

only criterion of impossibility in the sphere of pure a priori conceptions.

              Against these general considerations, the justice of which no one can

dispute, one argument is adduced, which is regarded as furnishing a

satisfactory demonstration from the fact. It is affirmed that there is one and

only one conception, in which the non-being or annihilation of the object is

self-contradictory, and this is the conception of an ens realissimum. It

possesses, you say, all reality, and you feel yourselves justified in admitting

the possibility of such a being. (This I am willing to grant for the present,

although the existence of a conception which is not self-contradictory is far
                                                                    67
from being sufficient to prove the possibility of an object.) Now the notion

of all reality embraces in it that of existence; the notion of existence lies,

therefore, in the conception of this possible thing. If this thing is annihilated

in thought, the internal possibility of the thing is also annihilated, which is

self-contradictory.

        67
               A conception is always possible, if it is not self-contradictory. This

is the logical criterion of possibility, distinguishing the object of such a

conception from the nihil negativum. But it may be, notwithstanding, an

empty conception, unless the objective reality of this synthesis, but which it

is generated, is demonstrated; and a proof of this kind must be based upon

principles of possible experience, and not upon the principle of analysis or

contradiction. This remark may be serviceable as a warning against

concluding, from the possibility of a conception — which is logical — the

possibility of a thing — which is real.

              I answer: It is absurd to introduce — under whatever term disguised

— into the conception of a thing, which is to be cogitated solely in reference

to its possibility, the conception of its existence. If this is admitted, you will

have apparently gained the day, but in reality have enounced nothing but a

mere tautology. I ask, is the proposition, this or that thing (which I am

admitting to be possible) exists, an analytical or a synthetical proposition? Ifthe former, there is no addition made to the subject of your thought by the

affirmation of its existence; but then the conception in your minds is identical

with the thing itself, or you have supposed the existence of a thing to be

possible, and then inferred its existence from its internal possibility — which

is but a miserable tautology. The word reality in the conception of the thing,

and the word existence in the conception of the predicate, will not help you

out of the difficulty. For, supposing you were to term all positing of a thing

reality, you have thereby posited the thing with all its predicates in the

conception of the subject and assumed its actual existence, and this you

merely repeat in the predicate. But if you confess, as every reasonable person

must, that every existential proposition is synthetical, how can it be

maintained that the predicate of existence cannot be denied without

contradiction?— a property which is the characteristic of analytical

propositions, alone.

              I should have a reasonable hope of putting an end for ever to this

sophistical mode of argumentation, by a strict definition of the conception of

existence, did not my own experience teach me that the illusion arising from

our confounding a logical with a real predicate (a predicate which aids in the

determination of a thing) resists almost all the endeavours of explanation and

illustration. A logical predicate may be what you please, even the subject may

be predicated of itself; for logic pays no regard to the content of a judgement.

But the determination of a conception is a predicate, which adds to and

enlarges the conception. It must not, therefore, be contained in the

conception.

              Being is evidently not a real predicate, that is, a conception of

something which is added to the conception of some other thing. It is merely

the positing of a thing, or of certain determinations in it. Logically, it is

merely the copula of a judgement. The proposition, God is omnipotent,

contains two conceptions, which have a certain object or content; the word is,

is no additional predicate — it merely indicates the relation of the predicate

to the subject. Now, if I take the subject (God) with all its predicates

(omnipotence being one), and say: God is, or, There is a God, I add no new

predicate to the conception of God, I merely posit or affirm the existence of

the subject with all its predicates — I posit the object in relation to my

conception. The content of both is the same; and there is no addition made to

the conception, which expresses merely the possibility of the object, by mycogitating the object — in the expression, it is — as absolutely given or

existing. Thus the real contains no more than the possible. A hundred real

dollars contain no more than a hundred possible dollars. For, as the latter

indicate the conception, and the former the object, on the supposition that the

content of the former was greater than that of the latter, my conception would

not be an expression of the whole object, and would consequently be an

inadequate conception of it. But in reckoning my wealth there may be said to

be more in a hundred real dollars than in a hundred possible dollars — that is,

in the mere conception of them. For the real object — the dollars — is not

analytically contained in my conception, but forms a synthetical addition to

my conception (which is merely a determination of my mental state),

although this objective reality — this existence — apart from my

conceptions, does not in the least degree increase the aforesaid hundred

dollars.

              By whatever and by whatever number of predicates — even to the

complete determination of it — I may cogitate a thing, I do not in the least

augment the object of my conception by the addition of the statement: This

thing exists. Otherwise, not exactly the same, but something more than what

was cogitated in my conception, would exist, and I could not affirm that the

exact object of my conception had real existence. If I cogitate a thing as

containing all modes of reality except one, the mode of reality which is

absent is not added to the conception of the thing by the affirmation that the

thing exists; on the contrary, the thing exists — if it exist at all — with the

same defect as that cogitated in its conception; otherwise not that which was

cogitated, but something different, exists. Now, if I cogitate a being as the

highest reality, without defect or imperfection, the question still remains —

whether this being exists or not? For, although no element is wanting in the

possible real content of my conception, there is a defect in its relation to my

mental state, that is, I am ignorant whether the cognition of the object

indicated by the conception is possible a posteriori. And here the cause of the

present difficulty becomes apparent. If the question regarded an object of

sense merely, it would be impossible for me to confound the conception with

the existence of a thing. For the conception merely enables me to cogitate an

object as according with the general conditions of experience; while the

existence of the object permits me to cogitate it as contained in the sphere of

actual experience. At the same time, this connection with the world of

experience does not in the least augment the conception, although a possibleperception has been added to the experience of the mind. But if we cogitate

existence by the pure category alone, it is not to be wondered at, that we

should find ourselves unable to present any criterion sufficient to distinguish

it from mere possibility.

              Whatever be the content of our conception of an object, it is

necessary to go beyond it, if we wish to predicate existence of the object. In

the case of sensuous objects, this is attained by their connection according to

empirical laws with some one of my perceptions; but there is no means of

cognizing the existence of objects of pure thought, because it must be

cognized completely a priori. But all our knowledge of existence (be it

immediately by perception, or by inferences connecting some object with a

perception) belongs entirely to the sphere of experience — which is in perfect

unity with itself; and although an existence out of this sphere cannot be

absolutely declared to be impossible, it is a hypothesis the truth of which we

have no means of ascertaining.

              The notion of a Supreme Being is in many respects a highly useful

idea; but for the very reason that it is an idea, it is incapable of enlarging our

cognition with regard to the existence of things. It is not even sufficient to

instruct us as to the possibility of a being which we do not know to exist. The

analytical criterion of possibility, which consists in the absence of

contradiction in propositions, cannot be denied it. But the connection of real

properties in a thing is a synthesis of the possibility of which an a priori

judgement cannot be formed, because these realities are not presented to us

specifically; and even if this were to happen, a judgement would still be

impossible, because the criterion of the possibility of synthetical cognitions

must be sought for in the world of experience, to which the object of an idea

cannot belong. And thus the celebrated Leibnitz has utterly failed in his

attempt to establish upon a priori grounds the possibility of this sublime ideal

being.

              The celebrated ontological or Cartesian argument for the existence

of a Supreme Being is therefore insufficient; and we may as well hope to

increase our stock of knowledge by the aid of mere ideas, as the merchant to

augment his wealth by the addition of noughts to his cash account.Section V. Of the Impossibility of a Cosmological Proof of the Existence

                                        of God.

 

 

              It was by no means a natural course of proceeding, but, on the

contrary, an invention entirely due to the subtlety of the schools, to attempt to

draw from a mere idea a proof of the existence of an object corresponding to

it. Such a course would never have been pursued, were it not for that need of

reason which requires it to suppose the existence of a necessary being as a

basis for the empirical regress, and that, as this necessity must be

unconditioned and a priori, reason is bound to discover a conception which

shall satisfy, if possible, this requirement, and enable us to attain to the a

priori cognition of such a being. This conception was thought to be found in

the idea of an ens realissimum, and thus this idea was employed for the

attainment of a better defined knowledge of a necessary being, of the

existence of which we were convinced, or persuaded, on other grounds. Thus

reason was seduced from her natural courage; and, instead of concluding with

the conception of an ens realissimum, an attempt was made to begin with it,

for the purpose of inferring from it that idea of a necessary existence which it

was in fact called in to complete. Thus arose that unfortunate ontological

argument, which neither satisfies the healthy common sense of humanity, nor

sustains the scientific examination of the philosopher.

              The cosmological proof, which we are about to examine, retains the

connection between absolute necessity and the highest reality; but, instead of

reasoning from this highest reality to a necessary existence, like the preceding

argument, it concludes from the given. unconditioned necessity of some

being its unlimited reality. The track it pursues, whether rational or

sophistical, is at least natural, and not only goes far to persuade the common

understanding, but shows itself deserving of respect from the speculative

intellect; while it contains, at the same time, the outlines of all the arguments

employed in natural theology — arguments which always have been, and still

will be, in use and authority. These, however adorned, and hid under

whatever embellishments of rhetoric and sentiment, are at bottom identical

with the arguments we are at present to discuss. This proof, termed by

Leibnitz the argumentum a contingentia mundi, I shall now lay before thereader, and subject to a strict examination.

              It is framed in the following manner: If something exists, an

absolutely necessary being must likewise exist. Now I, at least, exist.

Consequently, there exists an absolutely necessary being. The minor contains

an experience, the major reasons from a general experience to the existence
                      68
of a necessary being. Thus this argument really begins at experience, and is

not completely a priori, or ontological. The object of all possible experience

being the world, it is called the cosmological proof. It contains no reference

to any peculiar property of sensuous objects, by which this world of sense

might be distinguished from other possible worlds; and in this respect it

differs from the physico-theological proof, which is based upon the

consideration of the peculiar constitution of our sensuous world.

        68
               This inference is too well known to require more detailed

discussion. It is based upon the spurious transcendental law of causality, that

everything which is contingent has a cause, which, if itself contingent, must

also have a cause; and so on, till the series of subordinated causes must end

with an absolutely necessary cause, without which it would not possess

completeness.

              The proof proceeds thus: A necessary being can be determined only

in one way, that is, it can be determined by only one of all possible opposed

predicates; consequently, it must be completely determined in and by its

conception. But there is only a single conception of a thing possible, which

completely determines the thing a priori: that is, the conception of the ens

realissimum. It follows that the conception of the ens realissimum is the only

conception by and in which we can cogitate a necessary being. Consequently,

a Supreme Being necessarily exists.

              In this cosmological argument are assembled so many sophistical

propositions that speculative reason seems to have exerted in it all her

dialectical skill to produce a transcendental illusion of the most extreme

character. We shall postpone an investigation of this argument for the

present, and confine ourselves to exposing the stratagem by which it imposes

upon us an old argument in a new dress, and appeals to the agreement of two

witnesses, the one with the credentials of pure reason, and the other with

those of empiricism; while, in fact, it is only the former who has changed his

dress and voice, for the purpose of passing himself off for an additionalwitness. That it may possess a secure foundation, it bases its conclusions

upon experience, and thus appears to be completely distinct from the

ontological argument, which places its confidence entirely in pure a priori

conceptions. But this experience merely aids reason in making one step — to

the existence of a necessary being. What the properties of this being are

cannot be learned from experience; and therefore reason abandons it

altogether, and pursues its inquiries in the sphere of pure conception, for the

purpose of discovering what the properties of an absolutely necessary being

ought to be, that is, what among all possible things contain the conditions

(requisita) of absolute necessity. Reason believes that it has discovered these

requisites in the conception of an ens realissimum — and in it alone, and

hence concludes: The ens realissimum is an absolutely necessary being. But

it is evident that reason has here presupposed that the conception of an ens

realissimum is perfectly adequate to the conception of a being of absolute

necessity, that is, that we may infer the existence of the latter from that of the

former — a proposition which formed the basis of the ontological argument,

and which is now employed in the support of the cosmological argument,

contrary to the wish and professions of its inventors. For the existence of an

absolutely necessary being is given in conceptions alone. But if I say: “The

conception of the ens realissimum is a conception of this kind, and in fact the

only conception which is adequate to our idea of a necessary being,” I am

obliged to admit, that the latter may be inferred from the former. Thus it is

properly the ontological argument which figures in the cosmological, and

constitutes the whole strength of the latter; while the spurious basis of

experience has been of no further use than to conduct us to the conception of

absolute necessity, being utterly insufficient to demonstrate the presence of

this attribute in any determinate existence or thing. For when we propose to

ourselves an aim of this character, we must abandon the sphere of experience,

and rise to that of pure conceptions, which we examine with the purpose of

discovering whether any one contains the conditions of the possibility of an

absolutely necessary being. But if the possibility of such a being is thus

demonstrated, its existence is also proved; for we may then assert that, of all

possible beings there is one which possesses the attribute of necessity — in

other words, this being possesses an absolutely necessary existence.

              All illusions in an argument are more easily detected when they are

presented in the formal manner employed by the schools, which we now

proceed to do.              If the proposition: “Every absolutely necessary being is likewise an

ens realissimum,” is correct (and it is this which constitutes the nervus

probandi of the cosmological argument), it must, like all affirmative

judgements, be capable of conversion — the conversio per accidens, at least.

It follows, then, that some entia realissima are absolutely necessary beings.

But no ens realissimum is in any respect different from another, and what is

valid of some is valid of all. In this present case, therefore, I may employ

simple conversion, and say: “Every ens realissimum is a necessary being.”

But as this proposition is determined a priori by the conceptions contained in

it, the mere conception of an ens realissimum must possess the additional

attribute of absolute necessity. But this is exactly what was maintained in the

ontological argument, and not recognized by the cosmological, although it

formed the real ground of its disguised and illusory reasoning.

              Thus the second mode employed by speculative reason of

demonstrating the existence of a Supreme Being, is not only, like the first,

illusory and inadequate, but possesses the additional blemish of an ignoratio

elenchi — professing to conduct us by a new road to the desired goal, but

bringing us back, after a short circuit, to the old path which we had deserted

at its call.

              I mentioned above that this cosmological argument contains a

perfect nest of dialectical assumptions, which transcendental criticism does

not find it difficult to expose and to dissipate. I shall merely enumerate these,

leaving it to the reader, who must by this time be well practised in such

matters, to investigate the fallacies residing therein.

              The following fallacies, for example, are discoverable in this mode

of proof: 1. The transcendental principle: “Everything that is contingent must

have a cause”— a principle without significance, except in the sensuous

world. For the purely intellectual conception of the contingent cannot

produce any synthetical proposition, like that of causality, which is itself

without significance or distinguishing characteristic except in the phenomenal

world. But in the present case it is employed to help us beyond the limits of

its sphere. 2. “From the impossibility of an infinite ascending series of causes

in the world of sense a first cause is inferred”; a conclusion which the

principles of the employment of reason do not justify even in the sphere of

experience, and still less when an attempt is made to pass the limits of this

sphere. 3. Reason allows itself to be satisfied upon insufficient grounds, withregard to the completion of this series. It removes all conditions (without

which, however, no conception of Necessity can take place); and, as after this

it is beyond our power to form any other conceptions, it accepts this as a

completion of the conception it wishes to form of the series. 4. The logical

possibility of a conception of the total of reality (the criterion of this

possibility being the absence of contradiction) is confound. ed with the

transcendental, which requires a principle of the practicability of such a

synthesis — a principle which again refers us to the world of experience. And

so on.

              The aim of the cosmological argument is to avoid the necessity of

proving the existence of a necessary being priori from mere conceptions — a

proof which must be ontological, and of which we feel ourselves quite

incapable. With this purpose, we reason from an actual existence — an

experience in general, to an absolutely necessary condition of that existence.

It is in this case unnecessary to demonstrate its possibility. For after having

proved that it exists, the question regarding its possibility is superfluous.

Now, when we wish to define more strictly the nature of this necessary being,

we do not look out for some being the conception of which would enable us

to comprehend the necessity of its being — for if we could do this, an

empirical presupposition would be unnecessary; no, we try to discover

merely the negative condition (conditio sine qua non), without which a being

would not be absolutely necessary. Now this would be perfectly admissible in

every sort of reasoning, from a consequence to its principle; but in the present

case it unfortunately happens that the condition of absolute necessity can be

discovered in but a single being, the conception of which must consequently

contain all that is requisite for demonstrating the presence of absolute

necessity, and thus entitle me to infer this absolute necessity a priori. That is,

it must be possible to reason conversely, and say: The thing, to which the

conception of the highest reality belongs, is absolutely necessary. But if I

cannot reason thus — and I cannot, unless I believe in the sufficiency of the

ontological argument — I find insurmountable obstacles in my new path, and

am really no farther than the point from which I set out. The conception of a

Supreme Being satisfies all questions a priori regarding the internal

determinations of a thing, and is for this reason an ideal without equal or

parallel, the general conception of it indicating it as at the same time an ens

individuum among all possible things. But the conception does not satisfy the

question regarding its existence — which was the purpose of all ourinquiries; and, although the existence of a necessary being were admitted, we

should find it impossible to answer the question: What of all things in the

world must be regarded as such?

              It is certainly allowable to admit the existence of an all-sufficient

being — a cause of all possible effects — for the purpose of enabling reason

to introduce unity into its mode and grounds of explanation with regard to

phenomena. But to assert that such a being necessarily exists, is no longer the

modest enunciation of an admissible hypothesis, but the boldest declaration

of an apodeictic certainty; for the cognition of that which is absolutely

necessary must itself possess that character.

              The aim of the transcendental ideal formed by the mind is either to

discover a conception which shall harmonize with the idea of absolute

necessity, or a conception which shall contain that idea. If the one is possible,

so is the other; for reason recognizes that alone as absolutely necessary which

is necessary from its conception. But both attempts are equally beyond our

power — we find it impossible to satisfy the understanding upon this point,

and as impossible to induce it to remain at rest in relation to this incapacity.

              Unconditioned necessity, which, as the ultimate support and stay of

all existing things, is an indispensable requirement of the mind, is an abyss on

the verge of which human reason trembles in dismay. Even the idea of

eternity, terrible and sublime as it is, as depicted by Haller, does not produce

upon the mental vision such a feeling of awe and terror; for, although it

measures the duration of things, it does not support them. We cannot bear,

nor can we rid ourselves of the thought that a being, which we regard as the

greatest of all possible existences, should say to himself: I am from eternity

to eternity; beside me there is nothing, except that which exists by my will;

whence then am I? Here all sinks away from under us; and the greatest, as the

smallest, perfection, hovers without stay or footing in presence of the

speculative reason, which finds it as easy to part with the one as with the

other.

              Many physical powers, which evidence their existence by their

effects, are perfectly inscrutable in their nature; they elude all our powers of

observation. The transcendental object which forms the basis of phenomena,

and, in connection with it, the reason why our sensibility possesses this rather

than that particular kind of conditions, are and must ever remain hidden fromour mental vision; the fact is there, the reason of the fact we cannot see. But

an ideal of pure reason cannot be termed mysterious or inscrutable, because

the only credential of its reality is the need of it felt by reason, for the purpose

of giving completeness to the world of synthetical unity. An ideal is not even

given as a cogitable object, and therefore cannot be inscrutable; on the

contrary, it must, as a mere idea, be based on the constitution of reason itself,

and on this account must be capable of explanation and solution. For the very

essence of reason consists in its ability to give an account, of all our

conceptions, opinions, and assertions — upon objective, or, when they

happen to be illusory and fallacious, upon subjective grounds.

Detection and Explanation of the Dialectical Illusion in all Transcendental

              Arguments for the Existence of a Necessary Being.

 

              Both of the above arguments are transcendental; in other words, they

do not proceed upon empirical principles. For, although the cosmological

argument professed to lay a basis of experience for its edifice of reasoning, it

did not ground its procedure upon the peculiar constitution of experience, but

upon pure principles of reason — in relation to an existence given by

empirical consciousness; utterly abandoning its guidance, however, for the

purpose of supporting its assertions entirely upon pure conceptions. Now

what is the cause, in these transcendental arguments, of the dialectical, but

natural, illusion, which connects the conceptions of necessity and supreme

reality, and hypostatizes that which cannot be anything but an idea? What is

the cause of this unavoidable step on the part of reason, of admitting that

some one among all existing things must be necessary, while it falls back

from the assertion of the existence of such a being as from an abyss? And

how does reason proceed to explain this anomaly to itself, and from the

wavering condition of a timid and reluctant approbation — always again

withdrawn — arrive at a calm and settled insight into its cause?

              It is something very remarkable that, on the supposition that

something exists, I cannot avoid the inference that something exists

necessarily. Upon this perfectly natural — but not on that account reliable —

inference does the cosmological argument rest. But, let me form any

conception whatever of a thing, I find that I cannot cogitate the existence of

the thing as absolutely necessary, and that nothing prevents me — be the

thing or being what it may — from cogitating its non-existence. I may thus beobliged to admit that all existing things have a necessary basis, while I cannot

cogitate any single or individual thing as necessary. In other words, I can

never complete the regress through the conditions of existence, without

admitting the existence of a necessary being; but, on the other hand, I cannot

make a commencement from this being.

              If I must cogitate something as existing necessarily as the basis of

existing things, and yet am not permitted to cogitate any individual thing as

in itself necessary, the inevitable inference is that necessity and contingency

are not properties of things themselves- otherwise an internal contradiction

would result; that consequently neither of these principles are objective, but

merely subjective principles of reason — the one requiring us to seek for a

necessary ground for everything that exists, that is, to be satisfied with no

other explanation than that which is complete a priori, the other forbidding us

ever to hope for the attainment of this completeness, that is, to regard no

member of the empirical world as unconditioned. In this mode of viewing

them, both principles, in their purely heuristic and regulative character, and as

concerning merely the formal interest of reason, are quite consistent with

each other. The one says: “You must philosophize upon nature,” as if there

existed a necessary primal basis of all existing things, solely for the purpose

of introducing systematic unity into your knowledge, by pursuing an idea of

this character — a foundation which is arbitrarily admitted to be ultimate;

while the other warns you to consider no individual determination,

concerning the existence of things, as such an ultimate foundation, that is, as

absolutely necessary, but to keep the way always open for further progress in

the deduction, and to treat every determination as determined by some other.

But if all that we perceive must be regarded as conditionally necessary, it is

impossible that anything which is empirically given should be absolutely

necessary.

              It follows from this that you must accept the absolutely necessary as

out of and beyond the world, inasmuch as it is useful only as a principle of

the highest possible unity in experience, and you cannot discover any such

necessary existence in the would, the second rule requiring you to regard all

empirical causes of unity as themselves deduced.

              The philosophers of antiquity regarded all the forms of nature as

contingent; while matter was considered by them, in accordance with the

judgement of the common reason of mankind, as primal and necessary. But ifthey had regarded matter, not relatively — as the substratum of phenomena,

but absolutely and in itself — as an independent existence, this idea of

absolute necessity would have immediately disappeared. For there is nothing

absolutely connecting reason with such an existence; on the contrary, it can

annihilate it in thought, always and without self-contradiction. But in thought

alone lay the idea of absolute necessity. A regulative principle must,

therefore, have been at the foundation of this opinion. In fact, extension and

impenetrability — which together constitute our conception of matter —

form the supreme empirical principle of the unity of phenomena, and this

principle, in so far as it is empirically unconditioned, possesses the property

of a regulative principle. But, as every determination of matter which

constitutes what is real in it — and consequently impenetrability — is an

effect, which must have a cause, and is for this reason always derived, the

notion of matter cannot harmonize with the idea of a necessary being, in its

character of the principle of all derived unity. For every one of its real

properties, being derived, must be only conditionally necessary, and can

therefore be annihilated in thought; and thus the whole existence of matter

can be so annihilated or suppressed. If this were not the case, we should have

found in the world of phenomena the highest ground or condition of unity —

which is impossible, according to the second regulative principle. It follows

that matter, and, in general, all that forms part of the world of sense, cannot

be a necessary primal being, nor even a principle of empirical unity, but that

this being or principle must have its place assigned without the world. And,

in this way, we can proceed in perfect confidence to deduce the phenomena

of the world and their existence from other phenomena, just as if there

existed no necessary being; and we can at the same time, strive without

ceasing towards the attainment of completeness for our deduction, just as if

such a being — the supreme condition of all existences — were presupposed

by the mind.

              These remarks will have made it evident to the reader that the ideal

of the Supreme Being, far from being an enouncement of the existence of a

being in itself necessary, is nothing more than a regulative principle of

reason, requiring us to regard all connection existing between phenomena as

if it had its origin from an all-sufficient necessary cause, and basing upon this

the rule of a systematic and necessary unity in the explanation of phenomena.

We cannot, at the same time, avoid regarding, by a transcendental subreptio,

this formal principle as constitutive, and hypostatizing this unity. Preciselysimilar is the case with our notion of space. Space is the primal condition of

all forms, which are properly just so many different limitations of it; and thus,

although it is merely a principle of sensibility, we cannot help regarding it as

an absolutely necessary and self-subsistent thing — as an object given a

priori in itself. In the same way, it is quite natural that, as the systematic unity

of nature cannot be established as a principle for the empirical employment of

reason, unless it is based upon the idea of an ens realissimum, as the supreme

cause, we should regard this idea as a real object, and this object, in its

character of supreme condition, as absolutely necessary, and that in this way

a regulative should be transformed into a constitutive principle. This

interchange becomes evident when I regard this supreme being, which,

relatively to the world, was absolutely (unconditionally) necessary, as a thing

per se. In this case, I find it impossible to represent this necessity in or by any

conception, and it exists merely in my own mind, as the formal condition of

thought, but not as a material and hypostatic condition of existence.    Section VI. Of the Impossibility of a Physico-Theological Proof.

 

 

              If, then, neither a pure conception nor the general experience of an

existing being can provide a sufficient basis for the proof of the existence of

the Deity, we can make the attempt by the only other mode — that of

grounding our argument upon a determinate experience of the phenomena of

the present world, their constitution and disposition, and discover whether we

can thus attain to a sound conviction of the existence of a Supreme Being.

This argument we shall term the physico-theological argument. If it is shown

to be insufficient, speculative reason cannot present us with any satisfactory

proof of the existence of a being corresponding to our transcendental idea.

              It is evident from the remarks that have been made in the preceding

sections, that an answer to this question will be far from being difficult or

unconvincing. For how can any experience be adequate with an idea? The

very essence of an idea consists in the fact that no experience can ever be

discovered congruent or adequate with it. The transcendental idea of a

necessary and all-sufficient being is so immeasurably great, so high above all

that is empirical, which is always conditioned, that we hope in vain to find

materials in the sphere of experience sufficiently ample for our conception,

and in vain seek the unconditioned among things that are conditioned, while

examples, nay, even guidance is denied us by the laws of empirical synthesis.

              If the Supreme Being forms a link in the chain of empirical

conditions, it must be a member of the empirical series, and, like the lower

members which it precedes, have its origin in some higher member of the

series. If, on the other hand, we disengage it from the chain, and cogitate it as

an intelligible being, apart from the series of natural causes — how shall

reason bridge the abyss that separates the latter from the former? All laws

respecting the regress from effects to causes, all synthetical additions to our

knowledge relate solely to possible experience and the objects of the

sensuous world, and, apart from them, are without significance.

              The world around us opens before our view so magnificent a

spectacle of order, variety, beauty, and conformity to ends, that whether we

pursue our observations into the infinity of space in the one direction, or intoits illimitable divisions in the other, whether we regard the world in its

greatest or its least manifestations- even after we have attained to the highest

summit of knowledge which our weak minds can reach, we find that

language in the presence of wonders so inconceivable has lost its force, and

number its power to reckon, nay, even thought fails to conceive adequately,

and our conception of the whole dissolves into an astonishment without

power of expression — all the more eloquent that it is dumb. Everywhere

around us we observe a chain of causes and effects, of means and ends, of

death and birth; and, as nothing has entered of itself into the condition in

which we find it, we are constantly referred to some other thing, which itself

suggests the same inquiry regarding its cause, and thus the universe must sink

into the abyss of nothingness, unless we admit that, besides this infinite chain

of contingencies, there exists something that is primal and self-subsistent —

something which, as the cause of this phenomenal world, secures its

continuance and preservation.

              This highest cause — what magnitude shall we attribute to it? Of the

content of the world we are ignorant; still less can we estimate its magnitude

by comparison with the sphere of the possible. But this supreme cause being

a necessity of the human mind, what is there to prevent us from attributing to

it such a degree of perfection as to place it above the sphere of all that is

possible? This we can easily do, although only by the aid of the faint outline

of an abstract conception, by representing this being to ourselves as

containing in itself, as an individual substance, all possible perfection — a

conception which satisfies that requirement of reason which demands

parsimony in principles, which is free from self-contradiction, which even

contributes to the extension of the employment of reason in experience, by

means of the guidance afforded by this idea to order and system, and which

in no respect conflicts with any law of experience.

              This argument always deserves to be mentioned with respect. It is

the oldest, the clearest, and that most in conformity with the common reason

of humanity. It animates the study of nature, as it itself derives its existence

and draws ever new strength from that source. It introduces aims and ends

into a sphere in which our observation could not of itself have discovered

them, and extends our knowledge of nature, by directing our attention to a

unity, the principle of which lies beyond nature. This knowledge of nature

again reacts upon this idea — its cause; and thus our belief in a divine authorof the universe rises to the power of an irresistible conviction.

              For these reasons it would be utterly hopeless to attempt to rob this

argument of the authority it has always enjoyed. The mind, unceasingly

elevated by these considerations, which, although empirical, are so

remarkably powerful, and continually adding to their force, will not suffer

itself to be depressed by the doubts suggested by subtle speculation; it tears

itself out of this state of uncertainty, the moment it casts a look upon the

wondrous forms of nature and the majesty of the universe, and rises from

height to height, from condition to condition, till it has elevated itself to the

supreme and unconditioned author of all.

              But although we have nothing to object to the reasonableness and

utility of this procedure, but have rather to commend and encourage it, we

cannot approve of the claims which this argument advances to demonstrative

certainty and to a reception upon its own merits, apart from favour or support

by other arguments. Nor can it injure the cause of morality to endeavour to

lower the tone of the arrogant sophist, and to teach him that modesty and

moderation which are the properties of a belief that brings calm and content

into the mind, without prescribing to it an unworthy subjection. I maintain,

then, that the physico-theological argument is insufficient of itself to prove

the existence of a Supreme Being, that it must entrust this to the ontological

argument — to which it serves merely as an introduction, and that,

consequently, this argument contains the only possible ground of proof

(possessed by speculative reason) for the existence of this being.

              The chief momenta in the physico-theological argument are as

follow: 1. We observe in the world manifest signs of an arrangement full of

purpose, executed with great wisdom, and argument in whole of a content

indescribably various, and of an extent without limits. 2. This arrangement of

means and ends is entirely foreign to the things existing in the world — it

belongs to them merely as a contingent attribute; in other words, the nature of

different things could not of itself, whatever means were employed,

harmoniously tend towards certain purposes, were they not chosen and

directed for these purposes by a rational and disposing principle, in

accordance with certain fundamental ideas. 3. There exists, therefore, a

sublime and wise cause (or several), which is not merely a blind, all-powerful

nature, producing the beings and events which fill the world in unconscious

fecundity, but a free and intelligent cause of the world. 4. The unity of thiscause may be inferred from the unity of the reciprocal relation existing

between the parts of the world, as portions of an artistic edifice — an

inference which all our observation favours, and all principles of analogy

support.

              In the above argument, it is inferred from the analogy of certain

products of nature with those of human art, when it compels Nature to bend

herself to its purposes, as in the case of a house, a ship, or a watch, that the

same kind of causality — namely, understanding and will — resides in

nature. It is also declared that the internal possibility of this freely-acting

nature (which is the source of all art, and perhaps also of human reason) is

derivable from another and superhuman art — a conclusion which would

perhaps be found incapable of standing the test of subtle transcendental

criticism. But to neither of these opinions shall we at present object. We shall

only remark that it must be confessed that, if we are to discuss the subject of

cause at all, we cannot proceed more securely than with the guidance of the

analogy subsisting between nature and such products of design — these being

the only products whose causes and modes of organization are completely

known to us. Reason would be unable to satisfy her own requirements, if she

passed from a causality which she does know, to obscure and indemonstrable

principles of explanation which she does not know.

              According to the physico-theological argument, the connection and

harmony existing in the world evidence the contingency of the form merely,

but not of the matter, that is, of the substance of the world. To establish the

truth of the latter opinion, it would be necessary to prove that all things would

be in themselves incapable of this harmony and order, unless they were, even

as regards their substance, the product of a supreme wisdom. But this would

require very different grounds of proof from those presented by the analogy

with human art. This proof can at most, therefore, demonstrate the existence

of an architect of the world, whose efforts are limited by the capabilities of

the material with which he works, but not of a creator of the world, to whom

all things are subject. Thus this argument is utterly insufficient for the task

before us — a demonstration of the existence of an all-sufficient being. If we

wish to prove the contingency of matter, we must have recourse to a

transcendental argument, which the physicotheological was constructed

expressly to avoid.

              We infer, from the order and design visible in the universe, as adisposition of a thoroughly contingent character, the existence of a cause

proportionate thereto. The conception of this cause must contain certain

determinate qualities, and it must therefore be regarded as the conception of a

being which possesses all power, wisdom, and so on, in one word, all

perfection — the conception, that is, of an all-sufficient being. For the

predicates of very great, astonishing, or immeasurable power and excellence,

give us no determinate conception of the thing, nor do they inform us what

the thing may be in itself. They merely indicate the relation existing between

the magnitude of the object and the observer, who compares it with himself

and with his own power of comprehension, and are mere expressions of

praise and reverence, by which the object is either magnified, or the

observing subject depreciated in relation to the object. Where we have to do

with the magnitude (of the perfection) of a thing, we can discover no

determinate conception, except that which comprehends all possible

perfection or completeness, and it is only the total (omnitudo) of reality

which is completely determined in and through its conception alone.

              Now it cannot be expected that any one will be bold enough to

declare that he has a perfect insight into the relation which the magnitude of

the world he contemplates bears (in its extent as well as in its content) to

omnipotence, into that of the order and design in the world to the highest

wisdom, and that of the unity of the world to the absolute unity of a Supreme

Being. Physico-theology is therefore incapable of presenting a determinate

conception of a supreme cause of the world, and is therefore insufficient as a

principle of theology — a theology which is itself to be the basis of religion.

              The attainment of absolute totality is completely impossible on the

path of empiricism. And yet this is the path pursued in the physicotheological

argument. What means shall we employ to bridge the abyss?

              After elevating ourselves to admiration of the magnitude of the

power, wisdom, and other attributes of the author of the world, and finding

we can advance no further, we leave the argument on empirical grounds, and

proceed to infer the contingency of the world from the order and conformity

to aims that are observable in it. From this contingency we infer, by the help

of transcendental conceptions alone, the existence of something absolutely

necessary; and, still advancing, proceed from the conception of the absolute

necessity of the first cause to the completely determined or determining

conception thereof — the conception of an all-embracing reality. Thus thephysico-theological, failing in its undertaking, recurs in its embarrassment to

the cosmological argument; and, as this is merely the ontological argument in

disguise, it executes its design solely by the aid of pure reason, although it at

first professed to have no connection with this faculty and to base its entire

procedure upon experience alone.

              The physico-theologians have therefore no reason to regard with

such contempt the transcendental mode of argument, and to look down upon

it, with the conceit of clear-sighted observers of nature, as the brain-cobweb

of obscure speculatists. For, if they reflect upon and examine their own

arguments, they will find that, after following for some time the path of

nature and experience, and discovering themselves no nearer their object,

they suddenly leave this path and pass into the region of pure possibility,

where they hope to reach upon the wings of ideas what had eluded all their

empirical investigations. Gaining, as they think, a firm footing after this

immense leap, they extend their determinate conception — into the

possession of which they have come, they know not how — over the whole

sphere of creation, and explain their ideal, which is entirely a product of pure

reason, by illustrations drawn from experience — though in a degree

miserably unworthy of the grandeur of the object, while they refuse to

acknowledge that they have arrived at this cognition or hypothesis by a very

different road from that of experience.

              Thus the physico-theological is based upon the cosmological, and

this upon the ontological proof of the existence of a Supreme Being; and as

besides these three there is no other path open to speculative reason, the

ontological proof, on the ground of pure conceptions of reason, is the only

possible one, if any proof of a proposition so far transcending the empirical

exercise of the understanding is possible at all.Section VII. Critique of all Theology based upon Speculative Principles

                                      of Reason.

 

 

              If by the term theology I understand the cognition of a primal being,

that cognition is based either upon reason alone (theologia rationalis) or upon

revelation (theologia revelata). The former cogitates its object either by

means of pure transcendental conceptions, as an ens originarium,

realissimum, ens entium, and is termed transcendental theology; or, by means

of a conception derived from the nature of our own mind, as a supreme

intelligence, and must then be entitled natural theology. The person who

believes in a transcendental theology alone, is termed a deist; he who

acknowledges the possibility of a natural theology also, a theist. The former

admits that we can cognize by pure reason alone the existence of a Supreme

Being, but at the same time maintains that our conception of this being is

purely transcendental, and that all we can say of it is that it possesses all

reality, without being able to define it more closely. The second asserts that

reason is capable of presenting us, from the analogy with nature, with a more

definite conception of this being, and that its operations, as the cause of all

things, are the results of intelligence and free will. The former regards the

Supreme Being as the cause of the world — whether by the necessity of his

nature, or as a free agent, is left undetermined; the latter considers this being

as the author of the world.

              Transcendental theology aims either at inferring the existence of a

Supreme Being from a general experience, without any closer reference to the

world to which this experience belongs, and in this case it is called

cosmotheology; or it endeavours to cognize the existence of such a being,

through mere conceptions, without the aid of experience, and is then termed

ontotheology.

              Natural theology infers the attributes and the existence of an author

of the world, from the constitution of, the order and unity observable in, the

world, in which two modes of causality must be admitted to exist — those of

nature and freedom. Thus it rises from this world to a supreme intelligence,

either as the principle of all natural, or of all moral order and perfection. Inthe former case it is termed physico-theology, in the latter, ethical or moral-
          69
theology.

        69
               Not theological ethics; for this science contains ethical laws,

which presuppose the existence of a Supreme Governor of the world; while

moral-theology, on the contrary, is the expression of a conviction of the

existence of a Supreme Being, founded upon ethical laws.

              As we are wont to understand by the term God not merely an eternal

nature, the operations of which are insensate and blind, but a Supreme Being,

who is the free and intelligent author of all things, and as it is this latter view

alone that can be of interest to humanity, we might, in strict rigour, deny to

the deist any belief in God at all, and regard him merely as a maintainer of

the existence of a primal being or thing — the supreme cause of all other

things. But, as no one ought to be blamed, merely because he does not feel

himself justified in maintaining a certain opinion, as if he altogether denied

its truth and asserted the opposite, it is more correct — as it is less harsh — to

say, the deist believes in a God, the theist in a living God (summa

intelligentia). We shall now proceed to investigate the sources of all these

attempts of reason to establish the existence of a Supreme Being.

              It may be sufficient in this place to define theoretical knowledge or

cognition as knowledge of that which is, and practical knowledge as

knowledge of that which ought to be. In this view, the theoretical

employment of reason is that by which I cognize a priori (as necessary) that

something is, while the practical is that by which I cognize a priori what

ought to happen. Now, if it is an indubitably certain, though at the same time

an entirely conditioned truth, that something is, or ought to happen, either a

certain determinate condition of this truth is absolutely necessary, or such a

condition may be arbitrarily presupposed. In the former case the condition is

postulated (per thesin), in the latter supposed (per hypothesin). There are

certain practical laws — those of morality — which are absolutely necessary.

Now, if these laws necessarily presuppose the existence of some being, as the

condition of the possibility of their obligatory power, this being must be

postulated, because the conditioned, from which we reason to this

determinate condition, is itself cognized a priori as absolutely necessary. We

shall at some future time show that the moral laws not merely presuppose the

existence of a Supreme Being, but also, as themselves absolutely necessary in

a different relation, demand or postulate it — although only from a practicalpoint of view. The discussion of this argument we postpone for the present.

              When the question relates merely to that which is, not to that which

ought to be, the conditioned which is presented in experience is always

cogitated as contingent. For this reason its condition cannot be regarded as

absolutely necessary, but merely as relatively necessary, or rather as needful;

the condition is in itself and a priori a mere arbitrary presupposition in aid of

the cognition, by reason, of the conditioned. If, then, we are to possess a

theoretical cognition of the absolute necessity of a thing, we cannot attain to

this cognition otherwise than a priori by means of conceptions; while it is

impossible in this way to cognize the existence of a cause which bears any

relation to an existence given in experience.

              Theoretical cognition is speculative when it relates to an object or

certain conceptions of an object which is not given and cannot be discovered

by means of experience. It is opposed to the cognition of nature, which

concerns only those objects or predicates which can be presented in a

possible experience.

              The principle that everything which happens (the empirically

contingent) must have a cause, is a principle of the cognition of nature, but

not of speculative cognition. For, if we change it into an abstract principle,

and deprive it of its reference to experience and the empirical, we shall find

that it cannot with justice be regarded any longer as a synthetical proposition,

and that it is impossible to discover any mode of transition from that which

exists to something entirely different — termed cause. Nay, more, the

conception of a cause likewise that of the contingent — loses, in this

speculative mode of employing it, all significance, for its objective reality

and meaning are comprehensible from experience alone.

              When from the existence of the universe and the things in it the

existence of a cause of the universe is inferred, reason is proceeding not in

the natural, but in the speculative method. For the principle of the former

enounces, not that things themselves or substances, but only that which

happens or their states — as empirically contingent, have a cause: the

assertion that the existence of substance itself is contingent is not justified by

experience, it is the assertion of a reason employing its principles in a

speculative manner. If, again, I infer from the form of the universe, from the

way in which all things are connected and act and react upon each other, theexistence of a cause entirely distinct from the universe — this would again be

a judgement of purely speculative reason; because the object in this case —

the cause — can never be an object of possible experience. In both these

cases the principle of causality, which is valid only in the field of experience

— useless and even meaningless beyond this region, would be diverted from

its proper destination.

              Now I maintain that all attempts of reason to establish a theology by

the aid of speculation alone are fruitless, that the principles of reason as

applied to nature do not conduct us to any theological truths, and,

consequently, that a rational theology can have no existence, unless it is

founded upon the laws of morality. For all synthetical principles of the

understanding are valid only as immanent in experience; while the cognition

of a Supreme Being necessitates their being employed transcendentally, and

of this the understanding is quite incapable. If the empirical law of causality

is to conduct us to a Supreme Being, this being must belong to the chain of

empirical objects — in which case it would be, like all phenomena, itself

conditioned. If the possibility of passing the limits of experience be admitted,

by means of the dynamical law of the relation of an effect to its cause, what

kind of conception shall we obtain by this procedure? Certainly not the

conception of a Supreme Being, because experience never presents us with

the greatest of all possible effects, and it is only an effect of this character that

could witness to the existence of a corresponding cause. If, for the purpose of

fully satisfying the requirements of Reason, we recognize her right to assert

the existence of a perfect and absolutely necessary being, this can be admitted

only from favour, and cannot be regarded as the result or irresistible

demonstration. The physico-theological proof may add weight to others — if

other proofs there are — by connecting speculation with experience; but in

itself it rather prepares the mind for theological cognition, and gives it a right

and natural direction, than establishes a sure foundation for theology.

              It is now perfectly evident that transcendental questions admit only

of transcendental answers — those presented a priori by pure conceptions

without the least empirical admixture. But the question in the present case is

evidently synthetical — it aims at the extension of our cognition beyond the

bounds of experience — it requires an assurance respecting the existence of a

being corresponding with the idea in our minds, to which no experience can

ever be adequate. Now it has been abundantly proved that all a priorisynthetical cognition is possible only as the expression of the formal

conditions of a possible experience; and that the validity of all principles

depends upon their immanence in the field of experience, that is, their

relation to objects of empirical cognition or phenomena. Thus all

transcendental procedure in reference to speculative theology is without

result.

              If any one prefers doubting the conclusiveness of the proofs of our

analytic to losing the persuasion of the validity of these old and time

honoured arguments, he at least cannot decline answering the question —

how he can pass the limits of all possible experience by the help of mere

ideas. If he talks of new arguments, or of improvements upon old arguments,

I request him to spare me. There is certainly no great choice in this sphere of

discussion, as all speculative arguments must at last look for support to the

ontological, and I have, therefore, very little to fear from the argumentative

fecundity of the dogmatical defenders of a non-sensuous reason. Without

looking upon myself as a remarkably combative person, I shall not decline

the challenge to detect the fallacy and destroy the pretensions of every

attempt of speculative theology. And yet the hope of better fortune never

deserts those who are accustomed to the dogmatical mode of procedure. I

shall, therefore, restrict myself to the simple and equitable demand that such

reasoners will demonstrate, from the nature of the human mind as well as

from that of the other sources of knowledge, how we are to proceed to extend

our cognition completely a priori, and to carry it to that point where

experience abandons us, and no means exist of guaranteeing the objective

reality of our conceptions. In whatever way the understanding may have

attained to a conception, the existence of the object of the conception cannot

be discovered in it by analysis, because the cognition of the existence of the

object depends upon the object’s being posited and given in itself apart from

the conception. But it is utterly impossible to go beyond our conception,

without the aid of experience — which presents to the mind nothing but

phenomena, or to attain by the help of mere conceptions to a conviction of

the existence of new kinds of objects or supernatural beings.

              But although pure speculative reason is far from sufficient to

demonstrate the existence of a Supreme Being, it is of the highest utility in

correcting our conception of this being — on the supposition that we can

attain to the cognition of it by some other means — in making it consistentwith itself and with all other conceptions of intelligible objects, clearing it

from all that is incompatible with the conception of an ens summun, and

eliminating from it all limitations or admixtures of empirical elements.

              Transcendental theology is still therefore, notwithstanding its

objective insufficiency, of importance in a negative respect; it is useful as a

test of the procedure of reason when engaged with pure ideas, no other than a

transcendental standard being in this case admissible. For if, from a practical

point of view, the hypothesis of a Supreme and All-sufficient Being is to

maintain its validity without opposition, it must be of the highest importance

to define this conception in a correct and rigorous manner — as the

transcendental conception of a necessary being, to eliminate all phenomenal

elements (anthropomorphism in its most extended signification), and at the

same time to overflow all contradictory assertions — be they atheistic,

deistic, or anthropomorphic. This is of course very easy; as the same

arguments which demonstrated the inability of human reason to affirm the

existence of a Supreme Being must be alike sufficient to prove the invalidity

of its denial. For it is impossible to gain from the pure speculation of reason

demonstration that there exists no Supreme Being, as the ground of all that

exists, or that this being possesses none of those properties which we regard

as analogical with the dynamical qualities of a thinking being, or that, as the

anthropomorphists would have us believe, it is subject to all the limitations

which sensibility imposes upon those intelligences which exist in the world

of experience.

              A Supreme Being is, therefore, for the speculative reason, a mere

ideal, though a faultless one — a conception which perfects and crowns the

system of human cognition, but the objective reality of which can neither be

proved nor disproved by pure reason. If this defect is ever supplied by a

moral theology, the problematic transcendental theology which has preceded,

will have been at least serviceable as demonstrating the mental necessity

existing for the conception, by the complete determination of it which it has

furnished, and the ceaseless testing of the conclusions of a reason often

deceived by sense, and not always in harmony with its own ideas. The

attributes of necessity, infinitude, unity, existence apart from the world (and

not as a world soul), eternity (free from conditions of time), omnipresence

(free from conditions of space), omnipotence, and others, are pure

transcendental predicates; and thus the accurate conception of a SupremeBeing, which every theology requires, is furnished by transcendental

theology alone.

 

 

                                       Appendix.

 

 

      Of the Regulative Employment of the Ideas of Pure Reason.

 

 

              The result of all the dialectical attempts of pure reason not only

confirms the truth of what we have already proved in our Transcendental

Analytic, namely, that all inferences which would lead us beyond the limits

of experience are fallacious and groundless, but it at the same time teaches us

this important lesson, that human reason has a natural inclination to overstep

these limits, and that transcendental ideas are as much the natural property of

the reason as categories are of the understanding. There exists this difference,

however, that while the categories never mislead us, outward objects being

always in perfect harmony therewith, ideas are the parents of irresistible

illusions, the severest and most subtle criticism being required to save us

from the fallacies which they induce.

              Whatever is grounded in the nature of our powers will be found to be

in harmony with the final purpose and proper employment of these powers,

when once we have discovered their true direction and aim. We are entitled to

suppose, therefore, that there exists a mode of employing transcendental

ideas which is proper and immanent; although, when we mistake their

meaning, and regard them as conceptions of actual things, their mode of

application is transcendent and delusive. For it is not the idea itself, but only

the employment of the idea in relation to possible experience, that is

transcendent or immanent. An idea is employed transcendently, when it is

applied to an object falsely believed to be adequate with and to correspond to

it; imminently, when it is applied solely to the employment of the

understanding in the sphere of experience. Thus all errors of subreptio — of

misapplication, are to be ascribed to defects of judgement, and not to

understanding or reason.

              Reason never has an immediate relation to an object; it relates

immediately to the understanding alone. It is only through the understanding

that it can be employed in the field of experience. It does not formconceptions of objects, it merely arranges them and gives to them that unity

which they are capable of possessing when the sphere of their application has

been extended as widely as possible. Reason avails itself of the conception of

the understanding for the sole purpose of producing totality in the different

series. This totality the understanding does not concern itself with; its only

occupation is the connection of experiences, by which series of conditions in

accordance with conceptions are established. The object of reason is,

therefore, the understanding and its proper destination. As the latter brings

unity into the diversity of objects by means of its conceptions, so the former

brings unity into the diversity of conceptions by means of ideas; as it sets the

final aim of a collective unity to the operations of the understanding, which

without this occupies itself with a distributive unity alone.

              I accordingly maintain that transcendental ideas can never be

employed as constitutive ideas, that they cannot be conceptions of objects,

and that, when thus considered, they assume a fallacious and dialectical

character. But, on the other hand, they are capable of an admirable and

indispensably necessary application to objects — as regulative ideas,

directing the understanding to a certain aim, the guiding lines towards which

all its laws follow, and in which they all meet in one point. This point —

though a mere idea (focus imaginarius), that is, not a point from which the

conceptions of the understanding do really proceed, for it lies beyond the

sphere of possible experience — serves, notwithstanding, to give to these

conceptions the greatest possible unity combined with the greatest possible

extension. Hence arises the natural illusion which induces us to believe that

these lines proceed from an object which lies out of the sphere of empirical

cognition, just as objects reflected in a mirror appear to be behind it. But this

illusion — which we may hinder from imposing upon us — is necessary and

unavoidable, if we desire to see, not only those objects which lie before us,

but those which are at a great distance behind us; that is to say, when, in the

present case, we direct the aims of the understanding, beyond every given

experience, towards an extension as great as can possibly be attained.

              If we review our cognitions in their entire extent, we shall find that

the peculiar business of reason is to arrange them into a system, that is to say,

to give them connection according to a principle. This unity presupposes an

idea — the idea of the form of a whole (of cognition), preceding the

determinate cognition of the parts, and containing the conditions whichdetermine a priori to every part its place and relation to the other parts of the

whole system. This idea, accordingly, demands complete unity in the

cognition of the understanding — not the unity of a contingent aggregate, but

that of a system connected according to necessary laws. It cannot be affirmed

with propriety that this idea is a conception of an object; it is merely a

conception of the complete unity of the conceptions of objects, in so far as

this unity is available to the understanding as a rule. Such conceptions of

reason are not derived from nature; on the contrary, we employ them for the

interrogation and investigation of nature, and regard our cognition as

defective so long as it is not adequate to them. We admit that such a thing as

pure earth, pure water, or pure air, is not to be discovered. And yet we require

these conceptions (which have their origin in the reason, so far as regards

their absolute purity and completeness) for the purpose of determining the

share which each of these natural causes has in every phenomenon. Thus the

different kinds of matter are all ref erred to earths, as mere weight; to salts

and inflammable bodies, as pure force; and finally, to water and air, as the

vehicula of the former, or the machines employed by them in their operations

— for the purpose of explaining the chemical action and reaction of bodies in

accordance with the idea of a mechanism. For, although not actually so

expressed, the influence of such ideas of reason is very observable in the

procedure of natural philosophers.

              If reason is the faculty of deducing the particular from the general,

and if the general be certain in se and given, it is only necessary that the

judgement should subsume the particular under the general, the particular

being thus necessarily determined. I shall term this the demonstrative or

apodeictic employment of reason. If, however, the general is admitted as

problematical only, and is a mere idea, the particular case is certain, but the

universality of the rule which applies to this particular case remains a

problem. Several particular cases, the certainty of which is beyond doubt, are

then taken and examined, for the purpose of discovering whether the rule is

applicable to them; and if it appears that all the particular cases which can be

collected follow from the rule, its universality is inferred, and at the same

time, all the causes which have not, or cannot be presented to our

observation, are concluded to be of the same character with those which we

have observed. This I shall term the hypothetical employment of the reason.

              The hypothetical exercise of reason by the aid of ideas employed asproblematical conceptions is properly not constitutive. That is to say, if we

consider the subject strictly, the truth of the rule, which has been employed as

an hypothesis, does not follow from the use that is made of it by reason. For

how can we know all the possible cases that may arise? some of which may,

however, prove exceptions to the universality of the rule. This employment of

reason is merely regulative, and its sole aim is the introduction of unity into

the aggregate of our particular cognitions, and thereby the approximating of

the rule to universality.

              The object of the hypothetical employment of reason is therefore the

systematic unity of cognitions; and this unity is the criterion of the truth of a

rule. On the other hand, this systematic unity — as a mere idea — is in fact

merely a unity projected, not to be regarded as given, but only in the light of

a problem — a problem which serves, however, as a principle for the various

and particular exercise of the understanding in experience, directs it with

regard to those cases which are not presented to our observation, and

introduces harmony and consistency into all its operations.

              All that we can be certain of from the above considerations is that

this systematic unity is a logical principle, whose aim is to assist the

understanding, where it cannot of itself attain to rules, by means of ideas, to

bring all these various rules under one principle, and thus to ensure the most

complete consistency and connection that can be attained. But the assertion

that objects and the understanding by which they are cognized are so

constituted as to be determined to systematic unity, that this may be

postulated a priori, without any reference to the interest of reason, and that

we are justified in declaring all possible cognitions — empirical and others

— to possess systematic unity, and to be subject to general principles from

which, notwithstanding their various character, they are all derivable such an

assertion can be founded only upon a transcendental principle of reason,

which would render this systematic unity not subjectively and logically — in

its character of a method, but objectively necessary.

              We shall illustrate this by an example. The conceptions of the

understanding make us acquainted, among many other kinds of unity, with

that of the causality of a substance, which is termed power. The different

phenomenal manifestations of the same substance appear at first view to be

so very dissimilar that we are inclined to assume the existence of just as

many different powers as there are different effects — as, in the case of thehuman mind, we have feeling, consciousness, imagination, memory, wit,

analysis, pleasure, desire and so on. Now we are required by a logical maxim

to reduce these differences to as small a number as possible, by comparing

them and discovering the hidden identity which exists. We must inquire, for

example, whether or not imagination (connected with consciousness),

memory, wit, and analysis are not merely different forms of understanding

and reason. The idea of a fundamental power, the existence of which no

effort of logic can assure us of, is the problem to be solved, for the systematic

representation of the existing variety of powers. The logical principle of

reason requires us to produce as great a unity as is possible in the system of

our cognitions; and the more the phenomena of this and the other power are

found to be identical, the more probable does it become, that they are nothing

but different manifestations of one and the same power, which may be called,

relatively speaking, a fundamental power. And so with other cases.

              These relatively fundamental powers must again be compared with

each other, to discover, if possible, the one radical and absolutely

fundamental power of which they are but the manifestations. But this unity is

purely hypothetical. It is not maintained, that this unity does really exist, but

that we must, in the interest of reason, that is, for the establishment of

principles for the various rules presented by experience, try to discover and

introduce it, so far as is practicable, into the sphere of our cognitions.

              But the transcendental employment of the understanding would lead

us to believe that this idea of a fundamental power is not problematical, but

that it possesses objective reality, and thus the systematic unity of the various

powers or forces in a substance is demanded by the understanding and

erected into an apodeictic or necessary principle. For, without having

attempted to discover the unity of the various powers existing in nature, nay,

even after all our attempts have failed, we notwithstanding presuppose that it

does exist, and may be, sooner or later, discovered. And this reason does, not

only, as in the case above adduced, with regard to the unity of substance, but

where many substances, although all to a certain extent homogeneous, are

discoverable, as in the case of matter in general. Here also does reason

presuppose the existence of the systematic unity of various powers —

inasmuch as particular laws of nature are subordinate to general laws; and

parsimony in principles is not merely an economical principle of reason, but

an essential law of nature.              We cannot understand, in fact, how a logical principle of unity can

of right exist, unless we presuppose a transcendental principle, by which such

a systematic unit — as a property of objects themselves — is regarded as

necessary a priori. For with what right can reason, in its logical exercise,

require us to regard the variety of forces which nature displays, as in effect a

disguised unity, and to deduce them from one fundamental force or power,

when she is free to admit that it is just as possible that all forces should be

different in kind, and that a systematic unity is not conformable to the design

of nature? In this view of the case, reason would be proceeding in direct

opposition to her own destination, by setting as an aim an idea which entirely

conflicts with the procedure and arrangement of nature. Neither can we assert

that reason has previously inferred this unity from the contingent nature of

phenomena. For the law of reason which requires us to seek for this unity is a

necessary law, inasmuch as without it we should not possess a faculty of

reason, nor without reason a consistent and self-accordant mode of

employing the understanding, nor, in the absence of this, any proper and

sufficient criterion of empirical truth. In relation to this criterion, therefore,

we must suppose the idea of the systematic unity of nature to possess

objective validity and necessity.

              We find this transcendental presupposition lurking in different forms

in the principles of philosophers, although they have neither recognized it nor

confessed to themselves its presence. That the diversities of individual things

do not exclude identity of species, that the various species must be considered

as merely different determinations of a few genera, and these again as

divisions of still higher races, and so on — that, accordingly, a certain

systematic unity of all possible empirical conceptions, in so far as they can be

deduced from higher and more general conceptions, must be sought for, is a

scholastic maxim or logical principle, without which reason could not be

employed by us. For we can infer the particular from the general, only in so

far as general properties of things constitute the foundation upon which the

particular rest.

              That the same unity exists in nature is presupposed by philosophers

in the well-known scholastic maxim, which forbids us unnecessarily to

augment the number of entities or principles (entia praeter necessitatem non

esse multiplicanda). This maxim asserts that nature herself assists in the

establishment of this unity of reason, and that the seemingly infinite diversityof phenomena should not deter us from the expectation of discovering

beneath this diversity a unity of fundamental properties, of which the

aforesaid variety is but a more or less determined form. This unity, although a

mere idea, thinkers have found it necessary rather to moderate the desire than

to encourage it. It was considered a great step when chemists were able to

reduce all salts to two main genera — acids and alkalis; and they regard this

difference as itself a mere variety, or different manifestation of one and the

same fundamental material. The different kinds of earths (stones and even

metals) chemists have endeavoured to reduce to three, and afterwards to two;

but still, not content with this advance, they cannot but think that behind

these diversities there lurks but one genus — nay, that even salts and earths

have a common principle. It might be conjectured that this is merely an

economical plan of reason, for the purpose of sparing itself trouble, and an

attempt of a purely hypothetical character, which, when successful, gives an

appearance of probability to the principle of explanation employed by the

reason. But a selfish purpose of this kind is easily to be distinguished from

the idea, according to which every one presupposes that this unity is in

accordance with the laws of nature, and that reason does not in this case

request, but requires, although we are quite unable to determine the proper

limits of this unity.

              If the diversity existing in phenomena — a diversity not of form (for

in this they may be similar) but of content — were so great that the subtlest

human reason could never by comparison discover in them the least

similarity (which is not impossible), in this case the logical law of genera

would be without foundation, the conception of a genus, nay, all general

conceptions would be impossible, and the faculty of the understanding, the

exercise of which is restricted to the world of conceptions, could not exist.

The logical principle of genera, accordingly, if it is to be applied to nature (by

which I mean objects presented to our senses), presupposes a transcendental

principle. In accordance with this principle, homogeneity is necessarily

presupposed in the variety of phenomena (although we are unable to

determine a priori the degree of this homogeneity), because without it no

empirical conceptions, and consequently no experience, would be possible.

              The logical principle of genera, which demands identity in

phenomena, is balanced by another principle — that of species, which

requires variety and diversity in things, notwithstanding their accordance inthe same genus, and directs the understanding to attend to the one no less

than to the other. This principle (of the faculty of distinction) acts as a check

upon the reason and reason exhibits in this respect a double and conflicting

interest — on the one hand, the interest in the extent (the interest of

generality) in relation to genera; on the other, that of the content (the interest

of individuality) in relation to the variety of species. In the former case, the

understanding cogitates more under its conceptions, in the latter it cogitates

more in them. This distinction manifests itself likewise in the habits of

thought peculiar to natural philosophers, some of whom — the remarkably

speculative heads — may be said to be hostile to heterogeneity in

phenomena, and have their eyes always fixed on the unity of genera, while

others — with a strong empirical tendency — aim unceasingly at the analysis

of phenomena, and almost destroy in us the hope of ever being able to

estimate the character of these according to general principles.

              The latter mode of thought is evidently based upon a logical

principle, the aim of which is the systematic completeness of all cognitions.

This principle authorizes me, beginning at the genus, to descend to the

various and diverse contained under it; and in this way extension, as in the

former case unity, is assured to the system. For if we merely examine the

sphere of the conception which indicates a genus, we cannot discover how far

it is possible to proceed in the division of that sphere; just as it is impossible,

from the consideration of the space occupied by matter, to determine how far

we can proceed in the division of it. Hence every genus must contain

different species, and these again different subspecies; and as each of the

latter must itself contain a sphere (must be of a certain extent, as a conceptus

communis), reason demands that no species or sub-species is to be

considered as the lowest possible. For a species or sub-species, being always

a conception, which contains only what is common to a number of different

things, does not completely determine any individual thing, or relate

immediately to it, and must consequently contain other conceptions, that is,

other sub-species under it. This law of specification may be thus expressed:

entium varietates non temere sunt minuendae.

              But it is easy to see that this logical law would likewise be without

sense or application, were it not based upon a transcendental law of

specification, which certainly does not require that the differences existing

phenomena should be infinite in number, for the logical principle, whichmerely maintains the indeterminateness of the logical sphere of a conception,

in relation to its possible division, does not authorize this statement; while it

does impose upon the understanding the duty of searching for subspecies to

every species, and minor differences in every difference. For, were there no

lower conceptions, neither could there be any higher. Now the understanding

cognizes only by means of conceptions; consequently, how far soever it may

proceed in division, never by mere intuition, but always by lower and lower

conceptions. The cognition of phenomena in their complete determination

(which is possible only by means of the understanding) requires an

unceasingly continued specification of conceptions, and a progression to ever

smaller differences, of which abstraction bad been made in the conception of

the species, and still more in that of the genus.

              This law of specification cannot be deduced from experience; it can

never present us with a principle of so universal an application. Empirical

specification very soon stops in its distinction of diversities, and requires the

guidance of the transcendental law, as a principle of the reason — a law

which imposes on us the necessity of never ceasing in our search for

differences, even although these may not present themselves to the senses.

That absorbent earths are of different kinds could only be discovered by

obeying the anticipatory law of reason, which imposes upon the

understanding the task of discovering the differences existing between these

earths, and supposes that nature is richer in substances than our senses would

indicate. The faculty of the understanding belongs to us just as much under

the presupposition of differences in the objects of nature, as under the

condition that these objects are homogeneous, because we could not possess

conceptions, nor make any use of our understanding, were not the phenomena

included under these conceptions in some respects dissimilar, as well as

similar, in their character.

              Reason thus prepares the sphere of the understanding for the

operations of this faculty: 1. By the principle of the homogeneity of the

diverse in higher genera; 2. By the principle of the variety of the

homogeneous in lower species; and, to complete the systematic unity, it adds,

3. A law of the affinity of all conceptions which prescribes a continuous

transition from one species to every other by the gradual increase of diversity.

We may term these the principles of the homogeneity, the specification, and

the continuity of forms. The latter results from the union of the two former,inasmuch as we regard the systematic connection as complete in thought, in

the ascent to higher genera, as well as in the descent to lower species. For all

diversities must be related to each other, as they all spring from one highest

genus, descending through the different gradations of a more and more

extended determination.

              We may illustrate the systematic unity produced by the three logical

principles in the following manner. Every conception may be regarded as a

point, which, as the standpoint of a spectator, has a certain horizon, which

may be said to enclose a number of things that may be viewed, so to speak,

from that centre. Within this horizon there must be an infinite number of

other points, each of which has its own horizon, smaller and more

circumscribed; in other words, every species contains sub-species, according

to the principle of specification, and the logical horizon consists of smaller

horizons (subspecies), but not of points (individuals), which possess no

extent. But different horizons or genera, which include under them so many

conceptions, may have one common horizon, from which, as from a mid-

point, they may be surveyed; and we may proceed thus, till we arrive at the

highest genus, or universal and true horizon, which is determined by the

highest conception, and which contains under itself all differences and

varieties, as genera, species, and subspecies.

              To this highest standpoint I am conducted by the law of

homogeneity, as to all lower and more variously-determined conceptions by

the law of specification. Now as in this way there exists no void in the whole

extent of all possible conceptions, and as out of the sphere of these the mind

can discover nothing, there arises from the presupposition of the universal

horizon above mentioned, and its complete division, the principle: Non datur

vacuum formarum. This principle asserts that there are not different primitive

and highest genera, which stand isolated, so to speak, from each other, but all

the various genera are mere divisions and limitations of one highest and

universal genus; and hence follows immediately the principle: Datur

continuum formarum. This principle indicates that all differences of species

limit each other, and do not admit of transition from one to another by a

saltus, but only through smaller degrees of the difference between the one

species and the other. In one word, there are no species or sub-species which

(in the view of reason) are the nearest possible to each other; intermediate

species or sub-species being always possible, the difference of which fromeach of the former is always smaller than the difference existing between

these.

              The first law, therefore, directs us to avoid the notion that there exist

different primal genera, and enounces the fact of perfect homogeneity; the

second imposes a check upon this tendency to unity and prescribes the

distinction of sub-species, before proceeding to apply our general

conceptions to individuals. The third unites both the former, by enouncing the

fact of homogeneity as existing even in the most various diversity, by means

of the gradual transition from one species to another. Thus it indicates a

relationship between the different branches or species, in so far as they all

spring from the same stem.

              But this logical law of the continuum specierum (formarum

logicarum) presupposes a transcendental principle (lex continui in natura),

without which the understanding might be led into error, by following the

guidance of the former, and thus perhaps pursuing a path contrary to that

prescribed by nature. This law must, consequently, be based upon pure

transcendental, and not upon empirical, considerations. For, in the latter case,

it would come later than the system; whereas it is really itself the parent of all

that is systematic in our cognition of nature. These principles are not mere

hypotheses employed for the purpose of experimenting upon nature; although

when any such connection is discovered, it forms a solid ground for regarding

the hypothetical unity as valid in the sphere of nature — and thus they are in

this respect not without their use. But we go farther, and maintain that it is

manifest that these principles of parsimony in fundamental causes, variety in

effects, and affinity in phenomena, are in accordance both with reason and

nature, and that they are not mere methods or plans devised for the purpose of

assisting us in our observation of the external world.

              But it is plain that this continuity of forms is a mere idea, to which

no adequate object can be discovered in experience. And this for two reasons.

First, because the species in nature are really divided, and hence form quanta

discreta; and, if the gradual progression through their affinity were

continuous, the intermediate members lying between two given species must

be infinite in number, which is impossible. Secondly, because we cannot

make any determinate empirical use of this law, inasmuch as it does not

present us with any criterion of affinity which could aid us in determining

how far we ought to pursue the graduation of differences: it merely contains ageneral indication that it is our duty to seek for and, if possible, to discover

them.

              When we arrange these principles of systematic unity in the order

conformable to their employment in experience, they will stand thus: Variety,

Affinity, Unity, each of them, as ideas, being taken in the highest degree of

their completeness. Reason presupposes the existence of cognitions of the

understanding, which have a direct relation to experience, and aims at the

ideal unity of these cognitions — a unity which far transcends all experience

or empirical notions. The affinity of the diverse, notwithstanding the

differences existing between its parts, has a relation to things, but a still

closer one to the mere properties and powers of things. For example,

imperfect experience may represent the orbits of the planets as circular. But

we discover variations from this course, and we proceed to suppose that the

planets revolve in a path which, if not a circle, is of a character very similar to

it. That is to say, the movements of those planets which do not form a circle

will approximate more or less to the properties of a circle, and probably form

an ellipse. The paths of comets exhibit still greater variations, for, so far as

our observation extends, they do not return upon their own course in a circle

or ellipse. But we proceed to the conjecture that comets describe a parabola, a

figure which is closely allied to the ellipse. In fact, a parabola is merely an

ellipse, with its longer axis produced to an indefinite extent. Thus these

principles conduct us to a unity in the genera of the forms of these orbits, and,

proceeding farther, to a unity as regards the cause of the motions of the

heavenly bodies — that is, gravitation. But we go on extending our conquests

over nature, and endeavour to explain all seeming deviations from these

rules, and even make additions to our system which no experience can ever

substantiate — for example, the theory, in affinity with that of ellipses, of

hyperbolic paths of comets, pursuing which, these bodies leave our solar

system and, passing from sun to sun, unite the most distant parts of the

infinite universe, which is held together by the same moving power.

              The most remarkable circumstance connected with these principles

is that they seem to be transcendental, and, although only containing ideas for

the guidance of the empirical exercise of reason, and although this empirical

employment stands to these ideas in an asymptotic relation alone (to use a

mathematical term), that is, continually approximate, without ever being able

to attain to them, they possess, notwithstanding, as a priori syntheticalpropositions, objective though undetermined validity, and are available as

rules for possible experience. In the elaboration of our experience, they may
                                                            70
also be employed with great advantage, as heuristic principles. A

transcendental deduction of them cannot be made; such a deduction being

always impossible in the case of ideas, as has been already shown.

        70
               From the Greek, eurhioko.

              We distinguished, in the Transcendental Analytic, the dynamical

principles of the understanding, which are regulative principles of intuition,

from the mathematical, which are constitutive principles of intuition. These

dynamical laws are, however, constitutive in relation to experience, inasmuch

as they render the conceptions without which experience could not exist

possible a priori. But the principles of pure reason cannot be constitutive even

in regard to empirical conceptions, because no sensuous schema

corresponding to them can be discovered, and they cannot therefore have an

object in concreto. Now, if I grant that they cannot be employed in the sphere

of experience, as constitutive principles, how shall I secure for them

employment and objective validity as regulative principles, and in what way

can they be so employed?

              The understanding is the object of reason, as sensibility is the object

of the understanding. The production of systematic unity in all the empirical

operations of the understanding is the proper occupation of reason; just as it

is the business of the understanding to connect the various content of

phenomena by means of conceptions, and subject them to empirical laws. But

the operations of the understanding are, without the schemata of sensibility,

undetermined; and, in the same manner, the unity of reason is perfectly

undetermined as regards the conditions under which, and the extent to which,

the understanding ought to carry the systematic connection of its conceptions.

But, although it is impossible to discover in intuition a schema for the

complete systematic unity of all the conceptions of the understanding, there

must be some analogon of this schema. This analogon is the idea of the

maximum of the division and the connection of our cognition in one

principle. For we may have a determinate notion of a maximum and an

absolutely perfect, all the restrictive conditions which are connected with an

indeterminate and various content having been abstracted. Thus the idea of

reason is analogous with a sensuous schema, with this difference, that the

application of the categories to the schema of reason does not present acognition of any object (as is the case with the application of the categories to

sensuous schemata), but merely provides us with a rule or principle for the

systematic unity of the exercise of the understanding. Now, as every principle

which imposes upon the exercise of the understanding a priori compliance

with the rule of systematic unity also relates, although only in an indirect

manner, to an object of experience, the principles of pure reason will also

possess objective reality and validity in relation to experience. But they will

not aim at determining our knowledge in regard to any empirical object; they

will merely indicate the procedure, following which the empirical and

determinate exercise of the understanding may be in complete harmony and

connection with itself — a result which is produced by its being brought into

harmony with the principle of systematic unity, so far as that is possible, and

deduced from it.

              I term all subjective principles, which are not derived from

observation of the constitution of an object, but from the interest which

Reason has in producing a certain completeness in her cognition of that

object, maxims of reason. Thus there are maxims of speculative reason,

which are based solely upon its speculative interest, although they appear to

be objective principles.

              When principles which are really regulative are regarded as

constitutive, and employed as objective principles, contradictions must arise;

but if they are considered as mere maxims, there is no room for

contradictions of any kind, as they then merely indicate the different interests

of reason, which occasion differences in the mode of thought. In effect,

Reason has only one single interest, and the seeming contradiction existing

between her maxims merely indicates a difference in, and a reciprocal

limitation of, the methods by which this interest is satisfied.

              This reasoner has at heart the interest of diversity — in accordance

with the principle of specification; another, the interest of unity — in

accordance with the principle of aggregation. Each believes that his

judgement rests upon a thorough insight into the subject he is examining, and

yet it has been influenced solely by a greater or less degree of adherence to

some one of the two principles, neither of which are objective, but originate

solely from the interest of reason, and on this account to be termed maxims

rather than principles. When I observe intelligent men disputing about the

distinctive characteristics of men, animals, or plants, and even of minerals,those on the one side assuming the existence of certain national

characteristics, certain well-defined and hereditary distinctions of family,

race, and so on, while the other side maintain that nature has endowed all

races of men with the same faculties and dispositions, and that all differences

are but the result of external and accidental circumstances — I have only to

consider for a moment the real nature of the subject of discussion, to arrive at

the conclusion that it is a subject far too deep for us to judge of, and that there

is little probability of either party being able to speak from a perfect insight

into and understanding of the nature of the subject itself. Both have, in

reality, been struggling for the twofold interest of reason; the one maintaining

the one interest, the other the other. But this difference between the maxims

of diversity and unity may easily be reconciled and adjusted; although, so

long as they are regarded as objective principles, they must occasion not only

contradictions and polemic, but place hinderances in the way of the

advancement of truth, until some means is discovered of reconciling these

conflicting interests, and bringing reason into union and harmony with itself.

              The same is the case with the so-called law discovered by Leibnitz,

and supported with remarkable ability by Bonnet — the law of the

continuous gradation of created beings, which is nothing more than an

inference from the principle of affinity; for observation and study of the order

of nature could never present it to the mind as an objective truth. The steps of

this ladder, as they appear in experience, are too far apart from each other,

and the so-called petty differences between different kinds of animals are in

nature commonly so wide separations that no confidence can be placed in

such views (particularly when we reflect on the great variety of things, and

the ease with which we can discover resemblances), and no faith in the laws

which are said to express the aims and purposes of nature. On the other hand,

the method of investigating the order of nature in the light of this principle,

and the maxim which requires us to regard this order — it being still

undetermined how far it extends — as really existing in nature, is beyond

doubt a legitimate and excellent principle of reason — a principle which

extends farther than any experience or observation of ours and which,

without giving us any positive knowledge of anything in the region of

experience, guides us to the goal of systematic unity.

              Of the Ultimate End of the Natural Dialectic of Human Reason.

              The ideas of pure reason cannot be, of themselves and in their ownnature, dialectical; it is from their misemployment alone that fallacies and

illusions arise. For they originate in the nature of reason itself, and it is

impossible that this supreme tribunal for all the rights and claims of

speculation should be itself undeserving of confidence and promotive of

error. It is to be expected, therefore, that these ideas have a genuine and

legitimate aim. It is true, the mob of sophists raise against reason the cry of

inconsistency and contradiction, and affect to despise the government of that

faculty, because they cannot understand its constitution, while it is to its

beneficial influences alone that they owe the position and the intelligence

which enable them to criticize and to blame its procedure.

              We cannot employ an a priori conception with certainty, until we

have made a transcendental deduction therefore. The ideas of pure reason do

not admit of the same kind of deduction as the categories. But if they are to

possess the least objective validity, and to represent anything but mere

creations of thought (entia rationis ratiocinantis), a deduction of them must be

possible. This deduction will complete the critical task imposed upon pure

reason; and it is to this part Of our labours that we now proceed.

              There is a great difference between a thing’s being presented to the

mind as an object in an absolute sense, or merely as an ideal object. In the

former case I employ my conceptions to determine the object; in the latter

case nothing is present to the mind but a mere schema, which does not relate

directly to an object, not even in a hypothetical sense, but which is useful

only for the purpose of representing other objects to the mind, in a mediate

and indirect manner, by means of their relation to the idea in the intellect.

Thus I say the conception of a supreme intelligence is a mere idea; that is to

say, its objective reality does not consist in the fact that it has an immediate

relation to an object (for in this sense we have no means of establishing its

objective validity), it is merely a schema constructed according to the

necessary conditions of the unity of reason — the schema of a thing in

general, which is useful towards the production of the highest degree of

systematic unity in the empirical exercise of reason, in which we deduce this

or that object of experience from the imaginary object of this idea, as the

ground or cause of the said object of experience. In this way, the idea is

properly a heuristic, and not an ostensive, conception; it does not give us any

information respecting the constitution of an object, it merely indicates how,

under the guidance of the idea, we ought to investigate the constitution andthe relations of objects in the world of experience. Now, if it can be shown

that the three kinds of transcendental ideas (psychological, cosmological, and

theological), although not relating directly to any object nor determining it,

do nevertheless, on the supposition of the existence of an ideal object,

produce systematic unity in the laws of the empirical employment of the

reason, and extend our empirical cognition, without ever being inconsistent

or in opposition with it- it must be a necessary maxim of reason to regulate its

procedure according to these ideas. And this forms the transcendental

deduction of all speculative ideas, not as constitutive principles of the

extension of our cognition beyond the limits of our experience, but as

regulative principles of the systematic unity of empirical cognition, which is

by the aid of these ideas arranged and emended within its own proper limits,

to an extent unattainable by the operation of the principles of the

understanding alone.

              I shall make this plainer. Guided by the principles involved in these

ideas, we must, in the first place, so connect all the phenomena, actions, and

feelings of the mind, as if it were a simple substance, which, endowed with

personal identity, possesses a permanent existence (in this life at least), while

its states, among which those of the body are to be included as external

conditions, are in continual change. Secondly, in cosmology, we must

investigate the conditions of all natural phenomena, internal as well as

external, as if they belonged to a chain infinite and without any prime or

supreme member, while we do not, on this account, deny the existence of

intelligible grounds of these phenomena, although we never employ them to

explain phenomena, for the simple reason that they are not objects of our

cognition. Thirdly, in the sphere of theology, we must regard the whole

system of possible experience as forming an absolute, but dependent and

sensuously-conditioned unity, and at the same time as based upon a sole,

supreme, and all-sufficient ground existing apart from the world itself — a

ground which is a self-subsistent, primeval and creative reason, in relation to

which we so employ our reason in the field of experience, as if all objects

drew their origin from that archetype of all reason. In other words, we ought

not to deduce the internal phenomena of the mind from a simple thinking

substance, but deduce them from each other under the guidance of the

regulative idea of a simple being; we ought not to deduce the phenomena,

order, and unity of the universe from a supreme intelligence, but merely draw

from this idea of a supremely wise cause the rules which must guide reasonin its connection of causes and effects.

              Now there is nothing to hinder us from admitting these ideas to

possess an objective and hyperbolic existence, except the cosmological ideas,

which lead reason into an antinomy: the psychological and theological ideas

are not antinomial. They contain no contradiction; and how, then, can any

one dispute their objective reality, since he who denies it knows as little

about their possibility as we who affirm? And yet, when we wish to admit the

existence of a thing, it is not sufficient to convince ourselves that there is no

positive obstacle in the way; for it cannot be allowable to regard mere

creations of thought, which transcend, though they do not contradict, all our

conceptions, as real and determinate objects, solely upon the authority of a

speculative reason striving to compass its own aims. They cannot, therefore,

be admitted to be real in themselves; they can only possess a comparative

reality — that of a schema of the regulative principle of the systematic unity

of all cognition. They are to be regarded not as actual things, but as in some

measure analogous to them. We abstract from the object of the idea all the

conditions which limit the exercise of our understanding, but which, on the

other hand, are the sole conditions of our possessing a determinate

conception of any given thing. And thus we cogitate a something, of the real

nature of which we have not the least conception, but which we represent to

ourselves as standing in a relation to the whole system of phenomena,

analogous to that in which phenomena stand to each other.

              By admitting these ideal beings, we do not really extend our

cognitions beyond the objects of possible experience; we extend merely the

empirical unity of our experience, by the aid of systematic unity, the schema

of which is furnished by the idea, which is therefore valid — not as a

constitutive, but as a regulative principle. For although we posit a thing

corresponding to the idea — a something, an actual existence — we do not

on that account aim at the extension of our cognition by means of

transcendent conceptions. This existence is purely ideal, and not objective; it

is the mere expression of the systematic unity which is to be the guide of

reason in the field of experience. There are no attempts made at deciding

what the ground of this unity may be, or what the real nature of this

imaginary being.

              Thus the transcendental and only determinate conception of God,

which is presented to us by speculative reason, is in the strictest sense deistic.In other words, reason does not assure us of the objective validity of the

conception; it merely gives us the idea of something, on which the supreme

and necessary unity of all experience is based. This something we cannot,

following the analogy of a real substance, cogitate otherwise than as the

cause of all things operating in accordance with rational laws, if we regard it

as an individual object; although we should rest contented with the idea alone

as a regulative principle of reason, and make no attempt at completing the

sum of the conditions imposed by thought. This attempt is, indeed,

inconsistent with the grand aim of complete systematic unity in the sphere of

cognition — a unity to which no bounds are set by reason.

              Hence it happens that, admitting a divine being, I can have no

conception of the internal possibility of its perfection, or of the necessity of

its existence. The only advantage of this admission is that it enables me to

answer all other questions relating to the contingent, and to give reason the

most complete satisfaction as regards the unity which it aims at attaining in

the world of experience. But I cannot satisfy reason with regard to this

hypothesis itself; and this proves that it is not its intelligence and insight into

the subject, but its speculative interest alone which induces it to proceed from

a point lying far beyond the sphere of our cognition, for the purpose of being

able to consider all objects as parts of a systematic whole.

              Here a distinction presents itself, in regard to the way in which we

may cogitate a presupposition — a distinction which is somewhat subtle, but

of great importance in transcendental philosophy. I may have sufficient

grounds to admit something, or the existence of something, in a relative point

of view (suppositio relativa), without being justified in admitting it in an

absolute sense (suppositio absoluta). This distinction is undoubtedly

requisite, in the case of a regulative principle, the necessity of which we

recognize, though we are ignorant of the source and cause of that necessity,

and which we assume to be based upon some ultimate ground, for the

purpose of being able to cogitate the universality of the principle in a more

determinate way. For example, I cogitate the existence of a being

corresponding to a pure transcendental idea. But I cannot admit that this

being exists absolutely and in itself, because all of the conceptions by which I

can cogitate an object in a determinate manner fall short of assuring me of its

existence; nay, the conditions of the objective validity of my conceptions are

excluded by the idea — by the very fact of its being an idea. The conceptionsof reality, substance, causality, nay, even that of necessity in existence, have

no significance out of the sphere of empirical cognition, and cannot, beyond

that sphere, determine any object. They may, accordingly, be employed to

explain the possibility of things in the world of sense, but they are utterly

inadequate to explain the possibility of the universe itself considered as a

whole; because in this case the ground of explanation must lie out of and

beyond the world, and cannot, therefore, be an object of possible experience.

Now, I may admit the existence of an incomprehensible being of this nature

— the object of a mere idea, relatively to the world of sense; although I have

no ground to admit its existence absolutely and in itself. For if an idea (that of

a systematic and complete unity, of which I shall presently speak more

particularly) lies at the foundation of the most extended empirical

employment of reason, and if this idea cannot be adequately represented in

concreto, although it is indispensably necessary for the approximation of

empirical unity to the highest possible degree — I am not only authorized,

but compelled, to realize this idea, that is, to posit a real object corresponding

thereto. But I cannot profess to know this object; it is to me merely a

something, to which, as the ground of systematic unity in cognition, I

attribute such properties as are analogous to the conceptions employed by the

understanding in the sphere of experience. Following the analogy of the

notions of reality, substance, causality, and necessity, I cogitate a being,

which possesses all these attributes in the highest degree; and, as this idea is

the offspring of my reason alone, I cogitate this being as self-subsistent

reason, and as the cause of the universe operating by means of ideas of the

greatest possible harmony and unity. Thus I abstract all conditions that would

limit my idea, solely for the purpose of rendering systematic unity possible in

the world of empirical diversity, and thus securing the widest possible

extension for the exercise of reason in that sphere. This I am enabled to do,

by regarding all connections and relations in the world of sense, as if they

were the dispositions of a supreme reason, of which our reason is but a faint

image. I then proceed to cogitate this Supreme Being by conceptions which

have, properly, no meaning or application, except in the world of sense. But

as I am authorized to employ the transcendental hypothesis of such a being in

a relative respect alone, that is, as the substratum of the greatest possible

unity in experience — I may attribute to a being which I regard as distinct

from the world, such properties as belong solely to the sphere of sense and

experience. For I do not desire, and am not justified in desiring, to cognizethis object of my idea, as it exists in itself; for I possess no conceptions

sufficient for or task, those of reality, substance, causality, nay, even that of

necessity in existence, losing all significance, and becoming merely the signs

of conceptions, without content and without applicability, when I attempt to

carry them beyond the limits of the world of sense. I cogitate merely the

relation of a perfectly unknown being to the greatest possible systematic

unity of experience, solely for the purpose of employing it as the schema of

the regulative principle which directs reason in its empirical exercise.

              It is evident, at the first view, that we cannot presuppose the reality

of this transcendental object, by means of the conceptions of reality,

substance, causality, and so on, because these conceptions cannot be applied

to anything that is distinct from the world of sense. Thus the supposition of a

Supreme Being or cause is purely relative; it is cogitated only in behalf of the

systematic unity of experience; such a being is but a something, of whose

existence in itself we have not the least conception. Thus, too, it becomes

sufficiently manifest why we required the idea of a necessary being in

relation to objects given by sense, although we can never have the least

conception of this being, or of its absolute necessity.

              And now we can clearly perceive the result of our transcendental

dialectic, and the proper aim of the ideas of pure reason — which become

dialectical solely from misunderstanding and inconsiderateness. Pure reason

is, in fact, occupied with itself, and not with any object. Objects are not

presented to it to be embraced in the unity of an empirical conception; it is

only the cognitions of the understanding that are presented to it, for the

purpose of receiving the unity of a rational conception, that is, of being

connected according to a principle. The unity of reason is the unity of system;

and this systematic unity is not an objective principle, extending its dominion

over objects, but a subjective maxim, extending its authority over the

empirical cognition of objects. The systematic connection which reason gives

to the empirical employment of the understanding not only advances the

extension of that employment, but ensures its correctness, and thus the

principle of a systematic unity of this nature is also objective, although only

in an indefinite respect (principium vagum). It is not, however, a constitutive

principle, determining an object to which it directly relates; it is merely a

regulative principle or maxim, advancing and strengthening the empirical

exercise of reason, by the opening up of new paths of which theunderstanding is ignorant, while it never conflicts with the laws of its

exercise in the sphere of experience.

              But reason cannot cogitate this systematic unity, without at the same

time cogitating an object of the idea — an object that cannot be presented in

any experience, which contains no concrete example of a complete

systematic unity. This being (ens rationis ratiocinatae) is therefore a mere

idea and is not assumed to be a thing which is real absolutely and in itself. On

the contrary, it forms merely the problematical foundation of the connection

which the mind introduces among the phenomena of the sensuous world. We

look upon this connection, in the light of the above-mentioned idea, as if it

drew its origin from the supposed being which corresponds to the idea. And

yet all we aim at is the possession of this idea as a secure foundation for the

systematic unity of experience — a unity indispensable to reason,

advantageous to the understanding, and promotive of the interests of

empirical cognition.

              We mistake the true meaning of this idea when we regard it as an

enouncement, or even as a hypothetical declaration of the existence of a real

thing, which we are to regard as the origin or ground of a systematic

constitution of the universe. On the contrary, it is left completely

undetermined what the nature or properties of this so-called ground may be.

The idea is merely to be adopted as a point of view, from which this unity, so

essential to reason and so beneficial to the understanding, may be regarded as

radiating. In one word, this transcendental thing is merely the schema of a

regulative principle, by means of which Reason, so far as in her lies, extends

the dominion of systematic unity over the whole sphere of experience.

              The first object of an idea of this kind is the ego, considered merely

as a thinking nature or soul. If I wish to investigate the properties of a

thinking being, I must interrogate experience. But I find that I can apply none

of the categories to this object, the schema of these categories, which is the

condition of their application, being given only in sensuous intuition. But I

cannot thus attain to the cognition of a systematic unity of all the phenomena

of the internal sense. Instead, therefore, of an empirical conception of what

the soul really is, reason takes the conception of the empirical unity of all

thought, and, by cogitating this unity as unconditioned and primitive,

constructs the rational conception or idea of a simple substance which is in

itself unchangeable, possessing personal identity, and in connection withother real things external to it; in one word, it constructs the idea of a simple

self-subsistent intelligence. But the real aim of reason in this procedure is the

attainment of principles of systematic unity for the explanation of the

phenomena of the soul. That is, reason desires to be able to represent all the

determinations of the internal sense as existing in one subject, all powers as

deduced from one fundamental power, all changes as mere varieties in the

condition of a being which is permanent and always the same, and all

phenomena in space as entirely different in their nature from the procedure of

thought. Essential simplicity (with the other attributes predicated of the ego)

is regarded as the mere schema of this regulative principle; it is not assumed

that it is the actual ground of the properties of the soul. For these properties

may rest upon quite different grounds, of which we are completely ignorant;

just as the above predicates could not give us any knowledge of the soul as it

is in itself, even if we regarded them as valid in respect of it, inasmuch as

they constitute a mere idea, which cannot be represented in concreto. Nothing

but good can result from a psychological idea of this kind, if we only take

proper care not to consider it as more than an idea; that is, if we regard it as

valid merely in relation to the employment of reason, in the sphere of the

phenomena of the soul. Under the guidance of this idea, or principle, no

empirical laws of corporeal phenomena are called in to explain that which is

a phenomenon of the internal sense alone; no windy hypotheses of the

generation, annihilation, and palingenesis of souls are admitted. Thus the

consideration of this object of the internal sense is kept pure, and unmixed

with heterogeneous elements; while the investigation of reason aims at

reducing all the grounds of explanation employed in this sphere of knowledge

to a single principle. All this is best effected, nay, cannot be effected

otherwise than by means of such a schema, which requires us to regard this

ideal thing as an actual existence. The psychological idea is, therefore,

meaningless and inapplicable, except as the schema of a regulative

conception. For, if I ask whether the soul is not really of a spiritual nature —

it is a question which has no meaning. From such a conception has been

abstracted, not merely all corporeal nature, but all nature, that is, all the

predicates of a possible experience; and consequently, all the conditions

which enable us to cogitate an object to this conception have disappeared.

But, if these conditions are absent, it is evident that the conception is

meaningless.

              The second regulative idea of speculative reason is the conception ofthe universe. For nature is properly the only object presented to us, in regard

to which reason requires regulative principles. Nature is twofold — thinking

and corporeal nature. To cogitate the latter in regard to its internal possibility,

that is, to determine the application of the categories to it, no idea is required

— no representation which transcends experience. In this sphere, therefore,

an idea is impossible, sensuous intuition being our only guide; while, in the

sphere of psychology, we require the fundamental idea (I), which contains a

priori a certain form of thought namely, the unity of the ego. Pure reason has,

therefore, nothing left but nature in general, and the completeness of

conditions in nature in accordance with some principle. The absolute totality

of the series of these conditions is an idea, which can never be fully realized

in the empirical exercise of reason, while it is serviceable as a rule for the

procedure of reason in relation to that totality. It requires us, in the

explanation of given phenomena (in the regress or ascent in the series), to

proceed as if the series were infinite in itself, that is, were prolonged in

indefinitum,; while on the other hand, where reason is regarded as itself the

determining cause (in the region of freedom), we are required to proceed as if

we had not before us an object of sense, but of the pure understanding. In this

latter case, the conditions do not exist in the series of phenomena, but may be

placed quite out of and beyond it, and the series of conditions may be

regarded as if it had an absolute beginning from an intelligible cause. All this

proves that the cosmological ideas are nothing but regulative principles, and

not constitutive; and that their aim is not to realize an actual totality in such

series. The full discussion of this subject will be found in its proper place in

the chapter on the antinomy of pure reason.

              The third idea of pure reason, containing the hypothesis of a being

which is valid merely as a relative hypothesis, is that of the one and all-

sufficient cause of all cosmological series, in other words, the idea of God.

We have not the slightest ground absolutely to admit the existence of an

object corresponding to this idea; for what can empower or authorize us to

affirm the existence of a being of the highest perfection — a being whose

existence is absolutely necessary — merely because we possess the

conception of such a being? The answer is: It is the existence of the world

which renders this hypothesis necessary. But this answer makes it perfectly

evident that the idea of this being, like all other speculative ideas, is

essentially nothing more than a demand upon reason that it shall regulate the

connection which it and its subordinate faculties introduce into thephenomena of the world by principles of systematic unity and, consequently,

that it shall regard all phenomena as originating from one all-embracing

being, as the supreme and all-sufficient cause. From this it is plain that the

only aim of reason in this procedure is the establishment of its own formal

rule for the extension of its dominion in the world of experience; that it does

not aim at an extension of its cognition beyond the limits of experience; and

that, consequently, this idea does not contain any constitutive principle.

              The highest formal unity, which is based upon ideas alone, is the

unity of all things — a unity in accordance with an aim or purpose; and the

speculative interest of reason renders it necessary to regard all order in the

world as if it originated from the intention and design of a supreme reason.

This principle unfolds to the view of reason in the sphere of experience new

and enlarged prospects, and invites it to connect the phenomena of the world

according to teleological laws, and in this way to attain to the highest

possible degree of systematic unity. The hypothesis of a supreme

intelligence, as the sole cause of the universe — an intelligence which has for

us no more than an ideal existence — is accordingly always of the greatest

service to reason. Thus, if we presuppose, in relation to the figure of the earth
                                                              71
(which is round, but somewhat flattened at the poles), or that of mountains

or seas, wise designs on the part of an author of the universe, we cannot fail

to make, by the light of this supposition, a great number of interesting

discoveries. If we keep to this hypothesis, as a principle which is purely

regulative, even error cannot be very detrimental. For, in this case, error can

have no more serious consequences than that, where we expected to discover

a teleological connection (nexus finalis), only a mechanical or physical

connection appears. In such a case, we merely fail to find the additional form

of unity we expected, but we do not lose the rational unity which the mind

requires in its procedure in experience. But even a miscarriage of this sort

cannot affect the law in its general and teleological relations. For although we

may convict an anatomist of an error, when he connects the limb of some

animal with a certain purpose, it is quite impossible to prove in a single case

that any arrangement of nature, be it what it may, is entirely without aim or

design. And thus medical physiology, by the aid of a principle presented to it

by pure reason, extends its very limited empirical knowledge of the purposes

of the different parts of an organized body so far that it may be asserted with

the utmost confidence, and with the approbation of all reflecting men, that

every organ or bodily part of an animal has its use and answers a certaindesign. Now, this is a supposition which, if regarded as of a constitutive

character, goes much farther than any experience or observation of ours can

justify. Hence it is evident that it is nothing more than a regulative principle

of reason, which aims at the highest degree of systematic unity, by the aid of

the idea of a causality according to design in a supreme cause — a cause

which it regards as the highest intelligence.

        71
               The advantages which a circular form, in the case of the earth, has

over every other, are well known. But few are aware that the slight flattening

at the poles, which gives it the figure of a spheroid, is the only cause which

prevents the elevations of continents or even of mountains, perhaps thrown

up by some internal convulsion, from continually altering the position of the

axis of the earth — and that to some considerable degree in a short time. The

great protuberance of the earth under the Equator serves to overbalance the

impetus of all other masses of earth, and thus to preserve the axis of the earth,

so far as we can observe, in its present position. And yet this wise

arrangement has been unthinkingly explained from the equilibrium of the

formerly fluid mass.

              If, however, we neglect this restriction of the idea to a purely

regulative influence, reason is betrayed into numerous errors. For it has then

left the ground of experience, in which alone are to be found the criteria of

truth, and has ventured into the region of the incomprehensible and

unsearchable, on the heights of which it loses its power and collectedness,

because it has completely severed its connection with experience.

              The first error which arises from our employing the idea of a

Supreme Being as a constitutive (in repugnance to the very nature of an idea),

and not as a regulative principle, is the error of inactive reason (ignava
      72
ratio). We may so term every principle which requires us to regard our

investigations of nature as absolutely complete, and allows reason to cease its

inquiries, as if it had fully executed its task. Thus the psychological idea of

the ego, when employed as a constitutive principle for the explanation of the

phenomena of the soul, and for the extension of our knowledge regarding this

subject beyond the limits of experience — even to the condition of the soul

after death — is convenient enough for the purposes of pure reason, but

detrimental and even ruinous to its interests in the sphere of nature and

experience. The dogmatizing spiritualist explains the unchanging unity of our

personality through all changes of condition from the unity of a thinkingsubstance, the interest which we take in things and events that can happen

only after our death, from a consciousness of the immaterial nature of our

thinking subject, and so on. Thus he dispenses with all empirical

investigations into the cause of these internal phenomena, and with all

possible explanations of them upon purely natural grounds; while, at the

dictation of a transcendent reason, he passes by the immanent sources of

cognition in experience, greatly to his own ease and convenience, but to the

sacrifice of all, genuine insight and intelligence. These prejudicial

consequences become still more evident, in the case of the dogmatical

treatment of our idea of a Supreme Intelligence, and the theological system of

nature (physico-theology) which is falsely based upon it. For, in this case, the

aims which we observe in nature, and often those which we merely fancy to

exist, make the investigation of causes a very easy task, by directing us to

refer such and such phenomena immediately to the unsearchable will and

counsel of the Supreme Wisdom, while we ought to investigate their causes

in the general laws of the mechanism of matter. We are thus recommended to

consider the labour of reason as ended, when we have merely dispensed with

its employment, which is guided surely and safely only by the order of nature

and the series of changes in the world- which are arranged according to

immanent and general laws. This error may be avoided, if we do not merely

consider from the view-point of final aims certain parts of nature, such as the

division and structure of a continent, the constitution and direction of certain

mountain-chains, or even the organization existing in the vegetable and

animal kingdoms, but look upon this systematic unity of nature in a perfectly

general way, in relation to the idea of a Supreme Intelligence. If we pursue

this advice, we lay as a foundation for all investigation the conformity to

aims of all phenomena of nature in accordance with universal laws, for which

no particular arrangement of nature is exempt, but only cognized by us with

more or less difficulty; and we possess a regulative principle of the

systematic unity of a teleological connection, which we do not attempt to

anticipate or predetermine. All that we do, and ought to do, is to follow out

the physico-mechanical connection in nature according to general laws, with

the hope of discovering, sooner or later, the teleological connection also.

Thus, and thus only, can the principle of final unity aid in the extension of the

employment of reason in the sphere of experience, without being in any case

detrimental to its interests.

        72
               This was the term applied by the old dialecticians to a sophisticalargument, which ran thus: If it is your fate to die of this disease, you will die,

whether you employ a physician or not. Cicero says that this mode of

reasoning has received this appellation, because, if followed, it puts an end to

the employment of reason in the affairs of life. For a similar reason, I have

applied this designation to the sophistical argument of pure reason.

              The second error which arises from the misconception of the

principle of systematic unity is that of perverted reason (perversa ratio,

usteron roteron rationis). The idea of systematic unity is available as a

regulative principle in the connection of phenomena according to general

natural laws; and, how far soever we have to travel upon the path of

experience to discover some fact or event, this idea requires us to believe that

we have approached all the more nearly to the completion of its use in the

sphere of nature, although that completion can never be attained. But this

error reverses the procedure of reason. We begin by hypostatizing the

principle of systematic unity, and by giving an anthropomorphic

determination to the conception of a Supreme Intelligence, and then proceed

forcibly to impose aims upon nature. Thus not only does teleology, which

ought to aid in the completion of unity in accordance with general laws,

operate to the destruction of its influence, but it hinders reason from attaining

its proper aim, that is, the proof, upon natural grounds, of the existence of a

supreme intelligent cause. For, if we cannot presuppose supreme finality in

nature a priori, that is, as essentially belonging to nature, how can we be

directed to endeavour to discover this unity and, rising gradually through its

different degrees, to approach the supreme perfection of an author of all — a

perfection which is absolutely necessary, and therefore cognizable a priori?

The regulative principle directs us to presuppose systematic unity absolutely

and, consequently, as following from the essential nature of things — but

only as a unity of nature, not merely cognized empirically, but presupposed a

priori, although only in an indeterminate manner. But if I insist on basing

nature upon the foundation of a supreme ordaining Being, the unity of nature

is in effect lost. For, in this case, it is quite foreign and unessential to the

nature of things, and cannot be cognized from the general laws of nature. And

thus arises a vicious circular argument, what ought to have been proved

having been presupposed.

              To take the regulative principle of systematic unity in nature for a

constitutive principle, and to hypostatize and make a cause out of that whichis properly the ideal ground of the consistent and harmonious exercise of

reason, involves reason in inextricable embarrassments. The investigation of

nature pursues its own path under the guidance of the chain of natural causes,

in accordance with the general laws of nature, and ever follows the light of

the idea of an author of the universe — not for the purpose of deducing the

finality, which it constantly pursues, from this Supreme Being, but to attain to

the cognition of his existence from the finality which it seeks in the existence

of the phenomena of nature, and, if possible, in that of all things to cognize

this being, consequently, as absolutely necessary. Whether this latter purpose

succeed or not, the idea is and must always be a true one, and its

employment, when merely regulative, must always be accompanied by

truthful and beneficial results.

              Complete unity, in conformity with aims, constitutes absolute

perfection. But if we do not find this unity in the nature of the things which

go to constitute the world of experience, that is, of objective cognition,

consequently in the universal and necessary laws of nature, how can we infer

from this unity the idea of the supreme and absolutely necessary perfection of

a primal being, which is the origin of all causality? The greatest systematic

unity, and consequently teleological unity, constitutes the very foundation of

the possibility of the most extended employment of human reason. The idea

of unity is therefore essentially and indissolubly connected with the nature of

our reason. This idea is a legislative one; and hence it is very natural that we

should assume the existence of a legislative reason corresponding to it, from

which the systematic unity of nature- the object of the operations of reason —

must be derived.

              In the course of our discussion of the antinomies, we stated that it is

always possible to answer all the questions which pure reason may raise; and

that the plea of the limited nature of our cognition, which is unavoidable and

proper in many questions regarding natural phenomena, cannot in this case be

admitted, because the questions raised do not relate to the nature of things,

but are necessarily originated by the nature of reason itself, and relate to its

own internal constitution. We can now establish this assertion, which at first

sight appeared so rash, in relation to the two questions in which reason takes

the greatest interest, and thus complete our discussion of the dialectic of pure

reason.

              If, then, the question is asked, in relation to transcendental          73
theology, first, whether there is anything distinct from the world, which

contains the ground of cosmical order and connection according to general

laws? The answer is: Certainly. For the world is a sum of phenomena; there

must, therefore, be some transcendental basis of these phenomena, that is, a

basis cogitable by the pure understanding alone. If, secondly, the question is

asked whether this being is substance, whether it is of the greatest reality,

whether it is necessary, and so forth? I answer that this question is utterly

without meaning. For all the categories which aid me in forming a conception

of an object cannot be employed except in the world of sense, and are without

meaning when not applied to objects of actual or possible experience. Out of

this sphere, they are not properly conceptions, but the mere marks or indices

of conceptions, which we may admit, although they cannot, without the help

of experience, help us to understand any subject or thing. If, thirdly, the

question is whether we may not cogitate this being, which is distinct from the

world, in analogy with the objects of experience? The answer is:

Undoubtedly, but only as an ideal, and not as a real object. That is, we must

cogitate it only as an unknown substratum of the systematic unity, order, and

finality of the world — a unity which reason must employ as the regulative

principle of its investigation of nature. Nay, more, we may admit into the idea

certain anthropomorphic elements, which are promotive of the interests of

this regulative principle. For it is no more than an idea, which does not relate

directly to a being distinct from the world, but to the regulative principle of

the systematic unity of the world, by means, however, of a schema of this

unity — the schema of a Supreme Intelligence, who is the wisely-designing

author of the universe. What this basis of cosmical unity may be in itself, we

know not — we cannot discover from the idea; we merely know how we

ought to employ the idea of this unity, in relation to the systematic operation

of reason in the sphere of experience.

        73
               After what has been said of the psychological idea of the ego and

its proper employment as a regulative principle of the operations of reason, I

need not enter into details regarding the transcendental illusion by which the

systematic unity of all the various phenomena of the internal sense is

hypostatized. The procedure is in this case very similar to that which has

been discussed in our remarks on the theological ideal.

              But, it will be asked again, can we on these grounds, admit the

existence of a wise and omnipotent author of the world? Without doubt; andnot only so, but we must assume the existence of such a being. But do we

thus extend the limits of our knowledge beyond the field of possible

experience? By no means. For we have merely presupposed a something, of

which we have no conception, which we do not know as it is in itself; but, in

relation to the systematic disposition of the universe, which we must

presuppose in all our observation of nature, we have cogitated this unknown

being in analogy with an intelligent existence (an empirical conception), that

is to say, we have endowed it with those attributes, which, judging from the

nature of our own reason, may contain the ground of such a systematic unity.

This idea is therefore valid only relatively to the employment in experience of

our reason. But if we attribute to it absolute and objective validity, we

overlook the fact that it is merely an ideal being that we cogitate; and, by

setting out from a basis which is not determinable by considerations drawn

from experience, we place ourselves in a position which incapacitates us from

applying this principle to the empirical employment of reason.

              But, it will be asked further, can I make any use of this conception

and hypothesis in my investigations into the world and nature? Yes, for this

very purpose was the idea established by reason as a fundamental basis. But

may I regard certain arrangements, which seemed to have been made in

conformity with some fixed aim, as the arrangements of design, and look

upon them as proceeding from the divine will, with the intervention,

however, of certain other particular arrangements disposed to that end? Yes,

you may do so; but at the same time you must regard it as indifferent,

whether it is asserted that divine wisdom has disposed all things in

conformity with his highest aims, or that the idea of supreme wisdom is a

regulative principle in the investigation of nature, and at the same time a

principle of the systematic unity of nature according to general laws, even in

those cases where we are unable to discover that unity. In other words, it

must be perfectly indifferent to you whether you say, when you have

discovered this unity: God has wisely willed it so; or: Nature has wisely

arranged this. For it was nothing but the systematic unity, which reason

requires as a basis for the investigation of nature, that justified you in

accepting the idea of a supreme intelligence as a schema for a regulative

principle; and, the farther you advance in the discovery of design and finality,

the more certain the validity of your idea. But, as the whole aim of this

regulative principle was the discovery of a necessary and systematic unity in

nature, we have, in so far as we attain this, to attribute our success to the ideaof a Supreme Being; while, at the same time, we cannot, without involving

ourselves in contradictions, overlook the general laws of nature, as it was in

reference to them alone that this idea was employed. We cannot, I say,

overlook the general laws of nature, and regard this conformity to aims

observable in nature as contingent or hyperphysical in its origin; inasmuch as

there is no ground which can justify us in the admission of a being with such

properties distinct from and above nature. All that we are authorized to assert

is that this idea may be employed as a principle, and that the properties of the

being which is assumed to correspond to it may be regarded as systematically

connected in analogy with the causal determination of phenomena.

              For the same reasons we are justified in introducing into the idea of

the supreme cause other anthropomorphic elements (for without these we

could not predicate anything of it); we may regard it as allowable to cogitate

this cause as a being with understanding, the feelings of pleasure and

displeasure, and faculties of desire and will corresponding to these. At the

same time, we may attribute to this being infinite perfection — a perfection

which necessarily transcends that which our knowledge of the order and

design in the world authorize us to predicate of it. For the regulative law of

systematic unity requires us to study nature on the supposition that systematic

and final unity in infinitum is everywhere discoverable, even in the highest

diversity. For, although we may discover little of this cosmical perfection, it

belongs to the legislative prerogative of reason to require us always to seek

for and to expect it; while it must always be beneficial to institute all inquiries

into nature in accordance with this principle. But it is evident that, by this

idea of a supreme author of all, which I place as the foundation of all

inquiries into nature, I do not mean to assert the existence of such a being, or

that I have any knowledge of its existence; and, consequently, I do not really

deduce anything from the existence of this being, but merely from its idea,

that is to say, from the nature of things in this world, in accordance with this

idea. A certain dim consciousness of the true use of this idea seems to have

dictated to the philosophers of all times the moderate language used by them

regarding the cause of the world. We find them employing the expressions

wisdom and care of nature, and divine wisdom, as synonymous — nay, in

purely speculative discussions, preferring the former, because it does not

carry the appearance of greater pretensions than such as we are entitled to

make, and at the same time directs reason to its proper field of action —

nature and her phenomena.              Thus, pure reason, which at first seemed to promise us nothing less

than the extension of our cognition beyond the limits of experience, is found,

when thoroughly examined, to contain nothing but regulative principles, the

virtue and function of which is to introduce into our cognition a higher degree

of unity than the understanding could of itself. These principles, by placing

the goal of all our struggles at so great a distance, realize for us the most

thorough connection between the different parts of our cognition, and the

highest degree of systematic unity. But, on the other hand, if misunderstood

and employed as constitutive principles of transcendent cognition, they

become the parents of illusions and contradictions, while pretending to

introduce us to new regions of knowledge.

              Thus all human cognition begins with intuitions, proceeds from

thence to conceptions, and ends with ideas. Although it possesses, in relation

to all three elements, a priori sources of cognition, which seemed to transcend

the limits of all experience, a thoroughgoing criticism demonstrates that

speculative reason can never, by the aid of these elements, pass the bounds of

possible experience, and that the proper destination of this highest faculty of

cognition is to employ all methods, and all the principles of these methods,

for the purpose of penetrating into the innermost secrets of nature, by the aid

of the principles of unity (among all kinds of which teleological unity is the

highest), while it ought not to attempt to soar above the sphere of experience,

beyond which there lies nought for us but the void inane. The critical

examination, in our Transcendental Analytic, of all the propositions which

professed to extend cognition beyond the sphere of experience, completely

demonstrated that they can only conduct us to a possible experience. If we

were not distrustful even of the clearest abstract theorems, if we were not

allured by specious and inviting prospects to escape from the constraining

power of their evidence, we might spare ourselves the laborious examination

of all the dialectical arguments which a transcendent reason adduces in

support of its pretensions; for we should know with the most complete

certainty that, however honest such professions might be, they are null and

valueless, because they relate to a kind of knowledge to which no man can by

any possibility attain. But, as there is no end to discussion, if we cannot

discover the true cause of the illusions by which even the wisest are deceived,

and as the analysis of all our transcendent cognition into its elements is of

itself of no slight value as a psychological study, while it is a duty incumbent

on every philosopher — it was found necessary to investigate the dialecticalprocedure of reason in its primary sources. And as the inferences of which

this dialectic is the parent are not only deceitful, but naturally possess a

profound interest for humanity, it was advisable at the same time, to give a

full account of the momenta of this dialectical procedure, and to deposit it in

the archives of human reason, as a warning to all future metaphysicians to

avoid these causes of speculative error.

 

 

               II. – Transcendental Doctrine of Method.

 

 

              If we regard the sum of the cognition of pure speculative reason as

an edifice, the idea of which, at least, exists in the human mind, it may be

said that we have in the Transcendental Doctrine of Elements examined the

materials and determined to what edifice these belong, and what its height

and stability. We have found, indeed, that, although we had purposed to build

for ourselves a tower which should reach to Heaven, the supply of materials

sufficed merely for a habitation, which was spacious enough for all terrestrial

purposes, and high enough to enable us to survey the level plain of

experience, but that the bold undertaking designed necessarily failed for want

of materials — not to mention the confusion of tongues, which gave rise to

endless disputes among the labourers on the plan of the edifice, and at last

scattered them over all the world, each to erect a separate building for

himself, according to his own plans and his own inclinations. Our present

task relates not to the materials, but to the plan of an edifice; and, as we have

had sufficient warning not to venture blindly upon a design which may be

found to transcend our natural powers, while, at the same time, we cannot

give up the intention of erecting a secure abode for the mind, we must

proportion our design to the material which is presented to us, and which is,

at the same time, sufficient for all our wants.

              I understand, then, by the transcendental doctrine of method, the

determination of the formal conditions of a complete system of pure reason.

We shall accordingly have to treat of the discipline, the canon, the

architectonic, and, finally, the history of pure reason. This part of our

Critique will accomplish, from the transcendental point of view, what has

been usually attempted, but miserably executed, under the name of practical

logic. It has been badly executed, I say, because general logic, not being

limited to any particular kind of cognition (not even to the pure cognition of

the understanding) nor to any particular objects, it cannot, without borrowing

from other sciences, do more than present merely the titles or signs of

possible methods and the technical expressions, which are employed in the

systematic parts of all sciences; and thus the pupil is made acquainted withnames, the meaning and application of which he is to learn only at some

future time.

                                  Table of Contents

 

 

              The Discipline of Pure Reason.

              The Canon of Pure Reason.

              The Architectonic of Pure Reason.

              The History of Pure Reason.

 

                  Chapter I. The Discipline of Pure Reason.

 

 

              Negative judgements — those which are so not merely as regards

their logical form, but in respect of their content — are not commonly held in

especial respect. They are, on the contrary, regarded as jealous enemies of

our insatiable desire for knowledge; and it almost requires an apology to

induce us to tolerate, much less to prize and to respect them.

              All propositions, indeed, may be logically expressed in a negative

form; but, in relation to the content of our cognition, the peculiar province of

negative judgements is solely to prevent error. For this reason, too, negative

propositions, which are framed for the purpose of correcting false cognitions

where error is absolutely impossible, are undoubtedly true, but inane and

senseless; that is, they are in reality purposeless and, for this reason, often

very ridiculous. Such is the proposition of the schoolman that Alexander

could not have subdued any countries without an army.

              But where the limits of our possible cognition are very much

contracted, the attraction to new fields of knowledge great, the illusions to

which the mind is subject of the most deceptive character, and the evil

consequences of error of no inconsiderable magnitude — the negative

element in knowledge, which is useful only to guard us against error, is of far

more importance than much of that positive instruction which makes

additions to the sum of our knowledge. The restraint which is employed torepress, and finally to extirpate the constant inclination to depart from certain

rules, is termed discipline. It is distinguished from culture, which aims at the

formation of a certain degree of skill, without attempting to repress or to

destroy any other mental power, already existing. In the cultivation of a

talent, which has given evidence of an impulse towards self-development,
                              74
discipline takes a negative, culture and doctrine a positive, part.

        74
               I am well aware that, in the language of the schools, the term

discipline is usually employed as synonymous with instruction. But there are

so many cases in which it is necessary to distinguish the notion of the former,

as a course of corrective training, from that of the latter, as the

communication of knowledge, and the nature of things itself demands the

appropriation of the most suitable expressions for this distinction, that it is

my desire that the former terms should never be employed in any other than a

negative signification.

              That natural dispositions and talents (such as imagination and with,

which ask a free and unlimited development, require in many respects the

corrective influence of discipline, every one will readily grant. But it may

well appear strange that reason, whose proper duty it is to prescribe rules of

discipline to all the other powers of the mind, should itself require this

corrective. It has, in fact, hitherto escaped this humiliation, only because, in

presence of its magnificent pretensions and high position, no one could

readily suspect it to be capable of substituting fancies for conceptions, and

words for things.

              Reason, when employed in the field of experience, does not stand in

need of criticism, because its principles are subjected to the continual test of

empirical observations. Nor is criticism requisite in the sphere of

mathematics, where the conceptions of reason must always be presented in

concreto in pure intuition, and baseless or arbitrary assertions are discovered

without difficulty. But where reason is not held in a plain track by the

influence of empirical or of pure intuition, that is, when it is employed in the

transcendental sphere of pure conceptions, it stands in great need of

discipline, to restrain its propensity to overstep the limits of possible

experience and to keep it from wandering into error. In fact, the utility of the

philosophy of pure reason is entirely of this negative character. Particular

errors may be corrected by particular animadversions, and the causes of these

errors may be eradicated by criticism. But where we find, as in the case ofpure reason, a complete system of illusions and fallacies, closely connected

with each other and depending upon grand general principles, there seems to

be required a peculiar and negative code of mental legislation, which, under

the denomination of a discipline, and founded upon the nature of reason and

the objects of its exercise, shall constitute a system of thorough examination

and testing, which no fallacy will be able to withstand or escape from, under

whatever disguise or concealment it may lurk.

              But the reader must remark that, in this the second division of our

transcendental Critique the discipline of pure reason is not directed to the

content, but to the method of the cognition of pure reason. The former task

has been completed in the doctrine of elements. But there is so much

similarity in the mode of employing the faculty of reason, whatever be the

object to which it is applied, while, at the same time, its employment in the

transcendental sphere is so essentially different in kind from every other, that,

without the warning negative influence of a discipline specially directed to

that end, the errors are unavoidable which spring from the unskillful

employment of the methods which are originated by reason but which are out

of place in this sphere.  Section I. The Discipline of Pure Reason in the Sphere of Dogmatism.

 

 

              The science of mathematics presents the most brilliant example of

the extension of the sphere of pure reason without the aid of experience.

Examples are always contagious; and they exert an especial influence on the

same faculty, which naturally flatters itself that it will have the same good

fortune in other case as fell to its lot in one fortunate instance. Hence pure

reason hopes to be able to extend its empire in the transcendental sphere with

equal success and security, especially when it applies the same method which

was attended with such brilliant results in the science of mathematics. It is,

therefore, of the highest importance for us to know whether the method of

arriving at demonstrative certainty, which is termed mathematical, be

identical with that by which we endeavour to attain the same degree of

certainty in philosophy, and which is termed in that science dogmatical.

              Philosophical cognition is the cognition of reason by means of

conceptions; mathematical cognition is cognition by means of the

construction of conceptions. The construction of a conception is the

presentation a priori of the intuition which corresponds to the conception. For

this purpose a non-empirical intuition is requisite, which, as an intuition, is an

individual object; while, as the construction of a conception (a general

representation), it must be seen to be universally valid for all the possible

intuitions which rank under that conception. Thus I construct a triangle, by

the presentation of the object which corresponds to this conception, either by

mere imagination, in pure intuition, or upon paper, in empirical intuition, in

both cases completely a priori, without borrowing the type of that figure from

any experience. The individual figure drawn upon paper is empirical; but it

serves, notwithstanding, to indicate the conception, even in its universality,

because in this empirical intuition we keep our eye merely on the act of the

construction of the conception, and pay no attention to the various modes of

determining it, for example, its size, the length of its sides, the size of its

angles, these not in the least affecting the essential character of the

conception.

              Philosophical cognition, accordingly, regards the particular only inthe general; mathematical the general in the particular, nay, in the individual.

This is done, however, entirely a priori and by means of pure reason, so that,

as this individual figure is determined under certain universal conditions of

construction, the object of the conception, to which this individual figure

corresponds as its schema, must be cogitated as universally determined.

              The essential difference of these two modes of cognition consists,

therefore, in this formal quality; it does not regard the difference of the matter

or objects of both. Those thinkers who aim at distinguishing philosophy from

mathematics by asserting that the former has to do with quality merely, and

the latter with quantity, have mistaken the effect for the cause. The reason

why mathematical cognition can relate only to quantity is to be found in its

form alone. For it is the conception of quantities only that is capable of being

constructed, that is, presented a priori in intuition; while qualities cannot be

given in any other than an empirical intuition. Hence the cognition of

qualities by reason is possible only through conceptions. No one can find an

intuition which shall correspond to the conception of reality, except in

experience; it cannot be presented to the mind a priori and antecedently to the

empirical consciousness of a reality. We can form an intuition, by means of

the mere conception of it, of a cone, without the aid of experience; but the

colour of the cone we cannot know except from experience. I cannot present

an intuition of a cause, except in an example which experience offers to me.

Besides, philosophy, as well as mathematics, treats of quantities; as, for

example, of totality, infinity, and so on. Mathematics, too, treats of the

difference of lines and surfaces — as spaces of different quality, of the

continuity of extension — as a quality thereof. But, although in such cases

they have a common object, the mode in which reason considers that object is

very different in philosophy from what it is in mathematics. The former

confines itself to the general conceptions; the latter can do nothing with a

mere conception, it hastens to intuition. In this intuition it regards the

conception in concreto, not empirically, but in an a priori intuition, which it

has constructed; and in which, all the results which follow from the general

conditions of the construction of the conception are in all cases valid for the

object of the constructed conception.

              Suppose that the conception of a triangle is given to a philosopher

and that he is required to discover, by the philosophical method, what relation

the sum of its angles bears to a right angle. He has nothing before him but theconception of a figure enclosed within three right lines, and, consequently,

with the same number of angles. He may analyse the conception of a right

line, of an angle, or of the number three as long as he pleases, but he will not

discover any properties not contained in these conceptions. But, if this

question is proposed to a geometrician, he at once begins by constructing a

triangle. He knows that two right angles are equal to the sum of all the

contiguous angles which proceed from one point in a straight line; and he

goes on to produce one side of his triangle, thus forming two adjacent angles

which are together equal to two right angles. He then divides the exterior of

these angles, by drawing a line parallel with the opposite side of the triangle,

and immediately perceives that be has thus got an exterior adjacent angle

which is equal to the interior. Proceeding in this way, through a chain of

inferences, and always on the ground of intuition, he arrives at a clear and

universally valid solution of the question.

              But mathematics does not confine itself to the construction of

quantities (quanta), as in the case of geometry; it occupies itself with pure

quantity also (quantitas), as in the case of algebra, where complete

abstraction is made of the properties of the object indicated by the conception

of quantity. In algebra, a certain method of notation by signs is adopted, and

these indicate the different possible constructions of quantities, the extraction

of roots, and so on. After having thus denoted the general conception of

quantities, according to their different relations, the different operations by

which quantity or number is increased or diminished are presented in

intuition in accordance with general rules. Thus, when one quantity is to be

divided by another, the signs which denote both are placed in the form

peculiar to the operation of division; and thus algebra, by means of a

symbolical construction of quantity, just as geometry, with its ostensive or

geometrical construction (a construction of the objects themselves), arrives at

results which discursive cognition cannot hope to reach by the aid of mere

conceptions.

              Now, what is the cause of this difference in the fortune of the

philosopher and the mathematician, the former of whom follows the path of

conceptions, while the latter pursues that of intuitions, which he represents, a

priori, in correspondence with his conceptions? The cause is evident from

what has been already demonstrated in the introduction to this Critique. We

do not, in the present case, want to discover analytical propositions, whichmay be produced merely by analysing our conceptions — for in this the

philosopher would have the advantage over his rival; we aim at the discovery

of synthetical propositions — such synthetical propositions, moreover, as can

be cognized a priori. I must not confine myself to that which I actually

cogitate in my conception of a triangle, for this is nothing more than the mere

definition; I must try to go beyond that, and to arrive at properties which are

not contained in, although they belong to, the conception. Now, this is

impossible, unless I determine the object present to my mind according to the

conditions, either of empirical, or of pure, intuition. In the former case, I

should have an empirical proposition (arrived at by actual measurement of

the angles of the triangle), which would possess neither universality nor

necessity; but that would be of no value. In the latter, I proceed by

geometrical construction, by means of which I collect, in a pure intuition, just

as I would in an empirical intuition, all the various properties which belong to

the schema of a triangle in general, and consequently to its conception, and

thus construct synthetical propositions which possess the attribute of

universality.

              It would be vain to philosophize upon the triangle, that is, to reflect

on it discursively; I should get no further than the definition with which I had

been obliged to set out. There are certainly transcendental synthetical

propositions which are framed by means of pure conceptions, and which

form the peculiar distinction of philosophy; but these do not relate to any

particular thing, but to a thing in general, and enounce the conditions under

which the perception of it may become a part of possible experience. But the

science of mathematics has nothing to do with such questions, nor with the

question of existence in any fashion; it is concerned merely with the

properties of objects in themselves, only in so far as these are connected with

the conception of the objects.

              In the above example, we merely attempted to show the great

difference which exists between the discursive employment of reason in the

sphere of conceptions, and its intuitive exercise by means of the construction

of conceptions. The question naturally arises: What is the cause which

necessitates this twofold exercise of reason, and how are we to discover

whether it is the philosophical or the mathematical method which reason is

pursuing in an argument?

              All our knowledge relates, finally, to possible intuitions, for it isthese alone that present objects to the mind. An a priori or non-empirical

conception contains either a pure intuition — and in this case it can be

constructed; or it contains nothing but the synthesis of possible intuitions,

which are not given a priori. In this latter case, it may help us to form

synthetical a priori judgements, but only in the discursive method, by

conceptions, not in the intuitive, by means of the construction of conceptions.

              The only a priori intuition is that of the pure form of phenomena-

space and time. A conception of space and time as quanta may be presented a

priori in intuition, that is, constructed, either alone with their quality (figure),

or as pure quantity (the mere synthesis of the homogeneous), by means of

number. But the matter of phenomena, by which things are given in space

and time, can be presented only in perception, a posteriori. The only

conception which represents a priori this empirical content of phenomena is

the conception of a thing in general; and the a priori synthetical cognition of

this conception can give us nothing more than the rule for the synthesis of

that which may be contained in the corresponding a posteriori perception; it

is utterly inadequate to present an a priori intuition of the real object, which

must necessarily be empirical.

              Synthetical propositions, which relate to things in general, an a priori

intuition of which is impossible, are transcendental. For this reason

transcendental propositions cannot be framed by means of the construction of

conceptions; they are a priori, and based entirely on conceptions themselves.

They contain merely the rule, by which we are to seek in the world of

perception or experience the synthetical unity of that which cannot be intuited

a priori. But they are incompetent to present any of the conceptions which

appear in them in an a priori intuition; these can be given only a posteriori, in

experience, which, however, is itself possible only through these synthetical

principles.

              If we are to form a synthetical judgement regarding a conception, we

must go beyond it, to the intuition in which it is given. If we keep to what is

contained in the conception, the judgement is merely analytical — it is

merely an explanation of what we have cogitated in the conception. But I can

pass from the conception to the pure or empirical intuition which corresponds

to it. I can proceed to examine my conception in concreto, and to cognize,

either a priori or a posterio, what I find in the object of the conception. The

former — a priori cognition — is rational-mathematical cognition by meansof the construction of the conception; the latter — a posteriori cognition — is

purely empirical cognition, which does not possess the attributes of necessity

and universality. Thus I may analyse the conception I have of gold; but I gain

no new information from this analysis, I merely enumerate the different

properties which I had connected with the notion indicated by the word. My

knowledge has gained in logical clearness and arrangement, but no addition

has been made to it. But if I take the matter which is indicated by this name,

and submit it to the examination of my senses, I am enabled to form several

synthetical — although still empirical- propositions. The mathematical

conception of a triangle I should construct, that is, present a priori in

intuition, and in this way attain to rational-synthetical cognition. But when

the transcendental conception of reality, or substance, or power is presented

to my mind, I find that it does not relate to or indicate either an empirical or

pure intuition, but that it indicates merely the synthesis of empirical

intuitions, which cannot of course be given a priori. The synthesis in such a

conception cannot proceed a priori — without the aid of experience — to the

intuition which corresponds to the conception; and, for this reason, none of

these conceptions can produce a determinative synthetical proposition, they
                                                                75
can never present more than a principle of the synthesis of possible

empirical intuitions. A transcendental proposition is, therefore, a synthetical

cognition of reason by means of pure conceptions and the discursive method,

and it renders possible all synthetical unity in empirical cognition, though it

cannot present us with any intuition a priori.

        75
               In the case of the conception of cause, I do really go beyond the

empirical conception of an event — but not to the intuition which presents

this conception in concreto, but only to the time-conditions, which may be

found in experience to correspond to the conception. My procedure is,

therefore, strictly according to conceptions; I cannot in a case of this kind

employ the construction of conceptions, because the conception is merely a

rule for the synthesis of perceptions, which are not pure intuitions, and which,

therefore, cannot be given a priori.

              There is thus a twofold exercise of reason. Both modes have the

properties of universality and an a priori origin in common, but are, in their

procedure, of widely different character. The reason of this is that in the

world of phenomena, in which alone objects are presented to our minds, there

are two main elements — the form of intuition (space and time), which canbe cognized and determined completely a priori, and the matter or content —

that which is presented in space and time, and which, consequently, contains

a something — an existence corresponding to our powers of sensation. As

regards the latter, which can never be given in a determinate mode except by

experience, there are no a priori notions which relate to it, except the

undetermined conceptions of the synthesis of possible sensations, in so far as

these belong (in a possible experience) to the unity of consciousness. As

regards the former, we can determine our conceptions a priori in intuition,

inasmuch as we are ourselves the creators of the objects of the conceptions in

space and time- these objects being regarded simply as quanta. In the one

case, reason proceeds according to conceptions and can do nothing more than

subject phenomena to these — which can only be determined empirically,

that is, a posteriori — in conformity, however, with those conceptions as the

rules of all empirical synthesis. In the other case, reason proceeds by the

construction of conceptions; and, as these conceptions relate to an a priori

intuition, they may be given and determined in pure intuition a priori, and

without the aid of empirical data. The examination and consideration of

everything that exists in space or time — whether it is a quantum or not, in

how far the particular something (which fills space or time) is a primary

substratum, or a mere determination of some other existence, whether it

relates to anything else — either as cause or effect, whether its existence is

isolated or in reciprocal connection with and dependence upon others, the

possibility of this existence, its reality and necessity or opposites — all these

form part of the cognition of reason on the ground of conceptions, and this

cognition is termed philosophical. But to determine a priori an intuition in

space (its figure), to divide time into periods, or merely to cognize the

quantity of an intuition in space and time, and to determine it by number —

all this is an operation of reason by means of the construction of conceptions,

and is called mathematical.

              The success which attends the efforts of reason in the sphere of

mathematics naturally fosters the expectation that the same good fortune will

be its lot, if it applies the mathematical method in other regions of mental

endeavour besides that of quantities. Its success is thus great, because it can

support all its conceptions by a priori intuitions and, in this way, make itself a

master, as it were, over nature; while pure philosophy, with its a priori

discursive conceptions, bungles about in the world of nature, and cannot

accredit or show any a priori evidence of the reality of these conceptions.Masters in the science of mathematics are confident of the success of this

method; indeed, it is a common persuasion that it is capable of being applied

to any subject of human thought. They have hardly ever reflected or

philosophized on their favourite science — a task of great difficulty; and the

specific difference between the two modes of employing the faculty of reason

has never entered their thoughts. Rules current in the field of common

experience, and which common sense stamps everywhere with its approval,

are regarded by them as axiomatic. From what source the conceptions of

space and time, with which (as the only primitive quanta) they have to deal,

enter their minds, is a question which they do not trouble themselves to

answer; and they think it just as unnecessary to examine into the origin of the

pure conceptions of the understanding and the extent of their validity. All

they have to do with them is to employ them. In all this they are perfectly

right, if they do not overstep the limits of the sphere of nature. But they pass,

unconsciously, from the world of sense to the insecure ground of pure

transcendental conceptions (instabilis tellus, innabilis unda), where they can

neither stand nor swim, and where the tracks of their footsteps are obliterated

by time; while the march of mathematics is pursued on a broad and

magnificent highway, which the latest posterity shall frequent without fear of

danger or impediment.

              As we have taken upon us the task of determining, clearly and

certainly, the limits of pure reason in the sphere of transcendentalism, and as

the efforts of reason in this direction are persisted in, even after the plainest

and most expressive warnings, hope still beckoning us past the limits of

experience into the splendours of the intellectual world — it becomes

necessary to cut away the last anchor of this fallacious and fantastic hope. We

shall, accordingly, show that the mathematical method is unattended in the

sphere of philosophy by the least advantage — except, perhaps, that it more

plainly exhibits its own inadequacy — that geometry and philosophy are two

quite different things, although they go band in hand in hand in the field of

natural science, and, consequently, that the procedure of the one can never be

imitated by the other.

              The evidence of mathematics rests upon definitions, axioms, and

demonstrations. I shall be satisfied with showing that none of these forms can

be employed or imitated in philosophy in the sense in which they are

understood by mathematicians; and that the geometrician, if he employs hismethod in philosophy, will succeed only in building card-castles, while the

employment of the philosophical method in mathematics can result in

nothing but mere verbiage. The essential business of philosophy, indeed, is to

mark out the limits of the science; and even the mathematician, unless his

talent is naturally circumscribed and limited to this particular department of

knowledge, cannot turn a deaf ear to the warnings of philosophy, or set

himself above its direction.

              I. Of Definitions. A definition is, as the term itself indicates, the

representation, upon primary grounds, of the complete conception of a thing
                        76
within its own limits. Accordingly, an empirical conception cannot be

defined, it can only be explained. For, as there are in such a conception only a

certain number of marks or signs, which denote a certain class of sensuous

objects, we can never be sure that we do not cogitate under the word which

indicates the same object, at one time a greater, at another a smaller number

of signs. Thus, one person may cogitate in his conception of gold, in addition

to its properties of weight, colour, malleability, that of resisting rust, while

another person may be ignorant of this quality. We employ certain signs only

so long as we require them for the sake of distinction; new observations

abstract some and add new ones, so that an empirical conception never

remains within permanent limits. It is, in fact, useless to define a conception

of this kind. If, for example, we are speaking of water and its properties, we

do not stop at what we actually think by the word water, but proceed to

observation and experiment; and the word, with the few signs attached to it,

is more properly a designation than a conception of the thing. A definition in

this case would evidently be nothing more than a determination of the word.

In the second place, no a priori conception, such as those of substance, cause,

right, fitness, and so on, can be defined. For I can never be sure, that the clear

representation of a given conception (which is given in a confused state) has

been fully developed, until I know that the representation is adequate with its

object. But, inasmuch as the conception, as it is presented to the mind, may

contain a number of obscure representations, which we do not observe in our

analysis, although we employ them in our application of the conception, I can

never be sure that my analysis is complete, while examples may make this

probable, although they can never demonstrate the fact. instead of the word

definition, I should rather employ the term exposition- a more modest

expression, which the critic may accept without surrendering his doubts as to

the completeness of the analysis of any such conception. As, therefore,neither empirical nor a priori conceptions are capable of definition, we have

to see whether the only other kind of conceptions — arbitrary conceptions —

can be subjected to this mental operation. Such a conception can always be

defined; for I must know thoroughly what I wished to cogitate in it, as it was

I who created it, and it was not given to my mind either by the nature of my

understanding or by experience. At the same time, I cannot say that, by such

a definition, I have defined a real object. If the conception is based upon

empirical conditions, if, for example, I have a conception of a clock for a

ship, this arbitrary conception does not assure me of the existence or even of

the possibility of the object. My definition of such a conception would with

more propriety be termed a declaration of a project than a definition of an

object. There are no other conceptions which can bear definition, except

those which contain an arbitrary synthesis, which can be constructed a priori.

Consequently, the science of mathematics alone possesses definitions. For the

object here thought is presented a priori in intuition; and thus it can never

contain more or less than the conception, because the conception of the object

has been given by the definition — and primarily, that is, without deriving

the definition from any other source. Philosophical definitions are, therefore,

merely expositions of given conceptions, while mathematical definitions are

constructions of conceptions originally formed by the mind itself; the former

are produced by analysis, the completeness of which is never demonstratively

certain, the latter by a synthesis. In a mathematical definition the conception

is formed, in a philosophical definition it is only explained. From this it

follows:

        76
               The definition must describe the conception completely that is,

omit none of the marks or signs of which it composed; within its own limits,

that is, it must be precise, and enumerate no more signs than belong to the

conception; and on primary grounds, that is to say, the limitations of the

bounds of the conception must not be deduced from other conceptions, as in

this case a proof would be necessary, and the so-called definition would be

incapable of taking its place at the bead of all the judgements we have to

form regarding an object.

              (a) That we must not imitate, in philosophy, the mathematical usage

of commencing with definitions — except by way of hypothesis or

experiment. For, as all so-called philosophical definitions are merely analyses

of given conceptions, these conceptions, although only in a confused form,must precede the analysis; and the incomplete exposition must precede the

complete, so that we may be able to draw certain inferences from the

characteristics which an incomplete analysis has enabled us to discover,

before we attain to the complete exposition or definition of the conception. In

one word, a full and clear definition ought, in philosophy, rather to form the
                                                            77
conclusion than the commencement of our labours. In mathematics, on the

contrary, we cannot have a conception prior to the definition; it is the

definition which gives us the conception, and it must for this reason form the

commencement of every chain of mathematical reasoning.

        77
               Philosophy abounds in faulty definitions, especially such as

contain some of the elements requisite to form a complete definition. If a

conception could not be employed in reasoning before it had been defined, it

would fare ill with all philosophical thought. But, as incompletely defined

conceptions may always be employed without detriment to truth, so far as our

analysis of the elements contained in them proceeds, imperfect definitions,

that is, propositions which are properly not definitions, but merely

approximations thereto, may be used with great advantage. In mathematics,

definition belongs ad esse, in philosophy ad melius esse. It is a difficult task

to construct a proper definition. Jurists are still without a complete definition

of the idea of right.

              (b) Mathematical definitions cannot be erroneous. For the

conception is given only in and through the definition, and thus it contains

only what has been cogitated in the definition. But although a definition

cannot be incorrect, as regards its content, an error may sometimes, although

seldom, creep into the form. This error consists in a want of precision. Thus

the common definition of a circle — that it is a curved line, every point in

which is equally distant from another point called the centre — is faulty,

from the fact that the determination indicated by the word curved is

superfluous. For there ought to be a particular theorem, which may be easily

proved from the definition, to the effect that every line, which has all its

points at equal distances from another point, must be a curved line — that is,

that not even the smallest part of it can be straight. Analytical definitions, on

the other hand, may be erroneous in many respects, either by the introduction

of signs which do not actually exist in the conception, or by wanting in that

completeness which forms the essential of a definition. In the latter case, the

definition is necessarily defective, because we can never be fully certain ofthe completeness of our analysis. For these reasons, the method of definition

employed in mathematics cannot be imitated in philosophy.

              2. Of Axioms. These, in so far as they are immediately certain, are a

priori synthetical principles. Now, one conception cannot be connected

synthetically and yet immediately with another; because, if we wish to

proceed out of and beyond a conception, a third mediating cognition is

necessary. And, as philosophy is a cognition of reason by the aid of

conceptions alone, there is to be found in it no principle which deserves to be

called an axiom. Mathematics, on the other hand, may possess axioms,

because it can always connect the predicates of an object a priori, and without

any mediating term, by means of the construction of conceptions in intuition.

Such is the case with the proposition: Three points can always lie in a plane.

On the other hand, no synthetical principle which is based upon conceptions,

can ever be immediately certain (for example, the proposition: Everything

that happens has a cause), because I require a mediating term to connect the

two conceptions of event and cause- namely, the condition of time-

determination in an experience, and I cannot cognize any such principle

immediately and from conceptions alone. Discursive principles are,

accordingly, very different from intuitive principles or axioms. The former

always require deduction, which in the case of the latter may be altogether

dispensed with. Axioms are, for this reason, always self-evident, while

philosophical principles, whatever may be the degree of certainty they

possess, cannot lay any claim to such a distinction. No synthetical proposition

of pure transcendental reason can be so evident, as is often rashly enough

declared, as the statement, twice two are four. It is true that in the Analytic I

introduced into the list of principles of the pure understanding, certain axioms

of intuition; but the principle there discussed was not itself an axiom, but

served merely to present the principle of the possibility of axioms in general,

while it was really nothing more than a principle based upon conceptions. For

it is one part of the duty of transcendental philosophy to establish the

possibility of mathematics itself. Philosophy possesses, then, no axioms, and

has no right to impose its a priori principles upon thought, until it has

established their authority and validity by a thoroughgoing deduction.

              3. Of Demonstrations. Only an apodeictic proof, based upon

intuition, can be termed a demonstration. Experience teaches us what is, but it

cannot convince us that it might not have been otherwise. Hence a proof uponempirical grounds cannot be apodeictic. A priori conceptions, in discursive

cognition, can never produce intuitive certainty or evidence, however certain

the judgement they present may be. Mathematics alone, therefore, contains

demonstrations, because it does not deduce its cognition from conceptions,

but from the construction of conceptions, that is, from intuition, which can be

given a priori in accordance with conceptions. The method of algebra, in

equations, from which the correct answer is deduced by reduction, is a kind

of construction — not geometrical, but by symbols- in which all conceptions,

especially those of the relations of quantities, are represented in intuition by

signs; and thus the conclusions in that science are secured from errors by the

fact that every proof is submitted to ocular evidence. Philosophical cognition

does not possess this advantage, it being required to consider the general

always in abstracto (by means of conceptions), while mathematics can always

consider it in concreto (in an individual intuition), and at the same time by

means of a priori representation, whereby all errors are rendered manifest to

the senses. The former — discursive proofs — ought to be termed acroamatic

proofs, rather than demonstrations, as only words are employed in them,

while demonstrations proper, as the term itself indicates, always require a

reference to the intuition of the object.

              It follows from all these considerations that it is not consonant with

the nature of philosophy, especially in the sphere of pure reason, to employ

the dogmatical method, and to adorn itself with the titles and insignia of

mathematical science. It does not belong to that order, and can only hope for

a fraternal union with that science. Its attempts at mathematical evidence are

vain pretensions, which can only keep it back from its true aim, which is to

detect the illusory procedure of reason when transgressing its proper limits,

and by fully explaining and analysing our conceptions, to conduct us from the

dim regions of speculation to the clear region of modest self-knowledge.

Reason must not, therefore, in its transcendental endeavours, look forward

with such confidence, as if the path it is pursuing led straight to its aim, nor

reckon with such security upon its premisses, as to consider it unnecessary to

take a step back, or to keep a strict watch for errors, which, overlooked in the

principles, may be detected in the arguments themselves — in which case it

may be requisite either to determine these principles with greater strictness,

or to change them entirely.

              I divide all apodeictic propositions, whether demonstrable orimmediately certain, into dogmata and mathemata. A direct synthetical

proposition, based on conceptions, is a dogma; a proposition of the same

kind, based on the construction of conceptions, is a mathema. Analytical

judgements do not teach us any more about an object than what was

contained in the conception we had of it; because they do not extend our

cognition beyond our conception of an object, they merely elucidate the

conception. They cannot therefore be with propriety termed dogmas. Of the

two kinds of a priori synthetical propositions above mentioned, only those

which are employed in philosophy can, according to the general mode of

speech, bear this name; those of arithmetic or geometry would not be rightly

so denominated. Thus the customary mode of speaking confirms the

explanation given above, and the conclusion arrived at, that only those

judgements which are based upon conceptions, not on the construction of

conceptions, can be termed dogmatical.

              Thus, pure reason, in the sphere of speculation, does not contain a

single direct synthetical judgement based upon conceptions. By means of

ideas, it is, as we have shown, incapable of producing synthetical judgements,

which are objectively valid; by means of the conceptions of the

understanding, it establishes certain indubitable principles, not, however,

directly on the basis of conceptions, but only indirectly by means of the

relation of these conceptions to something of a purely contingent nature,

namely, possible experience. When experience is presupposed, these

principles are apodeictically certain, but in themselves, and directly, they

cannot even be cognized a priori. Thus the given conceptions of cause and

event will not be sufficient for the demonstration of the proposition: Every

event has a cause. For this reason, it is not a dogma; although from another

point of view, that of experience, it is capable of being proved to

demonstration. The proper term for such a proposition is principle, and not

theorem (although it does require to be proved), because it possesses the

remarkable peculiarity of being the condition of the possibility of its own

ground of proof, that is, experience, and of forming a necessary

presupposition in all empirical observation.

              If then, in the speculative sphere of pure reason, no dogmata are to

be found; all dogmatical methods, whether borrowed from mathematics, or

invented by philosophical thinkers, are alike inappropriate and inefficient.

They only serve to conceal errors and fallacies, and to deceive philosophy,whose duty it is to see that reason pursues a safe and straight path. A

philosophical method may, however, be systematical. For our reason is,

subjectively considered, itself a system, and, in the sphere of mere

conceptions, a system of investigation according to principles of unity, the

material being supplied by experience alone. But this is not the proper place

for discussing the peculiar method of transcendental philosophy, as our

present task is simply to examine whether our faculties are capable of

erecting an edifice on the basis of pure reason, and how far they may proceed

with the materials at their command.          Section II. The Discipline of Pure Reason in Polemics.

 

 

              Reason must be subject, in all its operations, to criticism, which

must always be permitted to exercise its functions without restraint; otherwise

its interests are imperilled and its influence obnoxious to suspicion. There is

nothing, however useful, however sacred it may be, that can claim exemption

from the searching examination of this supreme tribunal, which has no

respect of persons. The very existence of reason depends upon this freedom;

for the voice of reason is not that of a dictatorial and despotic power, it is

rather like the vote of the citizens of a free state, every member of which

must have the privilege of giving free expression to his doubts, and possess

even the right of veto.

              But while reason can never decline to submit itself to the tribunal of

criticism, it has not always cause to dread the judgement of this court. Pure

reason, however, when engaged in the sphere of dogmatism, is not so

thoroughly conscious of a strict observance of its highest laws, as to appear

before a higher judicial reason with perfect confidence. On the contrary, it

must renounce its magnificent dogmatical pretensions in philosophy.

              Very different is the case when it has to defend itself, not before a

judge, but against an equal. If dogmatical assertions are advanced on the

negative side, in opposition to those made by reason on the positive side, its

justification kat authrhopon is complete, although the proof of its

propositions is kat aletheian unsatisfactory.

              By the polemic of pure reason I mean the defence of its propositions

made by reason, in opposition to the dogmatical counter-propositions

advanced by other parties. The question here is not whether its own

statements may not also be false; it merely regards the fact that reason proves

that the opposite cannot be established with demonstrative certainty, nor even

asserted with a higher degree of probability. Reason does not hold her

possessions upon sufferance; for, although she cannot show a perfectly

satisfactory title to them, no one can prove that she is not the rightful

possessor.              It is a melancholy reflection that reason, in its highest exercise, falls

into an antithetic; and that the supreme tribunal for the settlement of

differences should not be at union with itself. It is true that we had to discuss

the question of an apparent antithetic, but we found that it was based upon a

misconception. In conformity with the common prejudice, phenomena were

regarded as things in themselves, and thus an absolute completeness in their

synthesis was required in the one mode or in the other (it was shown to be

impossible in both); a demand entirely out of place in regard to phenomena.

There was, then, no real self-contradiction of reason in the propositions: The

series of phenomena given in themselves has an absolutely first beginning;

and: This series is absolutely and in itself without beginning. The two

propositions are perfectly consistent with each other, because phenomena as

phenomena are in themselves nothing, and consequently the hypothesis that

they are things in themselves must lead to self-contradictory inferences.

              But there are cases in which a similar misunderstanding cannot be

provided against, and the dispute must remain unsettled. Take, for example,

the theistic proposition: There is a Supreme Being; and on the other hand, the

atheistic counter-statement: There exists no Supreme Being; or, in

psychology: Everything that thinks possesses the attribute of absolute and

permanent unity, which is utterly different from the transitory unity of

material phenomena; and the counter-proposition: The soul is not an

immaterial unity, and its nature is transitory, like that of phenomena. The

objects of these questions contain no heterogeneous or contradictory

elements, for they relate to things in themselves, and not to phenomena.

There would arise, indeed, a real contradiction, if reason came forward with a

statement on the negative side of these questions alone. As regards the

criticism to which the grounds of proof on the affirmative side must be

subjected, it may be freely admitted, without necessitating the surrender of

the affirmative propositions, which have, at least, the interest of reason in

their favour — an advantage which the opposite party cannot lay claim to.

              I cannot agree with the opinion of several admirable thinkers- Sulzer

among the rest — that, in spite of the weakness of the arguments hitherto in

use, we may hope, one day, to see sufficient demonstrations of the two

cardinal propositions of pure reason — the existence of a Supreme Being,

and the immortality of the soul. I am certain, on the contrary, that this will

never be the case. For on what ground can reason base such syntheticalpropositions, which do not relate to the objects of experience and their

internal possibility? But it is also demonstratively certain that no one will

ever be able to maintain the contrary with the least show of probability. For,

as he can attempt such a proof solely upon the basis of pure reason, he is

bound to prove that a Supreme Being, and a thinking subject in the character

of a pure intelligence, are impossible. But where will he find the knowledge

which can enable him to enounce synthetical judgements in regard to things

which transcend the region of experience? We may, therefore, rest assured

that the opposite never will be demonstrated. We need not, then, have

recourse to scholastic arguments; we may always admit the truth of those

propositions which are consistent with the speculative interests of reason in

the sphere of experience, and form, moreover, the only means of uniting the

speculative with the practical interest. Our opponent, who must not be

considered here as a critic solely, we can be ready to meet with a non liquet

which cannot fail to disconcert him; while we cannot deny his right to a

similar retort, as we have on our side the advantage of the support of the

subjective maxim of reason, and can therefore look upon all his sophistical

arguments with calm indifference.

              From this point of view, there is properly no antithetic of pure

reason. For the only arena for such a struggle would be upon the field of pure

theology and psychology; but on this ground there can appear no combatant

whom we need to fear. Ridicule and boasting can be his only weapons; and

these may be laughed at, as mere child’s play. This consideration restores to

Reason her courage; for what source of confidence could be found, if she,

whose vocation it is to destroy error, were at variance with herself and

without any reasonable hope of ever reaching a state of permanent repose?

              Everything in nature is good for some purpose. Even poisons are

serviceable; they destroy the evil effects of other poisons generated in our

system, and must always find a place in every complete pharmacopoeia. The

objections raised against the fallacies and sophistries of speculative reason,

are objections given by the nature of this reason itself, and must therefore

have a destination and purpose which can only be for the good of humanity.

For what purpose has Providence raised many objects, in which we have the

deepest interest, so far above us, that we vainly try to cognize them with

certainty, and our powers of mental vision are rather excited than satisfied by

the glimpses we may chance to seize? It is very doubtful whether it is for ourbenefit to advance bold affirmations regarding subjects involved in such

obscurity; perhaps it would even be detrimental to our best interests. But it is

undoubtedly always beneficial to leave the investigating, as well as the

critical reason, in perfect freedom, and permit it to take charge of its own

interests, which are advanced as much by its limitation, as by its extension of

its views, and which always suffer by the interference of foreign powers

forcing it, against its natural tendencies, to bend to certain preconceived

designs.

              Allow your opponent to say what he thinks reasonable, and combat

him only with the weapons of reason. Have no anxiety for the practical

interests of humanity — these are never imperilled in a purely speculative

dispute. Such a dispute serves merely to disclose the antinomy of reason,

which, as it has its source in the nature of reason, ought to be thoroughly

investigated. Reason is benefited by the examination of a subject on both

sides, and its judgements are corrected by being limited. It is not the matter

that may give occasion to dispute, but the manner. For it is perfectly

permissible to employ, in the presence of reason, the language of a firmly

rooted faith, even after we have been obliged to renounce all pretensions to

knowledge.

              If we were to ask the dispassionate David Hume — a philosopher

endowed, in a degree that few are, with a well-balanced judgement: What

motive induced you to spend so much labour and thought in undermining the

consoling and beneficial persuasion that reason is capable of assuring us of

the existence, and presenting us with a determinate conception of a Supreme

Being?— his answer would be: Nothing but the desire of teaching reason to

know its own powers better, and, at the same time, a dislike of the procedure

by which that faculty was compelled to support foregone conclusions, and

prevented from confessing the internal weaknesses which it cannot but feel

when it enters upon a rigid self-examination. If, on the other hand, we were to

ask Priestley — a philosopher who had no taste for transcendental

speculation, but was entirely devoted to the principles of empiricism — what

his motives were for overturning those two main pillars of religion — the

doctrines of the freedom of the will and the immortality of the soul (in his

view the hope of a future life is but the expectation of the miracle of

resurrection)- this philosopher, himself a zealous and pious teacher of

religion, could give no other answer than this: I acted in the interest ofreason, which always suffers, when certain objects are explained and judged

by a reference to other supposed laws than those of material nature — the

only laws which we know in a determinate manner. It would be unfair to

decry the latter philosopher, who endeavoured to harmonize his paradoxical

opinions with the interests of religion, and to undervalue an honest and

reflecting man, because he finds himself at a loss the moment he has left the

field of natural science. The same grace must be accorded to Hume, a man

not less well-disposed, and quite as blameless in his moral character, and who

pushed his abstract speculations to an extreme length, because, as he rightly

believed, the object of them lies entirely beyond the bounds of natural

science, and within the sphere of pure ideas.

              What is to be done to provide against the danger which seems in the

present case to menace the best interests of humanity? The course to be

pursued in reference to this subject is a perfectly plain and natural one. Let

each thinker pursue his own path; if he shows talent, if be gives evidence of

profound thought, in one word, if he shows that he possesses the power of

reasoning — reason is always the gainer. If you have recourse to other

means, if you attempt to coerce reason, if you raise the cry of treason to

humanity, if you excite the feelings of the crowd, which can neither

understand nor sympathize with such subtle speculations — you will only

make yourselves ridiculous. For the question does not concern the advantage

or disadvantage which we are expected to reap from such inquiries; the

question is merely how far reason can advance in the field of speculation,

apart from all kinds of interest, and whether we may depend upon the

exertions of speculative reason, or must renounce all reliance on it. Instead of

joining the combatants, it is your part to be a tranquil spectator of the struggle

— a laborious struggle for the parties engaged, but attended, in its progress as

well as in its result, with the most advantageous consequences for the

interests of thought and knowledge. It is absurd to expect to be enlightened

by Reason, and at the same time to prescribe to her what side of the question

she must adopt. Moreover, reason is sufficiently held in check by its own

power, the limits imposed on it by its own nature are sufficient; it is

unnecessary for you to place over it additional guards, as if its power were

dangerous to the constitution of the intellectual state. In the dialectic of

reason there is no victory gained which need in the least disturb your

tranquility.              The strife of dialectic is a necessity of reason, and we cannot but

wish that it had been conducted long ere this with that perfect freedom which

ought to be its essential condition. In this case, we should have had at an

earlier period a matured and profound criticism, which must have put an end

to all dialectical disputes, by exposing the illusions and prejudices in which

they originated.

              There is in human nature an unworthy propensity — a propensity

which, like everything that springs from nature, must in its final purpose be

conducive to the good of humanity — to conceal our real sentiments, and to

give expression only to certain received opinions, which are regarded as at

once safe and promotive of the common good. It is true, this tendency, not

only to conceal our real sentiments, but to profess those which may gain us

favour in the eyes of society, has not only civilized, but, in a certain measure,

moralized us; as no one can break through the outward covering of

respectability, honour, and morality, and thus the seemingly-good examples

which we which we see around us form an excellent school for moral

improvement, so long as our belief in their genuineness remains unshaken.

But this disposition to represent ourselves as better than we are, and to utter

opinions which are not our own, can be nothing more than a kind of

provisionary arrangement of nature to lead us from the rudeness of an

uncivilized state, and to teach us how to assume at least the appearance and

manner of the good we see. But when true principles have been developed,

and have obtained a sure foundation in our habit of thought, this

conventionalism must be attacked with earnest vigour, otherwise it corrupts

the heart, and checks the growth of good dispositions with the mischievous

weed of air appearances.

              I am sorry to remark the same tendency to misrepresentation and

hypocrisy in the sphere of speculative discussion, where there is less

temptation to restrain the free expression of thought. For what can be more

prejudicial to the interests of intelligence than to falsify our real sentiments,

to conceal the doubts which we feel in regard to our statements, or to

maintain the validity of grounds of proof which we well know to be

insufficient? So long as mere personal vanity is the source of these unworthy

artifices — and this is generally the case in speculative discussions, which are

mostly destitute of practical interest, and are incapable of complete

demonstration — the vanity of the opposite party exaggerates as much on theother side; and thus the result is the same, although it is not brought about so

soon as if the dispute had been conducted in a sincere and upright spirit. But

where the mass entertains the notion that the aim of certain subtle speculators

is nothing less than to shake the very foundations of public welfare and

morality — it seems not only prudent, but even praise worthy, to maintain the

good cause by illusory arguments, rather than to give to our supposed

opponents the advantage of lowering our declarations to the moderate tone of

a merely practical conviction, and of compelling us to confess our inability to

attain to apodeictic certainty in speculative subjects. But we ought to reflect

that there is nothing, in the world more fatal to the maintenance of a good

cause than deceit, misrepresentation, and falsehood. That the strictest laws of

honesty should be observed in the discussion of a purely speculative subject

is the least requirement that can be made. If we could reckon with security

even upon so little, the conflict of speculative reason regarding the important

questions of God, immortality, and freedom, would have been either decided

long ago, or would very soon be brought to a conclusion. But, in general, the

uprightness of the defence stands in an inverse ratio to the goodness of the

cause; and perhaps more honesty and fairness are shown by those who deny

than by those who uphold these doctrines.

              I shall persuade myself, then, that I have readers who do not wish to

see a righteous cause defended by unfair arguments. Such will now recognize

the fact that, according to the principles of this Critique, if we consider not

what is, but what ought to be the case, there can be really no polemic of pure

reason. For how can two persons dispute about a thing, the reality of which

neither can present in actual or even in possible experience? Each adopts the

plan of meditating on his idea for the purpose of drawing from the idea, if he

can, what is more than the idea, that is, the reality of the object which it

indicates. How shall they settle the dispute, since neither is able to make his

assertions directly comprehensible and certain, but must restrict himself to

attacking and confuting those of his opponent? All statements enounced by

pure reason transcend the conditions of possible experience, beyond the

sphere of which we can discover no criterion of truth, while they are at the

same time framed in accordance with the laws of the understanding, which

are applicable only to experience; and thus it is the fate of all such speculative

discussions that while the one party attacks the weaker side of his opponent,

he infallibly lays open his own weaknesses.              The critique of pure reason may be regarded as the highest tribunal

for all speculative disputes; for it is not involved in these disputes, which

have an immediate relation to certain objects and not to the laws of the mind,

but is instituted for the purpose of determining the rights and limits of reason.

              Without the control of criticism, reason is, as it were, in a state of

nature, and can only establish its claims and assertions by war. Criticism, on

the contrary, deciding all questions according to the fundamental laws of its

own institution, secures to us the peace of law and order, and enables us to

discuss all differences in the more tranquil manner of a legal process. In the

former case, disputes are ended by victory, which both sides may claim and

which is followed by a hollow armistice; in the latter, by a sentence, which,

as it strikes at the root of all speculative differences, ensures to all concerned

a lasting peace. The endless disputes of a dogmatizing reason compel us to

look for some mode of arriving at a settled decision by a critical investigation

of reason itself; just as Hobbes maintains that the state of nature is a state of

injustice and violence, and that we must leave it and submit ourselves to the

constraint of law, which indeed limits individual freedom, but only that it

may consist with the freedom of others and with the common good of all.

              This freedom will, among other things, permit of our openly stating

the difficulties and doubts which we are ourselves unable to solve, without

being decried on that account as turbulent and dangerous citizens. This

privilege forms part of the native rights of human reason, which recognizes

no other judge than the universal reason of humanity; and as this reason is the

source of all progress and improvement, such a privilege is to be held sacred

and inviolable. It is unwise, moreover, to denounce as dangerous any bold

assertions against, or rash attacks upon, an opinion which is held by the

largest and most moral class of the community; for that would be giving them

an importance which they do not deserve. When I hear that the freedom of

the will, the hope of a future life, and the existence of God have been

overthrown by the arguments of some able writer, I feel a strong desire to

read his book; for I expect that he will add to my knowledge and impart

greater clearness and distinctness to my views by the argumentative power

shown in his writings. But I am perfectly certain, even before I have opened

the book, that he has not succeeded in a single point, not because I believe I

am in possession of irrefutable demonstrations of these important

propositions, but because this transcendental critique, which has disclosed tome the power and the limits of pure reason, has fully convinced me that, as it

is insufficient to establish the affirmative, it is as powerless, and even more

so, to assure us of the truth of the negative answer to these questions. From

what source does this free-thinker derive his knowledge that there is, for

example, no Supreme Being? This proposition lies out of the field of possible

experience, and, therefore, beyond the limits of human cognition. But I would

not read at, all the answer which the dogmatical maintainer of the good cause

makes to his opponent, because I know well beforehand, that he will merely

attack the fallacious grounds of his adversary, without being able to establish

his own assertions. Besides, a new illusory argument, in the construction of

which talent and acuteness are shown, is suggestive of new ideas and new

trains of reasoning, and in this respect the old and everyday sophistries are

quite useless. Again, the dogmatical opponent of religion gives employment

to criticism, and enables us to test and correct its principles, while there is no

occasion for anxiety in regard to the influence and results of his reasoning.

              But, it will be said, must we not warn the youth entrusted to

academical care against such writings, must we not preserve them from the

knowledge of these dangerous assertions, until their judgement is ripened, or

rather until the doctrines which we wish to inculcate are so firmly rooted in

their minds as to withstand all attempts at instilling the contrary dogmas,

from whatever quarter they may come?

              If we are to confine ourselves to the dogmatical procedure in the

sphere of pure reason, and find ourselves unable to settle such disputes

otherwise than by becoming a party in them, and setting counter-assertions

against the statements advanced by our opponents, there is certainly no plan

more advisable for the moment, but, at the same time, none more absurd and

inefficient for the future, than this retaining of the youthful mind under

guardianship for a time, and thus preserving it — for so long at least — from

seduction into error. But when, at a later period, either curiosity, or the

prevalent fashion of thought places such writings in their hands, will the so-

called convictions of their youth stand firm? The young thinker, who has in

his armoury none but dogmatical weapons with which to resist the attacks of

his opponent, and who cannot detect the latent dialectic which lies in his own

opinions as well as in those of the opposite party, sees the advance of illusory

arguments and grounds of proof which have the advantage of novelty, against

as illusory grounds of proof destitute of this advantage, and which, perhaps,excite the suspicion that the natural credulity of his youth has been abused by

his instructors. He thinks he can find no better means of showing that he has

out grown the discipline of his minority than by despising those well-meant

warnings, and, knowing no system of thought but that of dogmatism, he

drinks deep draughts of the poison that is to sap the principles in which his

early years were trained.

              Exactly the opposite of the system here recommended ought to be

pursued in academical instruction. This can only be effected, however, by a

thorough training in the critical investigation of pure reason. For, in order to

bring the principles of this critique into exercise as soon as possible, and to

demonstrate their perfect even in the presence of the highest degree of

dialectical illusion, the student ought to examine the assertions made on both

sides of speculative questions step by step, and to test them by these

principles. It cannot be a difficult task for him to show the fallacies inherent

in these propositions, and thus he begins early to feel his own power of

securing himself against the influence of such sophistical arguments, which

must finally lose, for him, all their illusory power. And, although the same

blows which overturn the edifice of his opponent are as fatal to his own

speculative structures, if such he has wished to rear; he need not feel any

sorrow in regard to this seeming misfortune, as he has now before him a fair

prospect into the practical region in which he may reasonably hope to find a

more secure foundation for a rational system.

              There is, accordingly, no proper polemic in the sphere of pure

reason. Both parties beat the air and fight with their own shadows, as they

pass beyond the limits of nature, and can find no tangible point of attack —

no firm footing for their dogmatical conflict. Fight as vigorously as they may,

the shadows which they hew down, immediately start up again, like the

heroes in Walhalla, and renew the bloodless and unceasing contest.

              But neither can we admit that there is any proper sceptical

employment of pure reason, such as might be based upon the principle of

neutrality in all speculative disputes. To excite reason against itself, to place

weapons in the hands of the party on the one side as well as in those of the

other, and to remain an undisturbed and sarcastic spectator of the fierce

struggle that ensues, seems, from the dogmatical point of view, to be a part

fitting only a malevolent disposition. But, when the sophist evidences an

invincible obstinacy and blindness, and a pride which no criticism canmoderate, there is no other practicable course than to oppose to this pride and

obstinacy similar feelings and pretensions on the other side, equally well or

ill founded, so that reason, staggered by the reflections thus forced upon it,

finds it necessary to moderate its confidence in such pretensions and to listen

to the advice of criticism. But we cannot stop at these doubts, much less

regard the conviction of our ignorance, not only as a cure for the conceit

natural to dogmatism, but as the settlement of the disputes in which reason is

involved with itself. On the contrary, scepticism is merely a means of

awakening reason from its dogmatic dreams and exciting it to a more careful

investigation into its own powers and pretensions. But, as scepticism appears

to be the shortest road to a permanent peace in the domain of philosophy, and

as it is the track pursued by the many who aim at giving a philosophical

colouring to their contemptuous dislike of all inquiries of this kind, I think it

necessary to present to my readers this mode of thought in its true light.

              Scepticism not a Permanent State for Human Reason.

 

              The consciousness of ignorance — unless this ignorance is

recognized to be absolutely necessary ought, instead of forming the

conclusion of my inquiries, to be the strongest motive to the pursuit of them.

All ignorance is either ignorance of things or of the limits of knowledge. If

my ignorance is accidental and not necessary, it must incite me, in the first

case, to a dogmatical inquiry regarding the objects of which I am ignorant; in

the second, to a critical investigation into the bounds of all possible

knowledge. But that my ignorance is absolutely necessary and unavoidable,

and that it consequently absolves from the duty of all further investigation, is

a fact which cannot be made out upon empirical grounds — from observation

— but upon critical grounds alone, that is, by a thoroughgoing investigation

into the primary sources of cognition. It follows that the determination of the

bounds of reason can be made only on a priori grounds; while the empirical

limitation of reason, which is merely an indeterminate cognition of an

ignorance that can never be completely removed, can take place only a

posteriori. In other words, our empirical knowledge is limited by that which

yet remains for us to know. The former cognition of our ignorance, which is

possible only on a rational basis, is a science; the latter is merely a

perception, and we cannot say how far the inferences drawn from it may

extend. If I regard the earth, as it really appears to my senses, as a flat

surface, I am ignorant how far this surface extends. But experience teachesme that, how far soever I go, I always see before me a space in which I can

proceed farther; and thus I know the limits — merely visual — of my actual

knowledge of the earth, although I am ignorant of the limits of the earth

itself. But if I have got so far as to know that the earth is a sphere, and that its

surface is spherical, I can cognize a priori and determine upon principles,

from my knowledge of a small part of this surface — say to the extent of a

degree — the diameter and circumference of the earth; and although I am

ignorant of the objects which this surface contains, I have a perfect

knowledge of its limits and extent.

              The sum of all the possible objects of our cognition seems to us to be

a level surface, with an apparent horizon — that which forms the limit of its

extent, and which has been termed by us the idea of unconditioned totality.

To reach this limit by empirical means is impossible, and all attempts to

determine it a priori according to a principle, are alike in vain. But all the

questions raised by pure reason relate to that which lies beyond this horizon,

or, at least, in its boundary line.

              The celebrated David Hume was one of those geographers of human

reason who believe that they have given a sufficient answer to all such

questions by declaring them to lie beyond the horizon of our knowledge — a

horizon which, however, Hume was unable to determine. His attention

especially was directed to the principle of causality; and he remarked with

perfect justice that the truth of this principle, and even the objective validity

of the conception of a cause, was not commonly based upon clear insight,

that is, upon a priori cognition. Hence he concluded that this law does not

derive its authority from its universality and necessity, but merely from its

general applicability in the course of experience, and a kind of subjective

necessity thence arising, which he termed habit. From the inability of reason

to establish this principle as a necessary law for the acquisition of all

experience, he inferred the nullity of all the attempts of reason to pass the

region of the empirical.

              This procedure of subjecting the facta of reason to examination, and,

if necessary, to disapproval, may be termed the censura of reason. This

censura must inevitably lead us to doubts regarding all transcendent

employment of principles. But this is only the second step in our inquiry. The

first step in regard to the subjects of pure reason, and which marks the

infancy of that faculty, is that of dogmatism. The second, which we have justmentioned, is that of scepticism, and it gives evidence that our judgement has

been improved by experience. But a third step is necessary — indicative of

the maturity and manhood of the judgement, which now lays a firm

foundation upon universal and necessary principles. This is the period of

criticism, in which we do not examine the facta of reason, but reason itself, in

the whole extent of its powers, and in regard to its capability of a priori

cognition; and thus we determine not merely the empirical and ever-shifting

bounds of our knowledge, but its necessary and eternal limits. We

demonstrate from indubitable principles, not merely our ignorance in respect

to this or that subject, but in regard to all possible questions of a certain class.

Thus scepticism is a resting place for reason, in which it may reflect on its

dogmatical wanderings and gain some knowledge of the region in which it

happens to be, that it may pursue its way with greater certainty; but it cannot

be its permanent dwelling-place. It must take up its abode only in the region

of complete certitude, whether this relates to the cognition of objects

themselves, or to the limits which bound all our cognition.

              Reason is not to be considered as an indefinitely extended plane, of

the bounds of which we have only a general knowledge; it ought rather to be

compared to a sphere, the radius of which may be found from the curvature

of its surface — that is, the nature of a priori synthetical propositions — and,

consequently, its circumference and extent. Beyond the sphere of experience

there are no objects which it can cognize; nay, even questions regarding such

supposititious objects relate only to the subjective principles of a complete

determination of the relations which exist between the understanding-

conceptions which lie within this sphere.

              We are actually in possession of a priori synthetical cognitions, as is

proved by the existence of the principles of the understanding, which

anticipate experience. If any one cannot comprehend the possibility of these

principles, he may have some reason to doubt whether they are really a priori;

but he cannot on this account declare them to be impossible, and affirm the

nullity of the steps which reason may have taken under their guidance. He

can only say: If we perceived their origin and their authenticity, we should be

able to determine the extent and limits of reason; but, till we can do this, all

propositions regarding the latter are mere random assertions. In this view, the

doubt respecting all dogmatical philosophy, which proceeds without the

guidance of criticism, is well grounded; but we cannot therefore deny toreason the ability to construct a sound philosophy, when the way has been

prepared by a thorough critical investigation. All the conceptions produced,

and all the questions raised, by pure reason, do not lie in the sphere of

experience, but in that of reason itself, and hence they must be solved, and

shown to be either valid or inadmissible, by that faculty. We have no right to

decline the solution of such problems, on the ground that the solution can be

discovered only from the nature of things, and under pretence of the

limitation of human faculties, for reason is the sole creator of all these ideas,

and is therefore bound either to establish their validity or to expose their

illusory nature.

              The polemic of scepticism is properly directed against the dogmatist,

who erects a system of philosophy without having examined the fundamental

objective principles on which it is based, for the purpose of evidencing the

futility of his designs, and thus bringing him to a knowledge of his own

powers. But, in itself, scepticism does not give us any certain information in

regard to the bounds of our knowledge. All unsuccessful dogmatical attempts

of reason are facia, which it is always useful to submit to the censure of the

sceptic. But this cannot help us to any decision regarding the expectations

which reason cherishes of better success in future endeavours; the

investigations of scepticism cannot, therefore, settle the dispute regarding the

rights and powers of human reason.

              Hume is perhaps the ablest and most ingenious of all sceptical

philosophers, and his writings have, undoubtedly, exerted the most powerful

influence in awakening reason to a thorough investigation into its own

powers. It will, therefore, well repay our labours to consider for a little the

course of reasoning which he followed and the errors into which he strayed,

although setting out on the path of truth and certitude.

              Hume was probably aware, although he never clearly developed the

notion, that we proceed in judgements of a certain class beyond our

conception if the object. I have termed this kind of judgement synthetical. As

regard the manner in which I pass beyond my conception by the aid of

experience, no doubts can be entertained. Experience is itself a synthesis of

perceptions; and it employs perceptions to increment the conception, which I

obtain by means of another perception. But we feel persuaded that we are

able to proceed beyond a conception, and to extend our cognition a priori. We

attempt this in two ways — either, through the pure understanding, in relationto that which may become an object of experience, or, through pure reason,

in relation to such properties of things, or of the existence of things, as can

never be presented in any experience. This sceptical philosopher did not

distinguish these two kinds of judgements, as he ought to have done, but

regarded this augmentation of conceptions, and, if we may so express

ourselves, the spontaneous generation of understanding and reason,

independently of the impregnation of experience, as altogether impossible.

The so-called a priori principles of these faculties he consequently held to be

invalid and imaginary, and regarded them as nothing but subjective habits of

thought originating in experience, and therefore purely empirical and

contingent rules, to which we attribute a spurious necessity and universality.

In support of this strange assertion, he referred us to the generally

acknowledged principle of the relation between cause and effect. No faculty

of the mind can conduct us from the conception of a thing to the existence of

something else; and hence he believed he could infer that, without

experience, we possess no source from which we can augment a conception,

and no ground sufficient to justify us in framing a judgement that is to extend

our cognition a priori. That the light of the sun, which shines upon a piece of

wax, at the same time melts it, while it hardens clay, no power of the

understanding could infer from the conceptions which we previously

possessed of these substances; much less is there any a priori law that could

conduct us to such a conclusion, which experience alone can certify. On the

other hand, we have seen in our discussion of transcendental logic, that,

although we can never proceed immediately beyond the content of the

conception which is given us, we can always cognize completely a priori —

in relation, however, to a third term, namely, possible experience — the law

of its connection with other things. For example, if I observe that a piece of

wax melts, I can cognize a priori that there must have been something (the

sun’s heat) preceding, which this law; although, without the aid of

experience, I could not cognize a priori and in a determinate manner either

the cause from the effect, or the effect from the cause. Hume was, therefore,

wrong in inferring, from the contingency of the determination according to

law, the contingency of the law itself; and the passing beyond the conception

of a thing to possible experience (which is an a priori proceeding, constituting

the objective reality of the conception), he confounded with our synthesis of

objects in actual experience, which is always, of course, empirical. Thus, too,

he regarded the principle of affinity, which has its seat in the understandingand indicates a necessary connection, as a mere rule of association, lying in

the imitative faculty of imagination, which can present only contingent, and

not objective connections.

              The sceptical errors of this remarkably acute thinker arose

principally from a defect, which was common to him with the dogmatists,

namely, that he had never made a systematic review of all the different kinds

of a priori synthesis performed by the understanding. Had he done so, he

would have found, to take one example among many, that the principle of

permanence was of this character, and that it, as well as the principle of

causality, anticipates experience. In this way he might have been able to

describe the determinate limits of the a priori operations of understanding and

reason. But he merely declared the understanding to be limited, instead of

showing what its limits were; he created a general mistrust in the power of

our faculties, without giving us any determinate knowledge of the bounds of

our necessary and unavoidable ignorance; he examined and condemned some

of the principles of the understanding, without investigating all its powers

with the completeness necessary to criticism. He denies, with truth, certain

powers to the understanding, but he goes further, and declares it to be utterly

inadequate to the a priori extension of knowledge, although he has not fully

examined all the powers which reside in the faculty; and thus the fate which

always overtakes scepticism meets him too. That is to say, his own

declarations are doubted, for his objections were based upon facta, which are

contingent, and not upon principles, which can alone demonstrate the

necessary invalidity of all dogmatical assertions.

              As Hume makes no distinction between the well-grounded claims of

the understanding and the dialectical pretensions of reason, against which,

however, his attacks are mainly directed, reason does not feel itself shut out

from all attempts at the extension of a priori cognition, and hence it refuses,

in spite of a few checks in this or that quarter, to relinquish such efforts. For

one naturally arms oneself to resist an attack, and becomes more obstinate in

the resolve to establish the claims he has advanced. But a complete review of

the powers of reason, and the conviction thence arising that we are in

possession of a limited field of action, while we must admit the vanity of

higher claims, puts an end to all doubt and dispute, and induces reason to rest

satisfied with the undisturbed possession of its limited domain.

              To the uncritical dogmatist, who has not surveyed the sphere of hisunderstanding, nor determined, in accordance with principles, the limits of

possible cognition, who, consequently, is ignorant of his own powers, and

believes he will discover them by the attempts he makes in the field of

cognition, these attacks of scepticism are not only dangerous, but destructive.

For if there is one proposition in his chain of reasoning which be he cannot

prove, or the fallacy in which be cannot evolve in accordance with a

principle, suspicion falls on all his statements, however plausible they may

appear.

              And thus scepticism, the bane of dogmatical philosophy, conducts us

to a sound investigation into the understanding and the reason. When we are

thus far advanced, we need fear no further attacks; for the limits of our

domain are clearly marked out, and we can make no claims nor become

involved in any disputes regarding the region that lies beyond these limits.

Thus the sceptical procedure in philosophy does not present any solution of

the problems of reason, but it forms an excellent exercise for its powers,

awakening its circumspection, and indicating the means whereby it may most

fully establish its claims to its legitimate possessions.        Section III. The Discipline of Pure Reason in Hypothesis.

 

 

              This critique of reason has now taught us that all its efforts to extend

the bounds of knowledge, by means of pure speculation, are utterly fruitless.

So much the wider field, it may appear, lies open to hypothesis; as, where we

cannot know with certainty, we are at liberty to make guesses and to form

suppositions.

              Imagination may be allowed, under the strict surveillance of reason,

to invent suppositions; but, these must be based on something that is perfectly

certain — and that is the possibility of the object. If we are well assured upon

this point, it is allowable to have recourse to supposition in regard to the

reality of the object; but this supposition must, unless it is utterly groundless,

be connected, as its ground of explanation, with that which is really given and

absolutely certain. Such a supposition is termed a hypothesis.

              It is beyond our power to form the least conception a priori of the

possibility of dynamical connection in phenomena; and the category of the

pure understanding will not enable us to ex. cogitate any such connection, but

merely helps us to understand it, when we meet with it in experience. For this

reason we cannot, in accordance with the categories, imagine or invent any

object or any property of an object not given, or that may not be given in

experience, and employ it in a hypothesis; otherwise, we should be basing

our chain of reasoning upon mere chimerical fancies, and not upon

conceptions of things. Thus, we have no right to assume the existence of new

powers, not existing in nature — for example, an understanding with a non-

sensuous intuition, a force of attraction without contact, or some new kind of

substances occupying space, and yet without the property of impenetrability

— and, consequently, we cannot assume that there is any other kind of

community among substances than that observable in experience, any kind of

presence than that in space, or any kind of duration than that in time. In one

word, the conditions of possible experience are for reason the only conditions

of the possibility of things; reason cannot venture to form, independently of

these conditions, any conceptions of things, because such conceptions,

although not self-contradictory, are without object and without application.              The conceptions of reason are, as we have already shown, mere

ideas, and do not relate to any object in any kind of experience. At the same

time, they do not indicate imaginary or possible objects. They are purely

problematical in their nature and, as aids to the heuristic exercise of the

faculties, form the basis of the regulative principles for the systematic

employment of the understanding in the field of experience. If we leave this

ground of experience, they become mere fictions of thought, the possibility of

which is quite indemonstrable; and they cannot, consequently, be employed

as hypotheses in the explanation of real phenomena. It is quite admissible to

cogitate the soul as simple, for the purpose of enabling ourselves to employ

the idea of a perfect and necessary unity of all the faculties of the mind as the

principle of all our inquiries into its internal phenomena, although we cannot

cognize this unity in concreto. But to assume that the soul is a simple

substance (a transcendental conception) would be enouncing a proposition

which is not only indemonstrable — as many physical hypotheses are — but

a proposition which is purely arbitrary, and in the highest degree rash. The

simple is never presented in experience; and, if by substance is here meant

the permanent object of sensuous intuition, the possibility of a simple

phenomenon is perfectly inconceivable. Reason affords no good grounds for

admitting the existence of intelligible beings, or of intelligible properties of

sensuous things, although — as we have no conception either of their

possibility or of their impossibility — it will always be out of our power to

affirm dogmatically that they do not exist. In the explanation of given

phenomena, no other things and no other grounds of explanation can be

employed than those which stand in connection with the given phenomena

according to the known laws of experience. A transcendental hypothesis, in

which a mere idea of reason is employed to explain the phenomena of nature,

would not give us any better insight into a phenomenon, as we should be

trying to explain what we do not sufficiently understand from known

empirical principles, by what we do not understand at all. The principles of

such a hypothesis might conduce to the satisfaction of reason, but it would

not assist the understanding in its application to objects. Order and

conformity to aims in the sphere of nature must be themselves explained

upon natural grounds and according to natural laws; and the wildest

hypotheses, if they are only physical, are here more admissible than a

hyperphysical hypothesis, such as that of a divine author. For such a

hypothesis would introduce the principle of ignava ratio, which requires us togive up the search for causes that might be discovered in the course of

experience and to rest satisfied with a mere idea. As regards the absolute

totality of the grounds of explanation in the series of these causes, this can be

no hindrance to the understanding in the case of phenomena; because, as they

are to us nothing more than phenomena, we have no right to look for

anything like completeness in the synthesis of the series of their conditions.

              Transcendental hypotheses are therefore inadmissible; and we

cannot use the liberty of employing, in the absence of physical, hyperphysical

grounds of explanation. And this for two reasons; first, because such

hypothesis do not advance reason, but rather stop it in its progress; secondly,

because this licence would render fruitless all its exertions in its own proper

sphere, which is that of experience. For, when the explanation of natural

phenomena happens to be difficult, we have constantly at hand a

transcendental ground of explanation, which lifts us above the necessity of

investigating nature; and our inquiries are brought to a close, not because we

have obtained all the requisite knowledge, but because we abut upon a

principle which is incomprehensible and which, indeed, is so far back in the

track of thought as to contain the conception of the absolutely primal being.

              The next requisite for the admissibility of a hypothesis is its

sufficiency. That is, it must determine a priori the consequences which are

given in experience and which are supposed to follow from the hypothesis

itself. If we require to employ auxiliary hypotheses, the suspicion naturally

arises that they are mere fictions; because the necessity for each of them

requires the same justification as in the case of the original hypothesis, and

thus their testimony is invalid. If we suppose the existence of an infinitely

perfect cause, we possess sufficient grounds for the explanation of the

conformity to aims, the order and the greatness which we observe in the

universe; but we find ourselves obliged, when we observe the evil in the

world and the exceptions to these laws, to employ new hypothesis in support

of the original one. We employ the idea of the simple nature of the human

soul as the foundation of all the theories we may form of its phenomena; but

when we meet with difficulties in our way, when we observe in the soul

phenomena similar to the changes which take place in matter, we require to

call in new auxiliary hypotheses. These may, indeed, not be false, but we do

not know them to be true, because the only witness to their certitude is the

hypothesis which they themselves have been called in to explain.              We are not discussing the above-mentioned assertions regarding the

immaterial unity of the soul and the existence of a Supreme Being as

dogmata, which certain philosophers profess to demonstrate a priori, but

purely as hypotheses. In the former case, the dogmatist must take care that his

arguments possess the apodeictic certainty of a demonstration. For the

assertion that the reality of such ideas is probable is as absurd as a proof of

the probability of a proposition in geometry. Pure abstract reason, apart from

all experience, can either cognize nothing at all; and hence the judgements it

enounces are never mere opinions, they are either apodeictic certainties, or

declarations that nothing can be known on the subject. Opinions and probable

judgements on the nature of things can only be employed to explain given

phenomena, or they may relate to the effect, in accordance with empirical

laws, of an actually existing cause. In other words, we must restrict the

sphere of opinion to the world of experience and nature. Beyond this region

opinion is mere invention; unless we are groping about for the truth on a path

not yet fully known, and have some hopes of stumbling upon it by chance.

              But, although hypotheses are inadmissible in answers to the

questions of pure speculative reason, they may be employed in the defence of

these answers. That is to say, hypotheses are admissible in polemic, but not in

the sphere of dogmatism. By the defence of statements of this character, I do

not mean an attempt at discovering new grounds for their support, but merely

the refutation of the arguments of opponents. All a priori synthetical

propositions possess the peculiarity that, although the philosopher who

maintains the reality of the ideas contained in the proposition is not in

possession of sufficient knowledge to establish the certainty of his

statements, his opponent is as little able to prove the truth of the opposite.

This equality of fortune does not allow the one party to be superior to the

other in the sphere of speculative cognition; and it is this sphere, accordingly,

that is the proper arena of these endless speculative conflicts. But we shall

afterwards show that, in relation to its practical exercise, Reason has the right

of admitting what, in the field of pure speculation, she would not be justified

in supposing, except upon perfectly sufficient grounds; because all such

suppositions destroy the necessary completeness of speculation — a

condition which the practical reason, however, does not consider to be

requisite. In this sphere, therefore, Reason is mistress of a possession, her

title to which she does not require to prove — which, in fact, she could not

do. The burden of proof accordingly rests upon the opponent. But as he hasjust as little knowledge regarding the subject discussed, and is as little able to

prove the non-existence of the object of an idea, as the philosopher on the

other side is to demonstrate its reality, it is evident that there is an advantage

on the side of the philosopher who maintains his proposition as a practically

necessary supposition (melior est conditio possidentis). For he is at liberty to

employ, in self-defence, the same weapons as his opponent makes use of in

attacking him; that is, he has a right to use hypotheses not for the purpose of

supporting the arguments in favour of his own propositions, but to show that

his opponent knows no more than himself regarding the subject under

‘discussion and cannot boast of any speculative advantage.

              Hypotheses are, therefore, admissible in the sphere of pure reason

only as weapons for self-defence, and not as supports to dogmatical

assertions. But the opposing party we must always seek for in ourselves. For

speculative reason is, in the sphere of transcendentalism, dialectical in its

own nature. The difficulties and objections we have to fear lie in ourselves.

They are like old but never superannuated claims; and we must seek them

out, and settle them once and for ever, if we are to expect a permanent peace.

External tranquility is hollow and unreal. The root of these contradictions,

which lies in the nature of human reason, must be destroyed; and this can

only be done by giving it, in the first instance, freedom to grow, nay, by

nourishing it, that it may send out shoots, and thus betray its own existence. It

is our duty, therefore, to try to discover new objections, to put weapons in the

bands of our opponent, and to grant him the most favourable position in the

arena that he can wish. We have nothing to fear from these concessions; on

the contrary, we may rather hope that we shall thus make ourselves master of

a possession which no one will ever venture to dispute.

              The thinker requires, to be fully equipped, the hypotheses of pure

reason, which, although but leaden weapons (for they have not been steeled

in the armoury of experience), are as useful as any that can be employed by

his opponents. If, accordingly, we have assumed, from a non-speculative

point of view, the immaterial nature of the soul, and are met by the objection

that experience seems to prove that the growth and decay of our mental

faculties are mere modifications of the sensuous organism — we can weaken

the force of this objection by the assumption that the body is nothing but the

fundamental phenomenon, to which, as a necessary condition, all sensibility,

and consequently all thought, relates in the present state of our existence; andthat the separation of soul and body forms the conclusion of the sensuous

exercise of our power of cognition and the beginning of the intellectual. The

body would, in this view of the question, be regarded, not as the cause of

thought, but merely as its restrictive condition, as promotive of the sensuous

and animal, but as a hindrance to the pure and spiritual life; and the

dependence of the animal life on the constitution of the body, would not

prove that the whole life of man was also dependent on the state of the

organism. We might go still farther, and discover new objections, or carry out

to their extreme consequences those which have already been adduced.

              Generation, in the human race as well as among the irrational

animals, depends on so many accidents — of occasion, of proper sustenance,

of the laws enacted by the government of a country of vice even, that it is

difficult to believe in the eternal existence of a being whose life has begun

under circumstances so mean and trivial, and so entirely dependent upon our

own control. As regards the continuance of the existence of the whole race,

we need have no difficulties, for accident in single cases is subject to general

laws; but, in the case of each individual, it would seem as if we could hardly

expect so wonderful an effect from causes so insignificant. But, in answer to

these objections, we may adduce the transcendental hypothesis that all life is

properly intelligible, and not subject to changes of time, and that it neither

began in birth, nor will end in death. We may assume that this life is nothing

more than a sensuous representation of pure spiritual life; that the whole

world of sense is but an image, hovering before the faculty of cognition

which we exercise in this sphere, and with no more objective reality than a

dream; and that if we could intuite ourselves and other things as they really

are, we should see ourselves in a world of spiritual natures, our connection

with which did not begin at our birth and will not cease with the destruction

of the body. And so on.

              We cannot be said to know what has been above asserted, nor do we

seriously maintain the truth of these assertions; and the notions therein

indicated are not even ideas of reason, they are purely fictitious conceptions.

But this hypothetical procedure is in perfect conformity with the laws of

reason. Our opponent mistakes the absence of empirical conditions for a

proof of the complete impossibility of all that we have asserted; and we have

to show him that be has not exhausted the whole sphere of possibility and

that he can as little compass that sphere by the laws of experience and nature,as we can lay a secure foundation for the operations of reason beyond the

region of experience. Such hypothetical defences against the pretensions of

an opponent must not be regarded as declarations of opinion. The philosopher

abandons them, so soon as the opposite party renounces its dogmatical

conceit. To maintain a simply negative position in relation to propositions

which rest on an insecure foundation, well befits the moderation of a true

philosopher; but to uphold the objections urged against an opponent as proofs

of the opposite statement is a proceeding just as unwarrantable and arrogant

as it is to attack the position of a philosopher who advances affirmative

propositions regarding such a subject.

              It is evident, therefore, that hypotheses, in the speculative sphere, are

valid, not as independent propositions, but only relatively to opposite

transcendent assumptions. For, to make the principles of possible experience

conditions of the possibility of things in general is just as transcendent a

procedure as to maintain the objective reality of ideas which can be applied to

no objects except such as lie without the limits of possible experience. The

judgements enounced by pure reason must be necessary, or they must not be

enounced at all. Reason cannot trouble herself with opinions. But the

hypotheses we have been discussing are merely problematical judgements,

which can neither be confuted nor proved; while, therefore, they are not

personal opinions, they are indispensable as answers to objections which are

liable to be raised. But we must take care to confine them to this function,

and guard against any assumption on their part of absolute validity, a

proceeding which would involve reason in inextricable difficulties and

contradictions.    Section IV. The Discipline of Pure Reason in Relation to Proofs.

 

 

              It is a peculiarity, which distinguishes the proofs of transcendental

synthetical propositions from those of all other a priori synthetical cognitions,

that reason, in the case of the former, does not apply its conceptions directly

to an object, but is first obliged to prove, a priori, the objective validity of

these conceptions and the possibility of their syntheses. This is not merely a

prudential rule, it is essential to the very possibility of the proof of a

transcendental proposition. If I am required to pass, a priori, beyond the

conception of an object, I find that it is utterly impossible without the

guidance of something which is not contained in the conception. In

mathematics, it is a priori intuition that guides my synthesis; and, in this case,

all our conclusions may be drawn immediately from pure intuition. In

transcendental cognition, so long as we are dealing only with conceptions of

the understanding, we are guided by possible experience. That is to say, a

proof in the sphere of transcendental cognition does not show that the given

conception (that of an event, for example) leads directly to another

conception (that of a cause)- for this would be a saltus which nothing can

justify; but it shows that experience itself, and consequently the object of

experience, is impossible without the connection indicated by these

conceptions. It follows that such a proof must demonstrate the possibility of

arriving, synthetically and a priori, at a certain knowledge of things, which

was not contained in our conceptions of these things. Unless we pay

particular attention to this requirement, our proofs, instead of pursuing the

straight path indicated by reason, follow the tortuous road of mere subjective

association. The illusory conviction, which rests upon subjective causes of

association, and which is considered as resulting from the perception of a real

and objective natural affinity, is always open to doubt and suspicion. For this

reason, all the attempts which have been made to prove the principle of

sufficient reason, have, according to the universal admission of philosophers,

been quite unsuccessful; and, before the appearance of transcendental

criticism, it was considered better, as this principle could not be abandoned,

to appeal boldly to the common sense of mankind (a proceeding which

always proves that the problem, which reason ought to solve, is one in whichphilosophers find great difficulties), rather than attempt to discover new

dogmatical proofs.

              But, if the proposition to be proved is a proposition of pure reason,

and if I aim at passing beyond my empirical conceptions by the aid of mere

ideas, it is necessary that the proof should first show that such a step in

synthesis is possible (which it is not), before it proceeds to prove the truth of

the proposition itself. The so-called proof of the simple nature of the soul

from the unity of apperception, is a very plausible one. But it contains no

answer to the objection, that, as the notion of absolute simplicity is not a

conception which is directly applicable to a perception, but is an idea which

must be inferred — if at all — from observation, it is by no means evident

how the mere fact of consciousness, which is contained in all thought,

although in so far a simple representation, can conduct me to the

consciousness and cognition of a thing which is purely a thinking substance.

When I represent to my mind the power of my body as in motion, my body in

this thought is so far absolute unity, and my representation of it is a simple

one; and hence I can indicate this representation by the motion of a point,

because I have made abstraction of the size or volume of the body. But I

cannot hence infer that, given merely the moving power of a body, the body

may be cogitated as simple substance, merely because the representation in

my mind takes no account of its content in space, and is consequently simple.

The simple, in abstraction, is very different from the objectively simple; and

hence the Ego, which is simple in the first sense, may, in the second sense, as

indicating the soul itself, be a very complex conception, with a very various

content. Thus it is evident that in all such arguments there lurks a paralogism.

We guess (for without some such surmise our suspicion would not be excited

in reference to a proof of this character) at the presence of the paralogism, by

keeping ever before us a criterion of the possibility of those synthetical

propositions which aim at proving more than experience can teach us. This

criterion is obtained from the observation that such proofs do not lead us

directly from the subject of the proposition to be proved to the required

predicate, but find it necessary to presuppose the possibility of extending our

cognition a priori by means of ideas. We must, accordingly, always use the

greatest caution; we require, before attempting any proof, to consider how it

is possible to extend the sphere of cognition by the operations of pure reason,

and from what source we are to derive knowledge, which is not obtained

from the analysis of conceptions, nor relates, by anticipation, to possibleexperience. We shall thus spare ourselves much severe and fruitless labour,

by not expecting from reason what is beyond its power, or rather by

subjecting it to discipline, and teaching it to moderate its vehement desires

for the extension of the sphere of cognition.

              The first rule for our guidance is, therefore, not to attempt a

transcendental proof, before we have considered from what source we are to

derive the principles upon which the proof is to be based, and what right we

have to expect that our conclusions from these principles will be veracious. If

they are principles of the understanding, it is vain to expect that we should

attain by their means to ideas of pure reason; for these principles are valid

only in regard to objects of possible experience. If they are principles of pure

reason, our labour is alike in vain. For the principles of reason, if employed

as objective, are without exception dialectical and possess no validity or

truth, except as regulative principles of the systematic employment of reason

in experience. But when such delusive proof are presented to us, it is our duty

to meet them with the non liquet of a matured judgement; and, although we

are unable to expose the particular sophism upon which the proof is based,

we have a right to demand a deduction of the principles employed in it; and,

if these principles have their origin in pure reason alone, such a deduction is

absolutely impossible. And thus it is unnecessary that we should trouble

ourselves with the exposure and confutation of every sophistical illusion; we

may, at once, bring all dialectic, which is inexhaustible in the production of

fallacies, before the bar of critical reason, which tests the principles upon

which all dialectical procedure is based. The second peculiarity of

transcendental proof is that a transcendental proposition cannot rest upon

more than a single proof. If I am drawing conclusions, not from conceptions,

but from intuition corresponding to a conception, be it pure intuition, as in

mathematics, or empirical, as in natural science, the intuition which forms the

basis of my inferences presents me with materials for many synthetical

propositions, which I can connect in various modes, while, as it is allowable

to proceed from different points in the intention, I can arrive by different

paths at the same proposition.

              But every transcendental proposition sets out from a conception, and

posits the synthetical condition of the possibility of an object according to

this conception. There must, therefore, be but one ground of proof, because it

is the conception alone which determines the object; and thus the proofcannot contain anything more than the determination of the object according

to the conception. In our Transcendental Analytic, for example, we inferred

the principle: Every event has a cause, from the only condition of the

objective possibility of our conception of an event. This is that an event

cannot be determined in time, and consequently cannot form a part of

experience, unless it stands under this dynamical law. This is the only

possible ground of proof; for our conception of an event possesses objective

validity, that is, is a true conception, only because the law of causality

determines an object to which it can refer. Other arguments in support of this

principle have been attempted — such as that from the contingent nature of a

phenomenon; but when this argument is considered, we can discover no

criterion of contingency, except the fact of an event — of something

happening, that is to say, the existence which is preceded by the non-

existence of an object, and thus we fall back on the very thing to be proved. If

the proposition: “Every thinking being is simple,” is to be proved, we keep to

the conception of the ego, which is simple, and to which all thought has a

relation. The same is the case with the transcendental proof of the existence

of a Deity, which is based solely upon the harmony and reciprocal fitness of

the conceptions of an ens realissimum and a necessary being, and cannot be

attempted in any other manner.

              This caution serves to simplify very much the criticism of all

propositions of reason. When reason employs conceptions alone, only one

proof of its thesis is possible, if any. When, therefore, the dogmatist advances

with ten arguments in favour of a proposition, we may be sure that not one of

them is conclusive. For if he possessed one which proved the proposition he

brings forward to demonstration- as must always be the case with the

propositions of pure reason- what need is there for any more? His intention

can only be similar to that of the advocate who had different arguments for

different judges; this availing himself of the weakness of those who examine

his arguments, who, without going into any profound investigation, adopt the

view of the case which seems most probable at first sight and decide

according to it.

              The third rule for the guidance of pure reason in the conduct of a

proof is that all transcendental proofs must never be apagogic or indirect, but

always ostensive or direct. The direct or ostensive proof not only establishes

the truth of the proposition to be proved, but exposes the grounds of its truth;the apagogic, on the other hand, may assure us of the truth of the proposition,

but it cannot enable us to comprehend the grounds of its possibility. The

latter is, accordingly, rather an auxiliary to an argument, than a strictly

philosophical and rational mode of procedure. In one respect, however, they

have an advantage over direct proofs, from the fact that the mode of arguing

by contradiction, which they employ, renders our understanding of the

question more clear, and approximates the proof to the certainty of an

intuitional demonstration.

              The true reason why indirect proofs are employed in different

sciences is this. When the grounds upon which we seek to base a cognition

are too various or too profound, we try whether or not we may not discover

the truth of our cognition from its consequences. The modus ponens of

reasoning from the truth of its inferences to the truth of a proposition would

be admissible if all the inferences that can be drawn from it are known to be

true; for in this case there can be only one possible ground for these

inferences, and that is the true one. But this is a quite impracticable

procedure, as it surpasses all our powers to discover all the possible

inferences that can be drawn from a proposition. But this mode of reasoning

is employed, under favour, when we wish to prove the truth of an hypothesis;

in which case we admit the truth of the conclusion- which is supported by

analogy — that, if all the inferences we have drawn and examined agree with

the proposition assumed, all other possible inferences will also agree with it.

But, in this way, an hypothesis can never be established as a demonstrated

truth. The modus tollens of reasoning from known inferences to the unknown

proposition, is not only a rigorous, but a very easy mode of proof. For, if it

can be shown that but one inference from a proposition is false, then the

proposition must itself be false. Instead, then, of examining, in an ostensive

argument, the whole series of the grounds on which the truth of a proposition

rests, we need only take the opposite of this proposition, and if one inference

from it be false, then must the opposite be itself false; and, consequently, the

proposition which we wished to prove must be true.

              The apagogic method of proof is admissible only in those sciences

where it is impossible to mistake a subjective representation for an objective

cognition. Where this is possible, it is plain that the opposite of a given

proposition may contradict merely the subjective conditions of thought, and

not the objective cognition; or it may happen that both propositions contradicteach other only under a subjective condition, which is incorrectly considered

to be objective, and, as the condition is itself false, both propositions may be

false, and it will, consequently, be impossible to conclude the truth of the one

from the falseness of the other.

              In mathematics such subreptions are impossible; and it is in this

science, accordingly, that the indirect mode of proof has its true place. In the

science of nature, where all assertion is based upon empirical intuition, such

subreptions may be guarded against by the repeated comparison of

observations; but this mode of proof is of little value in this sphere of

knowledge. But the transcendental efforts of pure reason are all made in the

sphere of the subjective, which is the real medium of all dialectical illusion;

and thus reason endeavours, in its premisses, to impose upon us subjective

representations for objective cognitions. In the transcendental sphere of pure

reason, then, and in the case of synthetical propositions, it is inadmissible to

support a statement by disproving the counter-statement. For only two cases

are possible; either, the counter-statement is nothing but the enouncement of

the inconsistency of the opposite opinion with the subjective conditions of

reason, which does not affect the real case (for example, we cannot

comprehend the unconditioned necessity of the existence of a being, and

hence every speculative proof of the existence of such a being must be

opposed on subjective grounds, while the possibility of this being in itself

cannot with justice be denied); or, both propositions, being dialectical in their

nature, are based upon an impossible conception. In this latter case the rule

applies: non entis nulla sunt predicata; that is to say, what we affirm and what

we deny, respecting such an object, are equally untrue, and the apagogic

mode of arriving at the truth is in this case impossible. If, for example, we

presuppose that the world of sense is given in itself in its totality, it is false,

either that it is infinite, or that it is finite and limited in space. Both are false,

because the hypothesis is false. For the notion of phenomena (as mere

representations) which are given in themselves (as objects) is self-

contradictory; and the infinitude of this imaginary whole would, indeed, be

unconditioned, but would be inconsistent (as everything in the phenomenal

world is conditioned) with the unconditioned determination and finitude of

quantities which is presupposed in our conception.

              The apagogic mode of proof is the true source of those illusions

which have always had so strong an attraction for the admirers of dogmaticalphilosophy. It may be compared to a champion who maintains the honour and

claims of the party he has adopted by offering battle to all who doubt the

validity of these claims and the purity of that honour; while nothing can be

proved in this way, except the respective strength of the combatants, and the

advantage, in this respect, is always on the side of the attacking party.

Spectators, observing that each party is alternately conqueror and conquered,

are led to regard the subject of dispute as beyond the power of man to decide

upon. But such an opinion cannot be justified; and it is sufficient to apply to

these reasoners the remark:

  Non defensoribus istis Tempus eget.                Each must try to establish his

assertions by a transcendental deduction of the grounds of proof employed in

his argument, and thus enable us to see in what way the claims of reason may

be supported. If an opponent bases his assertions upon subjective grounds, he

may be refuted with ease; not, however to the advantage of the dogmatist,

who likewise depends upon subjective sources of cognition and is in like

manner driven into a corner by his opponent. But, if parties employ the direct

method of procedure, they will soon discover the difficulty, nay, the

impossibility of proving their assertions, and will be forced to appeal to

prescription and precedence; or they will, by the help of criticism, discover

with ease the dogmatical illusions by which they had been mocked, and

compel reason to renounce its exaggerated pretensions to speculative insight

and to confine itself within the limits of its proper sphere — that of practical

principles.

 

 

                     Chapter II. The Canon of Pure Reason.

 

 

              It is a humiliating consideration for human reason that it is

incompetent to discover truth by means of pure speculation, but, on the

contrary, stands in need of discipline to check its deviations from the straight

path and to expose the illusions which it originates. But, on the other hand,

this consideration ought to elevate and to give it confidence, for this

discipline is exercised by itself alone, and it is subject to the censure of no

other power. The bounds, moreover, which it is forced to set to its speculative

exercise, form likewise a check upon the fallacious pretensions of opponents;

and thus what remains of its possessions, after these exaggerated claims have

been disallowed, is secure from attack or usurpation. The greatest, and

perhaps the only, use of all philosophy of pure reason is, accordingly, of a

purely negative character. It is not an organon for the extension, but a

discipline for the determination, of the limits of its exercise; and without

laying claim to the discovery of new truth, it has the modest merit of

guarding against error.

              At the same time, there must be some source of positive cognitions

which belong to the domain of pure reason and which become the causes of

error only from our mistaking their true character, while they form the goal

towards which reason continually strives. How else can we account for the

inextinguishable desire in the human mind to find a firm footing in some

region beyond the limits of the world of experience? It hopes to attain to the

possession of a knowledge in which it has the deepest interest. It enters upon

the path of pure speculation; but in vain. We have some reason, however, to

expect that, in the only other way that lies open to it — the path of practical

reason — it may meet with better success.

              I understand by a canon a list of the a priori principles of the proper

employment of certain faculties of cognition. Thus general logic, in its

analytical department, is a formal canon for the faculties of understanding

and reason. In the same way, Transcendental Analytic was seen to be a canon

of the pure understanding; for it alone is competent to enounce true a priori

synthetical cognitions. But, when no proper employment of a faculty ofcognition is possible, no canon can exist. But the synthetical cognition of

pure speculative reason is, as has been shown, completely impossible. There

cannot, therefore, exist any canon for the speculative exercise of this faculty

— for its speculative exercise is entirely dialectical; and, consequently,

transcendental logic, in this respect, is merely a discipline, and not a canon.

If, then, there is any proper mode of employing the faculty of pure reason —

in which case there must be a canon for this faculty — this canon will relate,

not to the speculative, but to the practical use of reason. This canon we now

proceed to investigate.        Section I. Of the Ultimate End of the Pure Use of Reason.

 

 

              There exists in the faculty of reason a natural desire to venture

beyond the field of experience, to attempt to reach the utmost bounds of all

cognition by the help of ideas alone, and not to rest satisfied until it has

fulfilled its course and raised the sum of its cognitions into a self-subsistent

systematic whole. Is the motive for this endeavour to be found in its

speculative, or in its practical interests alone?

              Setting aside, at present, the results of the labours of pure reason in

its speculative exercise, I shall merely inquire regarding the problems the

solution of which forms its ultimate aim, whether reached or not, and in

relation to which all other aims are but partial and intermediate. These

highest aims must, from the nature of reason, possess complete unity;

otherwise the highest interest of humanity could not be successfully

promoted.

              The transcendental speculation of reason relates to three things: the

freedom of the will, the immortality of the soul, and the existence of God.

The speculative interest which reason has in those questions is very small;

and, for its sake alone, we should not undertake the labour of transcendental

investigation — a labour full of toil and ceaseless struggle. We should be loth

to undertake this labour, because the discoveries we might make would not

be of the smallest use in the sphere of concrete or physical investigation. We

may find out that the will is free, but this knowledge only relates to the

intelligible cause of our volition. As regards the phenomena or expressions of

this will, that is, our actions, we are bound, in obedience to an inviolable

maxim, without which reason cannot be employed in the sphere of

experience, to explain these in the same way as we explain all the other

phenomena of nature, that is to say, according to its unchangeable laws. We

may have discovered the spirituality and immortality of the soul, but we

cannot employ this knowledge to explain the phenomena of this life, nor the

peculiar nature of the future, because our conception of an incorporeal nature

is purely negative and does not add anything to our knowledge, and the only

inferences to be drawn from it are purely fictitious. If, again, we prove theexistence of a supreme intelligence, we should be able from it to make the

conformity to aims existing in the arrangement of the world comprehensible;

but we should not be justified in deducing from it any particular arrangement

or disposition, or inferring any where it is not perceived. For it is a necessary

rule of the speculative use of reason that we must not overlook natural

causes, or refuse to listen to the teaching of experience, for the sake of

deducing what we know and perceive from something that transcends all our

knowledge. In one word, these three propositions are, for the speculative

reason, always transcendent, and cannot be employed as immanent principles

in relation to the objects of experience; they are, consequently, of no use to us

in this sphere, being but the valueless results of the severe but unprofitable

efforts of reason.

              If, then, the actual cognition of these three cardinal propositions is

perfectly useless, while Reason uses her utmost endeavours to induce us to

admit them, it is plain that their real value and importance relate to our

practical, and not to our speculative interest.

              I term all that is possible through free will, practical. But if the

conditions of the exercise of free volition are empirical, reason can have only

a regulative, and not a constitutive, influence upon it, and is serviceable

merely for the introduction of unity into its empirical laws. In the moral

philosophy of prudence, for example, the sole business of reason is to bring

about a union of all the ends, which are aimed at by our inclinations, into one

ultimate end — that of happiness — and to show the agreement which should

exist among the means of attaining that end. In this sphere, accordingly,

reason cannot present to us any other than pragmatical laws of free action, for

our guidance towards the aims set up by the senses, and is incompetent to

give us laws which are pure and determined completely a priori. On the other

hand, pure practical laws, the ends of which have been given by reason

entirely a priori, and which are not empirically conditioned, but are, on the

contrary, absolutely imperative in their nature, would be products of pure

reason. Such are the moral laws; and these alone belong to the sphere of the

practical exercise of reason, and admit of a canon.

              All the powers of reason, in the sphere of what may be termed pure

philosophy, are, in fact, directed to the three above-mentioned problems

alone. These again have a still higher end — the answer to the question, what

we ought to do, if the will is free, if there is a God and a future world. Now,as this problem relates to our in reference to the highest aim of humanity, it is

evident that the ultimate intention of nature, in the constitution of our reason,

has been directed to the moral alone.

              We must take care, however, in turning our attention to an object
                  78
which is foreign to the sphere of transcendental philosophy, not to injure the

unity of our system by digressions, nor, on the other hand, to fail in clearness,

by saying too little on the new subject of discussion. I hope to avoid both

extremes, by keeping as close as possible to the transcendental, and excluding

all psychological, that is, empirical, elements.

        78
               All practical conceptions relate to objects of pleasure and pain, and

consequently — in an indirect manner, at least — to objects of feeling. But as

feeling is not a faculty of representation, but lies out of the sphere of our

powers of cognition, the elements of our judgements, in so far as they relate

to pleasure or pain, that is, the elements of our practical judgements, do not

belong to transcendental philosophy, which has to do with pure a priori

cognitions alone.

              I have to remark, in the first place, that at present I treat of the

conception of freedom in the practical sense only, and set aside the

corresponding transcendental conception, which cannot be employed as a

ground of explanation in the phenomenal world, but is itself a problem for

pure reason. A will is purely animal (arbitrium brutum) when it is determined

by sensuous impulses or instincts only, that is, when it is determined in a

pathological manner. A will, which can be determined independently of

sensuous impulses, consequently by motives presented by reason alone, is

called a free will (arbitrium liberum); and everything which is connected with

this free will, either as principle or consequence, is termed practical. The

existence of practical freedom can be proved from experience alone. For the

human will is not determined by that alone which immediately affects the

senses; on the contrary, we have the power, by calling up the notion of what

is useful or hurtful in a more distant relation, of overcoming the immediate

impressions on our sensuous faculty of desire. But these considerations of

what is desirable in relation to our whole state, that is, is in the end good and

useful, are based entirely upon reason. This faculty, accordingly, enounces

laws, which are imperative or objective laws of freedom and which tell us

what ought to take place, thus distinguishing themselves from the laws of

nature, which relate to that which does take place. The laws of freedom or offree will are hence termed practical laws.

              Whether reason is not itself, in the actual delivery of these laws,

determined in its turn by other influences, and whether the action which, in

relation to sensuous impulses, we call free, may not, in relation to higher and

more remote operative causes, really form a part of nature — these are

questions which do not here concern us. They are purely speculative

questions; and all we have to do, in the practical sphere, is to inquire into the

rule of conduct which reason has to present. Experience demonstrates to us

the existence of practical freedom as one of the causes which exist in nature,

that is, it shows the causal power of reason in the determination of the will.

The idea of transcendental freedom, on the contrary, requires that reason —

in relation to its causal power of commencing a series of phenomena —

should be independent of all sensuous determining causes; and thus it seems

to be in opposition to the law of nature and to all possible experience. It

therefore remains a problem for the human mind. But this problem does not

concern reason in its practical use; and we have, therefore, in a canon of pure

reason, to do with only two questions, which relate to the practical interest of

pure reason: Is there a God? and, Is there a future life? The question of

transcendental freedom is purely speculative, and we may therefore set it

entirely aside when we come to treat of practical reason. Besides, we have

already discussed this subject in the antinomy of pure reason.

     Section II. Of the Ideal of the Summum Bonum as a Determining

                Ground of the Ultimate End of Pure Reason.

 

 

              Reason conducted us, in its speculative use, through the field of

experience and, as it can never find complete satisfaction in that sphere, from

thence to speculative ideas — which, however, in the end brought us back

again to experience, and thus fulfilled the purpose of reason, in a manner

which, though useful, was not at all in accordance with our expectations. It

now remains for us to consider whether pure reason can be employed in a

practical sphere, and whether it will here conduct us to those ideas which

attain the highest ends of pure reason, as we have just stated them. We shall

thus ascertain whether, from the point of view of its practical interest, reason

may not be able to supply us with that which, on the speculative side, it

wholly denies us.

              The whole interest of reason, speculative as well as practical, is

centred in the three following questions:

  1. WHAT CAN I KNOW? 2. WHAT OUGHT I TO DO? 3. WHAT MAY I

HOPE?                The first question is purely speculative. We have, as I flatter

myself, exhausted all the replies of which it is susceptible, and have at last

found the reply with which reason must content itself, and with which it

ought to be content, so long as it pays no regard to the practical. But from the

two great ends to the attainment of which all these efforts of pure reason were

in fact directed, we remain just as far removed as if we had consulted our

ease and declined the task at the outset. So far, then, as knowledge is

concerned, thus much, at least, is established, that, in regard to those two

problems, it lies beyond our reach.

              The second question is purely practical. As such it may indeed fall

within the province of pure reason, but still it is not transcendental, but moral,

and consequently cannot in itself form the subject of our criticism.

              The third question: If I act as I ought to do, what may I then hope?—

is at once practical and theoretical. The practical forms a clue to the answer

of the theoretical, and — in its highest form- speculative question. For allhoping has happiness for its object and stands in precisely the same relation

to the practical and the law of morality as knowing to the theoretical

cognition of things and the law of nature. The former arrives finally at the

conclusion that something is (which determines the ultimate end), because

something ought to take place; the latter, that something is (which operates as

the highest cause), because something does take place.

              Happiness is the satisfaction of all our desires; extensive, in regard

to their multiplicity; intensive, in regard to their degree; and protensive, in

regard to their duration. The practical law based on the motive of happiness I

term a pragmatical law (or prudential rule); but that law, assuming such to

exist, which has no other motive than the worthiness of being happy, I term a

moral or ethical law. The first tells us what we have to do, if we wish to

become possessed of happiness; the second dictates how we ought to act, in

order to deserve happiness. The first is based upon empirical principles; for it

is only by experience that I can learn either what inclinations exist which

desire satisfaction, or what are the natural means of satisfying them. The

second takes no account of our desires or the means of satisfying them, and

regards only the freedom of a rational being, and the necessary conditions

under which alone this freedom can harmonize with the distribution of

happiness according to principles. This second law may therefore rest upon

mere ideas of pure reason, and may be cognized a priori.

              I assume that there are pure moral laws which determine, entirely a

priori (without regard to empirical motives, that is, to happiness), the conduct

of a rational being, or in other words, to use which it makes of its freedom,

and that these laws are absolutely imperative (not merely hypothetically, on

the supposition of other empirical ends), and therefore in all respects

necessary. I am warranted in assuming this, not only by the arguments of the

most enlightened moralists, but by the moral judgement of every man who

will make the attempt to form a distinct conception of such a law.

              Pure reason, then, contains, not indeed in its speculative, but in its

practical, or, more strictly, its moral use, principles of the possibility of

experience, of such actions, namely, as, in accordance with ethical precepts,

might be met with in the history of man. For since reason commands that

such actions should take place, it must be possible for them to take place; and

hence a particular kind of systematic unity — the moral — must be possible.

We have found, it is true, that the systematic unity of nature could not beestablished according to speculative principles of reason, because, while

reason possesses a causal power in relation to freedom, it has none in relation

to the whole sphere of nature; and, while moral principles of reason can

produce free actions, they cannot produce natural laws. It is, then, in its

practical, but especially in its moral use, that the principles of pure reason

possess objective reality.

              I call the world a moral world, in so far as it may be in accordance

with all the ethical laws — which, by virtue of the freedom of reasonable

beings, it can be, and according to the necessary laws of morality it ought to

be. But this world must be conceived only as an intelligible world, inasmuch

as abstraction is therein made of all conditions (ends), and even of all

impediments to morality (the weakness or pravity of human nature). So far,

then, it is a mere idea- though still a practical idea — which may have, and

ought to have, an influence on the world of sense, so as to bring it as far as

possible into conformity with itself. The idea of a moral world has, therefore,

objective reality, not as referring to an object of intelligible intuition — for of

such an object we can form no conception whatever — but to the world of

sense — conceived, however, as an object of pure reason in its practical use

— and to a corpus mysticum of rational beings in it, in so far as the liberum

arbitrium of the individual is placed, under and by virtue of moral laws, in

complete systematic unity both with itself and with the freedom of all others.

              That is the answer to the first of the two questions of pure reason

which relate to its practical interest: Do that which will render thee worthy of

happiness. The second question is this: If I conduct myself so as not to be

unworthy of happiness, may I hope thereby to obtain happiness? In order to

arrive at the solution of this question, we must inquire whether the principles

of pure reason, which prescribe a priori the law, necessarily also connect this

hope with it.

              I say, then, that just as the moral principles are necessary according

to reason in its practical use, so it is equally necessary according to reason in

its theoretical use to assume that every one has ground to hope for happiness

in the measure in which he has made himself worthy of it in his conduct, and

that therefore the system of morality is inseparably (though only in the idea

of pure reason) connected with that of happiness.

              Now in an intelligible, that is, in the moral world, in the conceptionof which we make abstraction of all the impediments to morality (sensuous

desires), such a system of happiness, connected with and proportioned to

morality, may be conceived as necessary, because freedom of volition —

partly incited, and partly restrained by moral laws — would be itself the

cause of general happiness; and thus rational beings, under the guidance of

such principles, would be themselves the authors both of their own enduring

welfare and that of others. But such a system of self-rewarding morality is

only an idea, the carrying out of which depends upon the condition that every

one acts as he ought; in other words, that all actions of reasonable beings be

such as they would be if they sprung from a Supreme Will, comprehending

in, or under, itself all particular wills. But since the moral law is binding on

each individual in the use of his freedom of volition, even if others should not

act in conformity with this law, neither the nature of things, nor the causality

of actions and their relation to morality, determine how the consequences of

these actions will be related to happiness; and the necessary connection of the

hope of happiness with the unceasing endeavour to become worthy of

happiness, cannot be cognized by reason, if we take nature alone for our

guide. This connection can be hoped for only on the assumption that the

cause of nature is a supreme reason, which governs according to moral laws.

              I term the idea of an intelligence in which the morally most perfect

will, united with supreme blessedness, is the cause of all happiness in the

world, so far as happiness stands in strict } relation to morality (as the

worthiness of being happy), the ideal of the supreme Good. supreme original

good, that pure reason can find the ground of the practically necessary

connection of both elements of the highest derivative good, and accordingly

of an intelligible, that is, moral world. Now since we are necessitated by

reason to conceive ourselves as belonging to such a world, while the senses

present to us nothing but a world of phenomena, we must assume the former

as a consequence of our conduct in the world of sense (since the world of

sense gives us no hint of it), and therefore as future in relation to us. Thus

God and a future life are two hypotheses which, according to the principles of

pure reason, are inseparable from the obligation which this reason imposes

upon us.

              Morality per se constitutes a system. But we can form no system of

happiness, except in so far as it is dispensed in strict proportion to morality.

But this is only possible in the intelligible world, under a wise author andruler. Such a ruler, together with life in such a world, which we must look

upon as future, reason finds itself compelled to assume; or it must regard the

moral laws as idle dreams, since the necessary consequence which this same

reason connects with them must, without this hypothesis, fall to the ground.

Hence also the moral laws are universally regarded as commands, which they

could not be did they not connect a priori adequate consequences with their

dictates, and thus carry with them promises and threats. But this, again, they

could not do, did they not reside in a necessary being, as the Supreme Good,

which alone can render such a teleological unity possible.

              Leibnitz termed the world, when viewed in relation to the rational

beings which it contains, and the moral relations in which they stand to each

other, under the government of the Supreme Good, the kingdom of Grace,

and distinguished it from the kingdom of Nature, in which these rational

beings live, under moral laws, indeed, but expect no other consequences from

their actions than such as follow according to the course of nature in the

world of sense. To view ourselves, therefore, as in the kingdom of grace, in

which all happiness awaits us, except in so far as we ourselves limit our

participation in it by actions which render us unworthy of happiness, is a

practically necessary idea of reason.

              Practical laws, in so far as they are subjective grounds of actions,

that is, subjective principles, are termed maxims. The judgements of moral

according to in its purity and ultimate results are framed according ideas; the

observance of its laws, according to according to maxims.

              The whole course of our life must be subject to moral maxims; but

this is impossible, unless with the moral law, which is a mere idea, reason

connects an efficient cause which ordains to all conduct which is in

conformity with the moral law an issue either in this or in another life, which

is in exact conformity with our highest aims. Thus, without a God and

without a world, invisible to us now, but hoped for, the glorious ideas of

morality are, indeed, objects of approbation and of admiration, but cannot be

the springs of purpose and action. For they do not satisfy all the aims which

are natural to every rational being, and which are determined a priori by pure

reason itself, and necessary.

              Happiness alone is, in the view of reason, far from being the

complete good. Reason does not approve of it (however much inclinationmay desire it), except as united with desert. On the other hand, morality

alone, and with it, mere desert, is likewise far from being the complete good.

To make it complete, he who conducts himself in a manner not unworthy of

happiness, must be able to hope for the possession of happiness. Even reason,

unbiased by private ends, or interested considerations, cannot judge

otherwise, if it puts itself in the place of a being whose business it is to

dispense all happiness to others. For in the practical idea both points are

essentially combined, though in such a way that participation in happiness is

rendered possible by the moral disposition, as its condition, and not

conversely, the moral disposition by the prospect of happiness. For a

disposition which should require the prospect of happiness as its necessary

condition would not be moral, and hence also would not be worthy of

complete happiness — a happiness which, in the view of reason, recognizes

no limitation but such as arises from our own immoral conduct.

              Happiness, therefore, in exact proportion with the morality of

rational beings (whereby they are made worthy of happiness), constitutes

alone the supreme good of a world into which we absolutely must transport

ourselves according to the commands of pure but practical reason. This world

is, it is true, only an intelligible world; for of such a systematic unity of ends

as it requires, the world of sense gives us no hint. Its reality can be based on

nothing else but the hypothesis of a supreme original good. In it independent

reason, equipped with all the sufficiency of a supreme cause, founds,

maintains, and fulfils the universal order of things, with the most perfect

teleological harmony, however much this order may be hidden from us in the

world of sense.

              This moral theology has the peculiar advantage, in contrast with

speculative theology, of leading inevitably to the conception of a sole,

perfect, and rational First Cause, whereof speculative theology does not give

us any indication on objective grounds, far less any convincing evidence. For

we find neither in transcendental nor in natural theology, however far reason

may lead us in these, any ground to warrant us in assuming the existence of

one only Being, which stands at the head of all natural causes, and on which

these are entirely dependent. On the other band, if we take our stand on moral

unity as a necessary law of the universe, and from this point of view consider

what is necessary to give this law adequate efficiency and, for us, obligatory

force, we must come to the conclusion that there is one only supreme will,which comprehends all these laws in itself. For how, under different wills,

should we find complete unity of ends? This will must be omnipotent, that all

nature and its relation to morality in the world may be subject to it;

omniscient, that it may have knowledge of the most secret feelings and their

moral worth; omnipresent, that it may be at hand to supply every necessity to

which the highest weal of the world may give rise; eternal, that this harmony

of nature and liberty may never fail; and so on.

              But this systematic unity of ends in this world of intelligences-

which, as mere nature, is only a world of sense, but, as a system of freedom

of volition, may be termed an intelligible, that is, moral world (regnum

gratiae)— leads inevitably also to the teleological unity of all things which

constitute this great whole, according to universal natural laws — just as the

unity of the former is according to universal and necessary moral laws — and

unites the practical with the speculative reason. The world must be

represented as having originated from an idea, if it is to harmonize with that

use of reason without which we cannot even consider ourselves as worthy of

reason- namely, the moral use, which rests entirely on the idea of the supreme

good. Hence the investigation of nature receives a teleological direction, and

becomes, in its widest extension, physico-theology. But this, taking its rise in

moral order as a unity founded on the essence of freedom, and not

accidentally instituted by external commands, establishes the teleological

view of nature on grounds which must be inseparably connected with the

internal possibility of things. This gives rise to a transcendental theology,

which takes the ideal of the highest ontological perfection as a principle of

systematic unity; and this principle connects all things according to universal

and necessary natural laws, because all things have their origin in the

absolute necessity of the one only Primal Being.

              What use can we make of our understanding, even in respect of

experience, if we do not propose ends to ourselves? But the highest ends are

those of morality, and it is only pure reason that can give us the knowledge of

these. Though supplied with these, and putting ourselves under their

guidance, we can make no teleological use of the knowledge of nature, as

regards cognition, unless nature itself has established teleological unity. For

without this unity we should not even possess reason, because we should

have no school for reason, and no cultivation through objects which afford

the materials for its conceptions. But teleological unity is a necessary unity,and founded on the essence of the individual will itself. Hence this will,

which is the condition of the application of this unity in concreto, must be so

likewise. In this way the transcendental enlargement of our rational cognition

would be, not the cause, but merely the effect of the practical teleology which

pure reason imposes upon us.

              Hence, also, we find in the history of human reason that, before the

moral conceptions were sufficiently purified and determined, and before men

had attained to a perception of the systematic unity of ends according to these

conceptions and from necessary principles, the knowledge of nature, and

even a considerable amount of intellectual culture in many other sciences,

could produce only rude and vague conceptions of the Deity, sometimes even

admitting of an astonishing indifference with regard to this question

altogether. But the more enlarged treatment of moral ideas, which was

rendered necessary by the extreme pure moral law of our religion, awakened

the interest, and thereby quickened the perceptions of reason in relation to

this object. In this way, and without the help either of an extended

acquaintance with nature, or of a reliable transcendental insight (for these

have been wanting in all ages), a conception of the Divine Being was arrived

at, which we now bold to be the correct one, not because speculative reason

convinces us of its correctness, but because it accords with the moral

principles of reason. Thus it is to pure reason, but only in its practical use,

that we must ascribe the merit of having connected with our highest interest a

cognition, of which mere speculation was able only to form a conjecture, but

the validity of which it was unable to establish — and of having thereby

rendered it, not indeed a demonstrated dogma, but a hypothesis absolutely

necessary to the essential ends of reason.

              But if practical reason has reached this elevation, and has attained to

the conception of a sole Primal Being as the supreme good, it must not,

therefore, imagine that it has transcended the empirical conditions of its

application, and risen to the immediate cognition of new objects; it must not

presume to start from the conception which it has gained, and to deduce from

it the moral laws themselves. For it was these very laws, the internal practical

necessity of which led us to the hypothesis of an independent cause, or of a

wise ruler of the universe, who should give them effect. Hence we are not

entitled to regard them as accidental and derived from the mere will of the

ruler, especially as we have no conception of such a will, except as formed inaccordance with these laws. So far, then, as practical reason has the right to

conduct us, we shall not look upon actions as binding on us, because they are

the commands of God, but we shall regard them as divine commands,

because we are internally bound by them. We shall study freedom under the

teleological unity which accords with principles of reason; we shall look

upon ourselves as acting in conformity with the divine will only in so far as

we hold sacred the moral law which reason teaches us from the nature of

actions themselves, and we shall believe that we can obey that will only by

promoting the weal of the universe in ourselves and in others. Moral theology

is, therefore, only of immanent use. It teaches us to fulfil our destiny here in

the world, by placing ourselves in harmony with the general system of ends,

and warns us against the fanaticism, nay, the crime of depriving reason of its

legislative authority in the moral conduct of life, for the purpose of directly

connecting this authority with the idea of the Supreme Being. For this would

be, not an immanent, but a transcendent use of moral theology, and, like the

transcendent use of mere speculation, would inevitably pervert and frustrate

the ultimate ends of reason.              Section III. Of Opinion, Knowledge, and Belief.

 

 

              The holding of a thing to be true is a phenomenon in our

understanding which may rest on objective grounds, but requires, also,

subjective causes in the mind of the person judging. If a judgement is valid

for every rational being, then its ground is objectively sufficient, and it is

termed a conviction. If, on the other hand, it has its ground in the particular

character of the subject, it is termed a persuasion.

              Persuasion is a mere illusion, the ground of the judgement, which

lies solely in the subject, being regarded as objective. Hence a judgement of

this kind has only private validity — is only valid for the individual who

judges, and the holding of a thing to be true in this way cannot be

communicated. But truth depends upon agreement with the object, and

consequently the judgements of all understandings, if true, must be in

agreement with each other (consentientia uni tertio consentiunt inter se).

Conviction may, therefore, be distinguished, from an external point of view,

from persuasion, by the possibility of communicating it and by showing its

validity for the reason of every man; for in this case the presumption, at least,

arises that the agreement of all judgements with each other, in spite of the

different characters of individuals, rests upon the common ground of the

agreement of each with the object, and thus the correctness of the judgement

is established.

              Persuasion, accordingly, cannot be subjectively distinguished from

conviction, that is, so long as the subject views its judgement simply as a

phenomenon of its own mind. But if we inquire whether the grounds of our

judgement, which are valid for us, produce the same effect on the reason of

others as on our own, we have then the means, though only subjective means,

not, indeed, of producing conviction, but of detecting the merely private

validity of the judgement; in other words, of discovering that there is in it the

element of mere persuasion.

              If we can, in addition to this, develop the subjective causes of the

judgement, which we have taken for its objective grounds, and thus explain

the deceptive judgement as a phenomenon in our mind, apart altogether fromthe objective character of the object, we can then expose the illusion and need

be no longer deceived by it, although, if its subjective cause lies in our nature,

we cannot hope altogether to escape its influence.

              I can only maintain, that is, affirm as necessarily valid for every one,

that which produces conviction. Persuasion I may keep for myself, if it is

agreeable to me; but I cannot, and ought not, to attempt to impose it as

binding upon others.

              Holding for true, or the subjective validity of a judgement in relation

to conviction (which is, at the same time, objectively valid), has the three

following degrees: opinion, belief, and knowledge. Opinion is a consciously

insufficient judgement, subjectively as well as objectively. Belief is

subjectively sufficient, but is recognized as being objectively insufficient.

Knowledge is both subjectively and objectively sufficient. Subjective

sufficiency is termed conviction (for myself); objective sufficiency is termed

certainty (for all). I need not dwell longer on the explanation of such simple

conceptions.

              I must never venture to be of opinion, without knowing something,

at least, by which my judgement, in itself merely problematical, is brought

into connection with the truth — which connection, although not perfect, is

still something more than an arbitrary fiction. Moreover, the law of such a

connection must be certain. For if, in relation to this law, I have nothing more

than opinion, my judgement is but a play of the imagination, without the least

relation to truth. In the judgements of pure reason, opinion has no place. For,

as they do not rest on empirical grounds and as the sphere of pure reason is

that of necessary truth and a priori cognition, the principle of connection in it

requires universality and necessity, and consequently perfect certainty —

otherwise we should have no guide to the truth at all. Hence it is absurd to

have an opinion in pure mathematics; we must know, or abstain from forming

a judgement altogether. The case is the same with the maxims of morality.

For we must not hazard an action on the mere opinion that it is allowed, but

we must know it to be so.

              In the transcendental sphere of reason, on the other hand, the term

opinion is too weak, while the word knowledge is too strong. From the

merely speculative point of view, therefore, we cannot form a judgement at

all. For the subjective grounds of a judgement, such as produce belief, cannotbe admitted in speculative inquiries, inasmuch as they cannot stand without

empirical support and are incapable of being communicated to others in equal

measure.

              But it is only from the practical point of view that a theoretically

insufficient judgement can be termed belief. Now the practical reference is

either to skill or to morality; to the former, when the end proposed is arbitrary

and accidental, to the latter, when it is absolutely necessary.

              If we propose to ourselves any end whatever, the conditions of its

attainment are hypothetically necessary. The necessity is subjectively, but

still only comparatively, sufficient, if I am acquainted with no other

conditions under which the end can be attained. On the other hand, it is

sufficient, absolutely and for every one, if I know for certain that no one can

be acquainted with any other conditions under which the attainment of the

proposed end would be possible. In the former case my supposition — my

judgement with regard to certain conditions — is a merely accidental belief;

in the latter it is a necessary belief. The physician must pursue some course in

the case of a patient who is in danger, but is ignorant of the nature of the

disease. He observes the symptoms, and concludes, according to the best of

his judgement, that it is a case of phthisis. His belief is, even in his own

judgement, only contingent: another man might, perhaps come nearer the

truth. Such a belief, contingent indeed, but still forming the ground of the

actual use of means for the attainment of certain ends, I term Pragmatical

belief.

              The usual test, whether that which any one maintains is merely his

persuasion, or his subjective conviction at least, that is, his firm belief, is a

bet. It frequently happens that a man delivers his opinions with so much

boldness and assurance, that he appears to be under no apprehension as to the

possibility of his being in error. The offer of a bet startles him, and makes

him pause. Sometimes it turns out that his persuasion may be valued at a

ducat, but not at ten. For he does not hesitate, perhaps, to venture a ducat, but

if it is proposed to stake ten, he immediately becomes aware of the possibility

of his being mistaken — a possibility which has hitherto escaped his

observation. If we imagine to ourselves that we have to stake the happiness of

our whole life on the truth of any proposition, our judgement drops its air of

triumph, we take the alarm, and discover the actual strength of our belief.

Thus pragmatical belief has degrees, varying in proportion to the interests atstake.

              Now, in cases where we cannot enter upon any course of action in

reference to some object, and where, accordingly, our judgement is purely

theoretical, we can still represent to ourselves, in thought, the possibility of a

course of action, for which we suppose that we have sufficient grounds, if

any means existed of ascertaining the truth of the matter. Thus we find in

purely theoretical judgements an analogon of practical judgements, to which

the word belief may properly be applied, and which we may term doctrinal

belief. I should not hesitate to stake my all on the truth of the proposition- if

there were any possibility of bringing it to the test of experience — that, at

least, some one of the planets, which we see, is inhabited. Hence I say that I

have not merely the opinion, but the strong belief, on the correctness of

which I would stake even many of the advantages of life, that there are

inhabitants in other worlds.

              Now we must admit that the doctrine of the existence of God

belongs to doctrinal belief. For, although in respect to the theoretical

cognition of the universe I do not require to form any theory which

necessarily involves this idea, as the condition of my explanation of the

phenomena which the universe presents, but, on the contrary, am rather

bound so to use my reason as if everything were mere nature, still

teleological unity is so important a condition of the application of my reason

to nature, that it is impossible for me to ignore it — especially since, in

addition to these considerations, abundant examples of it are supplied by

experience. But the sole condition, so far as my knowledge extends, under

which this unity can be my guide in the investigation of nature, is the

assumption that a supreme intelligence has ordered all things according to the

wisest ends. Consequently, the hypothesis of a wise author of the universe is

necessary for my guidance in the investigation of nature — is the condition

under which alone I can fulfil an end which is contingent indeed, but by no

means unimportant. Moreover, since the result of my attempts so frequently

confirms the utility of this assumption, and since nothing decisive can be

adduced against it, it follows that it would be saying far too little to term my

judgement, in this case, a mere opinion, and that, even in this theoretical

connection, I may assert that I firmly believe in God. Still, if we use words

strictly, this must not be called a practical, but a doctrinal belief, which the

theology of nature (physico-theology) must also produce in my mind. In thewisdom of a Supreme Being, and in the shortness of life, so inadequate to the

development of the glorious powers of human nature, we may find equally

sufficient grounds for a doctrinal belief in the future life of the human soul.

              The expression of belief is, in such cases, an expression of modesty

from the objective point of view, but, at the same time, of firm confidence,

from the subjective. If I should venture to term this merely theoretical

judgement even so much as a hypothesis which I am entitled to assume; a

more complete conception, with regard to another world and to the cause of

the world, might then be justly required of me than I am, in reality, able to

give. For, if I assume anything, even as a mere hypothesis, I must, at least,

know so much of the properties of such a being as will enable me, not to form

the conception, but to imagine the existence of it. But the word belief refers

only to the guidance which an idea gives me, and to its subjective influence

on the conduct of my reason, which forces me to hold it fast, though I may

not be in a position to give a speculative account of it.

              But mere doctrinal belief is, to some extent, wanting in stability. We

often quit our hold of it, in consequence of the difficulties which occur in

speculation, though in the end we inevitably return to it again.

              It is quite otherwise with moral belief. For in this sphere action is

absolutely necessary, that is, I must act in obedience to the moral law in all

points. The end is here incontrovertibly established, and there is only one

condition possible, according to the best of my perception, under which this

end can harmonize with all other ends, and so have practical validity —

namely, the existence of a God and of a future world. I know also, to a

certainty, that no one can be acquainted with any other conditions which

conduct to the same unity of ends under the moral law. But since the moral

precept is, at the same time, my maxim (as reason requires that it should be),

I am irresistibly constrained to believe in the existence of God and in a future

life; and I am sure that nothing can make me waver in this belief, since I

should thereby overthrow my moral maxims, the renunciation of which

would render me hateful in my own eyes.

              Thus, while all the ambitious attempts of reason to penetrate beyond

the limits of experience end in disappointment, there is still enough left to

satisfy us in a practical point of view. No one, it is true, will be able to boast

that he knows that there is a God and a future life; for, if he knows this, be isjust the man whom I have long wished to find. All knowledge, regarding an

object of mere reason, can be communicated; and I should thus be enabled to

hope that my own knowledge would receive this wonderful extension,

through the instrumentality of his instruction. No, my conviction is not

logical, but moral certainty; and since it rests on subjective grounds (of the

moral sentiment), I must not even say: It is morally certain that there is a

God, etc., but: I am morally certain, that is, my belief in God and in another

world is so interwoven with my moral nature that I am under as little

apprehension of having the former torn from me as of losing the latter.

              The only point in this argument that may appear open to suspicion is

that this rational belief presupposes the existence of moral sentiments. If we

give up this assumption, and take a man who is entirely indifferent with

regard to moral laws, the question which reason proposes, becomes then

merely a problem for speculation and may, indeed, be supported by strong

grounds from analogy, but not by such as will compel the most obstinate
                          79
scepticism to give way. But in these questions no man is free from all

interest. For though the want of good sentiments may place him beyond the

influence of moral interests, still even in this case enough may be left to make

him fear the existence of God and a future life. For he cannot pretend to any

certainty of the non-existence of God and of a future life, unless- since it

could only be proved by mere reason, and therefore apodeictically — he is

prepared to establish the impossibility of both, which certainly no reasonable

man would undertake to do. This would be a negative belief, which could

not, indeed, produce morality and good sentiments, but still could produce an

analogon of these, by operating as a powerful restraint on the outbreak of evil

dispositions.

        79
               The human mind (as, I believe, every rational being must of

necessity do) takes a natural interest in morality, although this interest is not

undivided, and may not be practically in preponderance. If you strengthen

and increase it, you will find the reason become docile, more enlightened,

and more capable of uniting the speculative interest with the practical. But if

you do not take care at the outset, or at least midway, to make men good, you

will never force them into an honest belief.

              But, it will be said, is this all that pure reason can effect, in opening

up prospects beyond the limits of experience? Nothing more than two articles

of belief? Common sense could have done as much as this, without taking thephilosophers to counsel in the matter!

              I shall not here eulogize philosophy for the benefits which the

laborious efforts of its criticism have conferred on human reason- even

granting that its merit should turn out in the end to be only negative — for on

this point something more will be said in the next section. But, I ask, do you

require that that knowledge which concerns all men, should transcend the

common understanding, and should only be revealed to you by philosophers?

The very circumstance which has called forth your censure, is the best

confirmation of the correctness of our previous assertions, since it discloses,

what could not have been foreseen, that Nature is not chargeable with any

partial distribution of her gifts in those matters which concern all men

without distinction and that, in respect to the essential ends of human nature,

we cannot advance further with the help of the highest philosophy, than under

the guidance which nature has vouchsafed to the meanest understanding.

 

 

               Chapter III. The Architectonic of Pure Reason.

 

 

              By the term architectonic I mean the art of constructing a system.

Without systematic unity, our knowledge cannot become science; it will be

an aggregate, and not a system. Thus architectonic is the doctrine of the

scientific in cognition, and therefore necessarily forms part of our

methodology.

              Reason cannot permit our knowledge to remain in an unconnected

and rhapsodistic state, but requires that the sum of our cognitions should

constitute a system. It is thus alone that they can advance the ends of reason.

By a system I mean the unity of various cognitions under one idea. This idea

is the conception — given by reason — of the form of a whole, in so far as

the conception determines a priori not only the limits of its content, but the

place which each of its parts is to occupy. The scientific idea contains,

therefore, the end and the form of the whole which is in accordance with that

end. The unity of the end, to which all the parts of the system relate, and

through which all have a relation to each other, communicates unity to the

whole system, so that the absence of any part can be immediately detected

from our knowledge of the rest; and it determines a priori the limits of the

system, thus excluding all contingent or arbitrary additions. The whole is thus

an organism (articulatio), and not an aggregate (coacervatio); it may grow

from within (per intussusceptionem), but it cannot increase by external

additions (per appositionem). It is, thus, like an animal body, the growth of

which does not add any limb, but, without changing their proportions, makes

each in its sphere stronger and more active.

              We require, for the execution of the idea of a system, a schema, that

is, a content and an arrangement of parts determined a priori by the principle

which the aim of the system prescribes. A schema which is not projected in

accordance with an idea, that is, from the standpoint of the highest aim of

reason, but merely empirically, in accordance with accidental aims and

purposes (the number of which cannot be predetermined), can give us

nothing more than technical unity. But the schema which is originated from

an idea (in which case reason presents us with aims a priori, and does notlook for them to experience), forms the basis of architectonical unity. A

science, in the proper acceptation of that term. cannot be formed technically,

that is, from observation of the similarity existing between different objects,

and the purely contingent use we make of our knowledge in concreto with

reference to all kinds of arbitrary external aims; its constitution must be

framed on architectonical principles, that is, its parts must be shown to

possess an essential affinity, and be capable of being deduced from one

supreme and internal aim or end, which forms the condition of the possibility

of the scientific whole. The schema of a science must give a priori the plan of

it (monogramma), and the division of the whole into parts, in conformity with

the idea of the science; and it must also distinguish this whole from all others,

according to certain understood principles.

              No one will attempt to construct a science, unless he have some idea

to rest on as a proper basis. But, in the elaboration of the science, he finds

that the schema, nay, even the definition which he at first gave of the science,

rarely corresponds with his idea; for this idea lies, like a germ, in our reason,

its parts undeveloped and hid even from microscopical observation. For this

reason, we ought to explain and define sciences, not according to the

description which the originator gives of them, but according to the idea

which we find based in reason itself, and which is suggested by the natural

unity of the parts of the science already accumulated. For it will of ten be

found that the originator of a science and even his latest successors remain

attached to an erroneous idea, which they cannot render clear to themselves,

and that they thus fail in determining the true content, the articulation or

systematic unity, and the limits of their science.

              It is unfortunate that, only after having occupied ourselves for a long

time in the collection of materials, under the guidance of an idea which lies

undeveloped in the mind, but not according to any definite plan of

arrangement — nay, only after we have spent much time and labour in the

technical disposition of our materials, does it become possible to view the

idea of a science in a clear light, and to project, according to architectonical

principles, a plan of the whole, in accordance with the aims of reason.

Systems seem, like certain worms, to be formed by a kind of generatio

aequivoca — by the mere confluence of conceptions, and to gain

completeness only with the progress of time. But the schema or germ of all

lies in reason; and thus is not only every system organized according to itsown idea, but all are united into one grand system of human knowledge, of

which they form members. For this reason, it is possible to frame an

architectonic of all human cognition, the formation of which, at the present

time, considering the immense materials collected or to be found in the ruins

of old systems, would not indeed be very difficult. Our purpose at present is

merely to sketch the plan of the architectonic of all cognition given by pure

reason; and we begin from the point where the main root of human

knowledge divides into two, one of which is reason. By reason I understand

here the whole higher faculty of cognition, the rational being placed in

contradistinction to the empirical.

              If I make complete abstraction of the content of cognition,

objectively considered, all cognition is, from a subjective point of view,

either historical or rational. Historical cognition is cognitio ex datis, rational,

cognitio ex principiis. Whatever may be the original source of a cognition, it

is, in relation to the person who possesses it, merely historical, if he knows

only what has been given him from another quarter, whether that knowledge

was communicated by direct experience or by instruction. Thus the Person

who has learned a system of philosophy — say the Wolfian — although he

has a perfect knowledge of all the principles, definitions, and arguments in

that philosophy, as well as of the divisions that have been made of the

system, possesses really no more than an historical knowledge of the Wolfian

system; he knows only what has been told him, his judgements are only those

which he has received from his teachers. Dispute the validity of a definition,

and he is completely at a loss to find another. He has formed his mind on

another’s; but the imitative faculty is not the productive. His knowledge has

not been drawn from reason; and although, objectively considered, it is

rational knowledge, subjectively, it is merely historical. He has learned this or

that philosophy and is merely a plaster cast of a living man. Rational

cognitions which are objective, that is, which have their source in reason, can

be so termed from a subjective point of view, only when they have been

drawn by the individual himself from the sources of reason, that is, from

principles; and it is in this way alone that criticism, or even the rejection of

what has been already learned, can spring up in the mind.

              All rational cognition is, again, based either on conceptions, or on

the construction of conceptions. The former is termed philosophical, the latter

mathematical. I have already shown the essential difference of these twomethods of cognition in the first chapter. A cognition may be objectively

philosophical and subjectively historical — as is the case with the majority of

scholars and those who cannot look beyond the limits of their system, and

who remain in a state of pupilage all their lives. But it is remarkable that

mathematical knowledge, when committed to memory, is valid, from the

subjective point of view, as rational knowledge also, and that the same

distinction cannot be drawn here as in the case of philosophical cognition.

The reason is that the only way of arriving at this knowledge is through the

essential principles of reason, and thus it is always certain and indisputable;

because reason is employed in concreto — but at the same time a priori —

that is, in pure and, therefore, infallible intuition; and thus all causes of

illusion and error are excluded. Of all the a priori sciences of reason,

therefore, mathematics alone can be learned. Philosophy — unless it be in an

historical manner — cannot be learned; we can at most learn to philosophize.

              Philosophy is the system of all philosophical cognition. We must use

this term in an objective sense, if we understand by it the archetype of all

attempts at philosophizing, and the standard by which all subjective

philosophies are to be judged. In this sense, philosophy is merely the idea of

a possible science, which does not exist in concreto, but to which we

endeavour in various ways to approximate, until we have discovered the right

path to pursue — a path overgrown by the errors and illusions of sense —

and the image we have hitherto tried in vain to shape has become a perfect

copy of the great prototype. Until that time, we cannot learn philosophy — it

does not exist; if it does, where is it, who possesses it, and how shall we

know it? We can only learn to philosophize; in other words, we can only

exercise our powers of reasoning in accordance with general principles,

retaining at the same time, the right of investigating the sources of these

principles, of testing, and even of rejecting them.

              Until then, our conception of philosophy is only a scholastic

conception — a conception, that is, of a system of cognition which we are

trying to elaborate into a science; all that we at present know being the

systematic unity of this cognition, and consequently the logical completeness

of the cognition for the desired end. But there is also a cosmical conception

(conceptus cosmicus) of philosophy, which has always formed the true basis

of this term, especially when philosophy was personified and presented to us

in the ideal of a philosopher. In this view philosophy is the science of therelation of all cognition to the ultimate and essential aims of human reason

(teleologia rationis humanae), and the philosopher is not merely an artist —

who occupies himself with conceptions — but a lawgiver, legislating for

human reason. In this sense of the word, it would be in the highest degree

arrogant to assume the title of philosopher, and to pretend that we had

reached the perfection of the prototype which lies in the idea alone.

              The mathematician, the natural philosopher, and the logician — how

far soever the first may have advanced in rational, and the two latter in

philosophical knowledge — are merely artists, engaged in the arrangement

and formation of conceptions; they cannot be termed philosophers. Above

them all, there is the ideal teacher, who employs them as instruments for the

advancement of the essential aims of human reason. Him alone can we call

philosopher; but he nowhere exists. But the idea of his legislative power

resides in the mind of every man, and it alone teaches us what kind of

systematic unity philosophy demands in view of the ultimate aims of reason.
                                                    80
This idea is, therefore, a cosmical conception.

        80
               By a cosmical conception, I mean one in which all men

necessarily take an interest; the aim of a science must accordingly be

determined according to scholastic conceptions, if it is regarded merely as a

means to certain arbitrarily proposed ends.

              In view of the complete systematic unity of reason, there can only be

one ultimate end of all the operations of the mind. To this all other aims are

subordinate, and nothing more than means for its attainment. This ultimate

end is the destination of man, and the philosophy which relates to it is termed

moral philosophy. The superior position occupied by moral philosophy,

above all other spheres for the operations of reason, sufficiently indicates the

reason why the ancients always included the idea — and in an especial

manner — of moralist in that of philosopher. Even at the present day, we call

a man who appears to have the power of self-government, even although his

knowledge may be very limited, by the name of philosopher.

              The legislation of human reason, or philosophy, has two objects-

nature and freedom — and thus contains not only the laws of nature, but also

those of ethics, at first in two separate systems, which, finally, merge into one

grand philosophical system of cognition. The philosophy of nature relates to

that which is, that of ethics to that which ought to be.              But all philosophy is either cognition on the basis of pure reason, or

the cognition of reason on the basis of empirical principles. The former is

termed pure, the latter empirical philosophy.

              The philosophy of pure reason is either propaedeutic, that is, an

inquiry into the powers of reason in regard to pure a priori cognition, and is

termed critical philosophy; or it is, secondly, the system of pure reason — a

science containing the systematic presentation of the whole body of

philosophical knowledge, true as well as illusory, given by pure reason —

and is called metaphysic. This name may, however, be also given to the

whole system of pure philosophy, critical philosophy included, and may

designate the investigation into the sources or possibility of a priori

cognition, as well as the presentation of the a priori cognitions which form a

system of pure philosophy — excluding, at the same time, all empirical and

mathematical elements.

              Metaphysic is divided into that of the speculative and that of the

practical use of pure reason, and is, accordingly, either the metaphysic of

nature, or the metaphysic of ethics. The former contains all the pure rational

principles — based upon conceptions alone (and thus excluding mathematics)

— of all theoretical cognition; the latter, the principles which determine and

necessitate a priori all action. Now moral philosophy alone contains a code of

laws — for the regulation of our actions — which are deduced from

principles entirely a priori. Hence the metaphysic of ethics is the only pure

moral philosophy, as it is not based upon anthropological or other empirical

considerations. The metaphysic of speculative reason is what is commonly

called metaphysic in the more limited sense. But as pure moral philosophy

properly forms a part of this system of cognition, we must allow it to retain

the name of metaphysic, although it is not requisite that we should insist on

so terming it in our present discussion.

              It is of the highest importance to separate those cognitions which

differ from others both in kind and in origin, and to take great care that they

are not confounded with those with which they are generally found

connected. What the chemist does in the analysis of substances, what the

mathematician in pure mathematics, is, in a still higher degree, the duty of the

philosopher, that the value of each different kind of cognition, and the part it

takes in the operations of the mind, may be clearly defined. Human reason

has never wanted a metaphysic of some kind, since it attained the power ofthought, or rather of reflection; but it has never been able to keep this sphere

of thought and cognition pure from all admixture of foreign elements. The

idea of a science of this kind is as old as speculation itself; and what mind

does not speculate — either in the scholastic or in the popular fashion? At the

same time, it must be admitted that even thinkers by profession have been

unable clearly to explain the distinction between the two elements of our

cognition — the one completely a priori, the other a posteriori; and hence the

proper definition of a peculiar kind of cognition, and with it the just idea of a

science which has so long and so deeply engaged the attention of the human

mind, has never been established. When it was said: “Metaphysic is the

science of the first principles of human cognition,” this definition did not

signalize a peculiarity in kind, but only a difference in degree; these first

principles were thus declared to be more general than others, but no criterion

of distinction from empirical principles was given. Of these some are more

general, and therefore higher, than others; and — as we cannot distinguish

what is completely a priori from that which is known to be a posteriori —

where shall we draw the line which is to separate the higher and so-called

first principles, from the lower and subordinate principles of cognition? What

would be said if we were asked to be satisfied with a division of the epochs

of the world into the earlier centuries and those following them? “Does the

fifth, or the tenth century belong to the earlier centuries?” it would be asked.

In the same way I ask: Does the conception of extension belong to

metaphysics? You answer, “Yes.” Well, that of body too? “Yes.” And that of

a fluid body? You stop, you are unprepared to admit this; for if you do,

everything will belong to metaphysics. From this it is evident that the mere

degree of subordination — of the particular to the general — cannot

determine the limits of a science; and that, in the present case, we must

expect to find a difference in the conceptions of metaphysics both in kind and

in origin. The fundamental idea of metaphysics was obscured on another side

by the fact that this kind of a priori cognition showed a certain similarity in

character with the science of mathematics. Both have the property in common

of possessing an a priori origin; but, in the one, our knowledge is based upon

conceptions, in the other, on the construction of conceptions. Thus a decided

dissimilarity between philosophical and mathematical cognition comes out —

a dissimilarity which was always felt, but which could not be made distinct

for want of an insight into the criteria of the difference. And thus it happened

that, as philosophers themselves failed in the proper development of the ideaof their science, the elaboration of the science could not proceed with a

definite aim, or under trustworthy guidance. Thus, too, philosophers, ignorant

of the path they ought to pursue and always disputing with each other

regarding the discoveries which each asserted he had made, brought their

science into disrepute with the rest of the world, and finally, even among

themselves.

              All pure a priori cognition forms, therefore, in view of the peculiar

faculty which originates it, a peculiar and distinct unity; and metaphysic is

the term applied to the philosophy which attempts to represent that cognition

in this systematic unity. The speculative part of metaphysic, which has

especially appropriated this appellation — that which we have called the

metaphysic of nature — and which considers everything, as it is (not as it

ought to be), by means of a priori conceptions, is divided in the following

manner.

              Metaphysic, in the more limited acceptation of the term, consists of

two parts — transcendental philosophy and the physiology of pure reason.

The former presents the system of all the conceptions and principles

belonging to the understanding and the reason, and which relate to objects in

general, but not to any particular given objects (Ontologia); the latter has

nature for its subject-matter, that is, the sum of given objects — whether

given to the senses, or, if we will, to some other kind of intuition — and is

accordingly physiology, although only rationalis. But the use of the faculty of

reason in this rational mode of regarding nature is either physical or

hyperphysical, or, more properly speaking, immanent or transcendent. The

former relates to nature, in so far as our knowledge regarding it may be

applied in experience (in concreto); the latter to that connection of the objects

of experience, which transcends all experience. Transcendent physiology has,

again, an internal and an external connection with its object, both, however,

transcending possible experience; the former is the physiology of nature as a

whole, or transcendental cognition of the world, the latter of the connection

of the whole of nature with a being above nature, or transcendental cognition

of God.

              Immanent physiology, on the contrary, considers nature as the sum

of all sensuous objects, consequently, as it is presented to us — but still

according to a priori conditions, for it is under these alone that nature can be

presented to our minds at all. The objects of immanent physiology are of twokinds: 1. Those of the external senses, or corporeal nature; 2. The object of

the internal sense, the soul, or, in accordance with our fundamental

conceptions of it, thinking nature. The metaphysics of corporeal nature is

called physics; but, as it must contain only the principles of an a priori

cognition of nature, we must term it rational physics. The metaphysics of

thinking nature is called psychology, and for the same reason is to be

regarded as merely the rational cognition of the soul.

              Thus the whole system of metaphysics consists of four principal

parts: 1. Ontology; 2. Rational Physiology; 3. Rational cosmology; and 4.

Rational theology. The second part — that of the rational doctrine of nature
                                                          81
— may be subdivided into two, physica rationalis and psychologia

rationalis.

        81
               It must not be supposed that I mean by this appellation what is

generally called physica general is, and which is rather mathematics than a

philosophy of nature. For the metaphysic of nature is completely different

from mathematics, nor is it so rich in results, although it is of great

importance as a critical test of the application of pure understanding-

cognition to nature. For want of its guidance, even mathematicians, adopting

certain common notions- which are, in fact, metaphysical — have

unconsciously crowded their theories of nature with hypotheses, the fallacy

of which becomes evident upon the application of the principles of this

metaphysic, without detriment, however, to the employment of mathematics

in this sphere of cognition.

              The fundamental idea of a philosophy of pure reason of necessity

dictates this division; it is, therefore, architectonical — in accordance with

the highest aims of reason, and not merely technical, or according to certain

accidentally-observed similarities existing between the different parts of the

whole science. For this reason, also, is the division immutable and of

legislative authority. But the reader may observe in it a few points to which

he ought to demur, and which may weaken his conviction of its truth and

legitimacy.

              In the first place, how can I desire an a priori cognition or

metaphysic of objects, in so far as they are given a posteriori? and how is it

possible to cognize the nature of things according to a priori principles, and

to attain to a rational physiology? The answer is this. We take fromexperience nothing more than is requisite to present us with an object (in

general) of the external or of the internal sense; in the former case, by the

mere conception of matter (impenetrable and inanimate extension), in the

latter, by the conception of a thinking being — given in the internal empirical

representation, I think. As to the rest, we must not employ in our metaphysic

of these objects any empirical principles (which add to the content of our

conceptions by means of experience), for the purpose of forming by their

help any judgements respecting these objects.

              Secondly, what place shall we assign to empirical psychology, which

has always been considered a part of metaphysics, and from which in our

time such important philosophical results have been expected, after the hope

of constructing an a priori system of knowledge had been abandoned? I

answer: It must be placed by the side of empirical physics or physics proper;

that is, must be regarded as forming a part of applied philosophy, the a priori

principles of which are contained in pure philosophy, which is therefore

connected, although it must not be confounded, with psychology. Empirical

psychology must therefore be banished from the sphere of metaphysics, and

is indeed excluded by the very idea of that science. In conformity, however,

with scholastic usage, we must permit it to occupy a place in metaphysics —

but only as an appendix to it. We adopt this course from motives of economy;

as psychology is not as yet full enough to occupy our attention as an

independent study, while it is, at the same time, of too great importance to be

entirely excluded or placed where it has still less affinity than it has with the

subject of metaphysics. It is a stranger who has been long a guest; and we

make it welcome to stay, until it can take up a more suitable abode in a

complete system of anthropology — the pendant to empirical physics.

              The above is the general idea of metaphysics, which, as more was

expected from it than could be looked for with justice, and as these pleasant

expectations were unfortunately never realized, fell into general disrepute.

Our Critique must have fully convinced the reader that, although metaphysics

cannot form the foundation of religion, it must always be one of its most

important bulwarks, and that human reason, which naturally pursues a

dialectical course, cannot do without this science, which checks its tendencies

towards dialectic and, by elevating reason to a scientific and clear self-

knowledge, prevents the ravages which a lawless speculative reason would

infallibly commit in the sphere of morals as well as in that of religion. Wemay be sure, therefore, whatever contempt may be thrown upon metaphysics

by those who judge a science not by its own nature, but according to the

accidental effects it may have produced, that it can never be completely

abandoned, that we must always return to it as to a beloved one who has been

for a time estranged, because the questions with which it is engaged relate to

the highest aims of humanity, and reason must always labour either to attain

to settled views in regard to these, or to destroy those which others have

already established.

              Metaphysic, therefore — that of nature, as well as that of ethics, but

in an especial manner the criticism which forms the propaedeutic to all the

operations of reason — forms properly that department of knowledge which

may be termed, in the truest sense of the word, philosophy. The path which it

pursues is that of science, which, when it has once been discovered, is never

lost, and never misleads. Mathematics, natural science, the common

experience of men, have a high value as means, for the most part, to

accidental ends — but at last also, to those which are necessary and essential

to the existence of humanity. But to guide them to this high goal, they require

the aid of rational cognition on the basis of pure conceptions, which, be it

termed as it may, is properly nothing but metaphysics.

              For the same reason, metaphysics forms likewise the completion of

the culture of human reason. In this respect, it is indispensable, setting aside

altogether the influence which it exerts as a science. For its subject-matter is

the elements and highest maxims of reason, which form the basis of the

possibility of some sciences and of the use of all. That, as a purely

speculative science, it is more useful in preventing error than in the extension

of knowledge, does not detract from its value; on the contrary, the supreme

office of censor which it occupies assures to it the highest authority and

importance. This office it administers for the purpose of securing order,

harmony, and well-being to science, and of directing its noble and fruitful

labours to the highest possible aim — the happiness of all mankind.

 

 

                     Chapter IV. The History of Pure Reason.

 

 

              This title is placed here merely for the purpose of designating a

division of the system of pure reason of which I do not intend to treat at

present. I shall content myself with casting a cursory glance, from a purely

transcendental point of view — that of the nature of pure reason — on the

labours of philosophers up to the present time. They have aimed at erecting

an edifice of philosophy; but to my eye this edifice appears to be in a very

ruinous condition.

              It is very remarkable, although naturally it could not have been

otherwise, that, in the infancy of philosophy, the study of the nature of God

and the constitution of a future world formed the commencement, rather than

the conclusion, as we should have it, of the speculative efforts of the human

mind. However rude the religious conceptions generated by the remains of

the old manners and customs of a less cultivated time, the intelligent classes

were not thereby prevented from devoting themselves to free inquiry into the

existence and nature of God; and they easily saw that there could be no surer

way of pleasing the invisible ruler of the world, and of attaining to happiness

in another world at least, than a good and honest course of life in this. Thus

theology and morals formed the two chief motives, or rather the points of

attraction in all abstract inquiries. But it was the former that especially

occupied the attention of speculative reason, and which afterwards became so

celebrated under the name of metaphysics.

              I shall not at present indicate the periods of time at which the

greatest changes in metaphysics took place, but shall merely give a hasty

sketch of the different ideas which occasioned the most important revolutions

in this sphere of thought. There are three different ends in relation to which

these revolutions have taken place.

              1. In relation to the object of the cognition of reason, philosophers

may be divided into sensualists and intellectualists. Epicurus may be regarded

as the head of the former, Plato of the latter. The distinction here signalized,

subtle as it is, dates from the earliest times, and was long maintained. The

former asserted that reality resides in sensuous objects alone, and thateverything else is merely imaginary; the latter, that the senses are the parents

of illusion and that truth is to be found in the understanding alone. The

former did not deny to the conceptions of the understanding a certain kind of

reality; but with them it was merely logical, with the others it was mystical.

The former admitted intellectual conceptions, but declared that sensuous

objects alone possessed real existence. The latter maintained that all real

objects were intelligible, and believed that the pure understanding possessed

a faculty of intuition apart from sense, which, in their opinion, served only to

confuse the ideas of the understanding.

              2. In relation to the origin of the pure cognitions of reason, we find

one school maintaining that they are derived entirely from experience, and

another that they have their origin in reason alone. Aristotle may be regarded

as the bead of the empiricists, and Plato of the noologists. Locke, the follower

of Aristotle in modern times, and Leibnitz of Plato (although he cannot be

said to have imitated him in his mysticism), have not been able to bring this

question to a settled conclusion. The procedure of Epicurus in his sensual

system, in which he always restricted his conclusions to the sphere of

experience, was much more consequent than that of Aristotle and Locke. The

latter especially, after having derived all the conceptions and principles of the

mind from experience, goes so far, in the employment of these conceptions

and principles, as to maintain that we can prove the existence of God and the

existence of God and the immortality of them objects lying beyond the soul

— both of them of possible experience — with the same force of

demonstration as any mathematical proposition.

              3. In relation to method. Method is procedure according to

principles. We may divide the methods at present employed in the field of

inquiry into the naturalistic and the scientific. The naturalist of pure reason

lays it down as his principle that common reason, without the aid of science

— which he calls sound reason, or common sense — can give a more

satisfactory answer to the most important questions of metaphysics than

speculation is able to do. He must maintain, therefore, that we can determine

the content and circumference of the moon more certainly by the naked eye,

than by the aid of mathematical reasoning. But this system is mere misology

reduced to principles; and, what is the most absurd thing in this doctrine, the

neglect of all scientific means is paraded as a peculiar method of extending

our cognition. As regards those who are naturalists because they know nobetter, they are certainly not to be blamed. They follow common sense,

without parading their ignorance as a method which is to teach us the

wonderful secret, how we are to find the truth which lies at the bottom of the

well of Democritus.

  Quod sapio satis est mihi, non ego curo Esse quod                Arcesilas
                                      82
aerumnosique Solones. PERSIUS is their motto, under which they may lead

a pleasant and praise worthy life, without troubling themselves with science

or troubling science with them.

        82
               [Satirae, iii. 78-79. “What I know is enough for I don’t care to be

what Arcesilas was, and the wretched Solons.”]

              As regards those who wish to pursue a scientific method, they have

now the choice of following either the dogmatical or the sceptical, while they

are bound never to desert the systematic mode of procedure. When I mention,

in relation to the former, the celebrated Wolf, and as regards the latter, David

Hume, I may leave, in accordance with my present intention, all others

unnamed. The critical path alone is still open. If my reader has been kind and

patient enough to accompany me on this hitherto untravelled route, he can

now judge whether, if he and others will contribute their exertions towards

making this narrow footpath a high road of thought, that which many

centuries have failed to accomplish may not be executed before the close of

the present — namely, to bring Reason to perfect contentment in regard to

that which has always, but without permanent results, occupied her powers

and engaged her ardent desire for knowledge.

 

 

 

 

                 The Critique of Practical Reason

 

                      translated by Thomas Kingsmill Abbott

 

                                     CONTENTS

 

PREFACE.
INTRODUCTION. – OF THE IDEA OF A CRITIQUE OF PRACTICAL REASON.
FIRST PART. – ELEMENTS OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON.
BOOK I: THE ANALYTIC OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON.
CHAPTER I. –  OF THE PRINCIPLES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON.
CHAPTER II. – OF THE CONCEPT OF AN OBJECT OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON.
CHAPTER III. – OF THE MOTIVES OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON.
BOOK II: DIALECTIC OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON.
CHAPTER I. –  OF A DIALECTIC OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON GENERALLY.
CHAPTER II. – OF THE DIALECTIC OF PURE REASON IN DEFINING THE CONCEPTION OF THE “SUMMUM BONUM”.
SECOND PART. – METHODOLOGY OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON.
CONCLUSION.                                        Preface.

 

 

              This work is called the Critique of Practical Reason, not of the pure

practical reason, although its parallelism with the speculative critique would

seem to require the latter term. The reason of this appears sufficiently from

the treatise itself. Its business is to show that there is pure practical reason,

and for this purpose it criticizes the entire practical faculty of reason. If it

succeeds in this, it has no need to criticize the pure faculty itself in order to

see whether reason in making such a claim does not presumptuously overstep

itself (as is the case with the speculative reason). For if, as pure reason, it is

actually practical, it proves its own reality and that of its concepts by fact, and

all disputation against the possibility of its being real is futile.

              With this faculty, transcendental freedom is also established;

freedom, namely, in that absolute sense in which speculative reason required

it in its use of the concept of causality in order to escape the antinomy into

which it inevitably falls, when in the chain of cause and effect it tries to think

the unconditioned. Speculative reason could only exhibit this concept (of

freedom) problematically as not impossible to thought, without assuring it

any objective reality, and merely lest the supposed impossibility of what it

must at least allow to be thinkable should endanger its very being and plunge

it into an abyss of scepticism.

              Inasmuch as the reality of the concept of freedom is proved by an

apodeictic law of practical reason, it is the keystone of the whole system of

pure reason, even the speculative, and all other concepts (those of God and

immortality) which, as being mere ideas, remain in it unsupported, now

attach themselves to this concept, and by it obtain consistence and objective

reality; that is to say, their possibility is proved by the fact that freedom

actually exists, for this idea is revealed by the moral law.

              Freedom, however, is the only one of all the ideas of the speculative

reason of which we know the possibility a priori (without, however,

understanding it), because it is the condition of the moral law which we
      1
know. The ideas of God and immortality, however, are not conditions of the

moral law, but only conditions of the necessary object of a will determined

by this law; that is to say, conditions of the practical use of our pure reason.Hence, with respect to these ideas, we cannot affirm that we know and

understand, I will not say the actuality, but even the possibility of them.

However they are the conditions of the application of the morally determined

will to its object, which is given to it a priori, viz., the summum bonum.

Consequently in this practical point of view their possibility must be

assumed, although we cannot theoretically know and understand it. To justify

this assumption it is sufficient, in a practical point of view, that they contain

no intrinsic impossibility (contradiction). Here we have what, as far as

speculative reason is concerned, is a merely subjective principle of assent,

which, however, is objectively valid for a reason equally pure but practical,

and this principle, by means of the concept of freedom, assures objective

reality and authority to the ideas of God and immortality. Nay, there is a

subjective necessity (a need of pure reason) to assume them. Nevertheless the

theoretical knowledge of reason is not hereby enlarged, but only the

possibility is given, which heretofore was merely a problem and now

becomes assertion, and thus the practical use of reason is connected with the

elements of theoretical reason. And this need is not a merely hypothetical one

for the arbitrary purposes of speculation, that we must assume something if

we wish in speculation to carry reason to its utmost limits, but it is a need

which has the force of law to assume something without which that cannot be

which we must inevitably set before us as the aim of our action.

        1
               Lest any one should imagine that he finds an inconsistency here

when I call freedom the condition of the moral law, and hereafter maintain in

the treatise itself that the moral law is the condition under which we can first

become conscious of freedom, I will merely remark that freedom is the ratio

essendi of the moral law, while the moral law is the ratio cognoscendi of

freedom. For had not the moral law been previously distinctly thought in our

reason, we should never consider ourselves justified in assuming such a thing

as freedom, although it be not contradictory. But were there no freedom it

would be impossible to trace the moral law in ourselves at all.

              It would certainly be more satisfactory to our speculative reason if it

could solve these problems for itself without this circuit and preserve the

solution for practical use as a thing to be referred to, but in fact our faculty of

speculation is not so well provided. Those who boast of such high knowledge

ought not to keep it back, but to exhibit it publicly that it may be tested and

appreciated. They want to prove: very good, let them prove; and the criticalphilosophy lays its arms at their feet as the victors. Quid statis? Nolint. Atqui

licet esse beatis. As they then do not in fact choose to do so, probably

because they cannot, we must take up these arms again in order to seek in the

mortal use of reason, and to base on this, the notions of God, freedom, and

immortality, the possibility of which speculation cannot adequately prove.

              Here first is explained the enigma of the critical philosophy, viz.:

how we deny objective reality to the supersensible use of the categories in

speculation and yet admit this reality with respect to the objects of pure

practical reason. This must at first seem inconsistent as long as this practical

use is only nominally known. But when, by a thorough analysis of it, one

becomes aware that the reality spoken of does not imply any theoretical

determination of the categories and extension of our knowledge to the

supersensible; but that what is meant is that in this respect an object belongs

to them, because either they are contained in the necessary determination of

the will a priori, or are inseparably connected with its object; then this

inconsistency disappears, because the use we make of these concepts is

different from what speculative reason requires. On the other hand, there now

appears an unexpected and very satisfactory proof of the consistency of the

speculative critical philosophy. For whereas it insisted that the objects of

experience as such, including our own subject, have only the value of

phenomena, while at the same time things in themselves must be supposed as

their basis, so that not everything supersensible was to be regarded as a

fiction and its concept as empty; so now practical reason itself, without any

concert with the speculative, assures reality to a supersensible object of the

category of causality, viz., freedom, although (as becomes a practical

concept) only for practical use; and this establishes on the evidence of a fact

that which in the former case could only be conceived. By this the strange but

certain doctrine of the speculative critical philosophy, that the thinking

subject is to itself in internal intuition only a phenomenon, obtains in the

critical examination of the practical reason its full confirmation, and that so

thoroughly that we should be compelled to adopt this doctrine, even if the
                                      2
former had never proved it at all.

        2
               The union of causality as freedom with causality as rational

mechanism, the former established by the moral law, the latter by the law of

nature in the same subject, namely, man, is impossible, unless we conceive

him with reference to the former as a being in himself, and with reference tothe latter as a phenomenon — the former in pure consciousness, the latter in

empirical consciousness. Otherwise reason inevitably contradicts itself.

              By this also I can understand why the most considerable objections

which I have as yet met with against the Critique turn about these two points,

namely, on the one side, the objective reality of the categories as applied to

noumena, which is in the theoretical department of knowledge denied, in the

practical affirmed; and on the other side, the paradoxical demand to regard

oneself qua subject of freedom as a noumenon, and at the same time from the

point of view of physical nature as a phenomenon in one’s own empirical

consciousness; for as long as one has formed no definite notions of morality

and freedom, one could not conjecture on the one side what was intended to

be the noumenon, the basis of the alleged phenomenon, and on the other side

it seemed doubtful whether it was at all possible to form any notion of it,

seeing that we had previously assigned all the notions of the pure

understanding in its theoretical use exclusively to phenomena. Nothing but a

detailed criticism of the practical reason can remove all this misapprehension

and set in a clear light the consistency which constitutes its greatest merit.

              So much by way of justification of the proceeding by which, in this

work, the notions and principles of pure speculative reason which have

already undergone their special critical examination are, now and then, again

subjected to examination. This would not in other cases be in accordance

with the systematic process by which a science is established, since matters

which have been decided ought only to be cited and not again discussed. In

this case, however, it was not only allowable but necessary, because reason is

here considered in transition to a different use of these concepts from what it

had made of them before. Such a transition necessitates a comparison of the

old and the new usage, in order to distinguish well the new path from the old

one and, at the same time, to allow their connection to be observed.

Accordingly considerations of this kind, including those which are once more

directed to the concept of freedom in the practical use of the pure reason,

must not be regarded as an interpolation serving only to fill up the gaps in the

critical system of speculative reason (for this is for its own purpose

complete), or like the props and buttresses which in a hastily constructed

building are often added afterwards; but as true members which make the

connexion of the system plain, and show us concepts, here presented as real,

which there could only be presented problematically. This remark appliesespecially to the concept of freedom, respecting which one cannot but

observe with surprise that so many boast of being able to understand it quite

well and to explain its possibility, while they regard it only psychologically,

whereas if they had studied it in a transcendental point of view, they must

have recognized that it is not only indispensable as a problematical concept,

in the complete use of speculative reason, but also quite incomprehensible;

and if they afterwards came to consider its practical use, they must needs

have come to the very mode of determining the principles of this, to which

they are now so loth to assent. The concept of freedom is the stone of

stumbling for all empiricists, but at the same time the key to the loftiest

practical principles for critical moralists, who perceive by its means that they

must necessarily proceed by a rational method. For this reason I beg the

reader not to pass lightly over what is said of this concept at the end of the

Analytic.

              I must leave it to those who are acquainted with works of this kind to

judge whether such a system as that of the practical reason, which is here

developed from the critical examination of it, has cost much or little trouble,

especially in seeking not to miss the true point of view from which the whole

can be rightly sketched. It presupposes, indeed, the Fundamental Principles of

the Metaphysic of Morals, but only in so far as this gives a preliminary

acquaintance with the principle of duty, and assigns and justifies a definite
                                                          3
formula thereof; in other respects it is independent. It results from the nature

of this practical faculty itself that the complete classification of all practical

sciences cannot be added, as in the critique of the speculative reason. For it is

not possible to define duties specially, as human duties, with a view to their

classification, until the subject of this definition (viz., man) is known

according to his actual nature, at least so far as is necessary with respect to

duty; this, however, does not belong to a critical examination of the practical

reason, the business of which is only to assign in a complete manner the

principles of its possibility, extent, and limits, without special reference to

human nature. The classification then belongs to the system of science, not to

the system of criticism.

        3
               A reviewer who wanted to find some fault with this work has hit

the truth better, perhaps, than he thought, when he says that no new principle

of morality is set forth in it, but only a new formula. But who would think of

introducing a new principle of all morality and making himself as it were thefirst discoverer of it, just as if all the world before him were ignorant what

duty was or had been in thorough-going error? But whoever knows of what

importance to a mathematician a formula is, which defines accurately what is

to be done to work a problem, will not think that a formula is insignificant

and useless which does the same for all duty in general.

              In the second part of the Analytic I have given, as I trust, a sufficient
                                                                4
answer to the objection of a truth-loving and acute critic of the Fundamental

Principles of the Metaphysic of Morals — a critic always worthy of respect

the objection, namely, that the notion of good was not established before the
                                                          5
moral principle, as be thinks it ought to have been. I have also had regard to

many of the objections which have reached me from men who show that they

have at heart the discovery of the truth, and I shall continue to do so (for

those who have only their old system before their eyes, and who have already

settled what is to be approved or disapproved, do not desire any explanation

which might stand in the way of their own private opinion.)

        4
               [See Kant’s “Das mag in der Theoric ricktig seyn,” etc. Werke, vol.

vii, p. 182.]

        5
               It might also have been objected to me that I have not first defined

the notion of the faculty of desire, or of the feeling of Pleasure, although this

reproach would be unfair, because this definition might reasonably be

presupposed as given in psychology. However, the definition there given

might be such as to found the determination of the faculty of desire on the

feeling of pleasure (as is commonly done), and thus the supreme principle of

practical philosophy would be necessarily made empirical, which, however,

remains to be proved and in this critique is altogether refuted. It will,

therefore, give this definition here in such a manner as it ought to be given, in

order to leave this contested point open at the beginning, as it should be.

LIFE is the faculty a being has of acting according to laws of the faculty of

desire. The faculty of DESIRE is the being’s faculty of becoming by means

of its ideas the cause of the actual existence of the objects of these ideas.

PLEASURE is the idea of the agreement of the object, or the action with the

subjective conditions of life, i.e., with the faculty of causality of an idea in

respect of the actuality of its object (or with the determination of the forces of

the subject to action which produces it). I have no further need for the

purposes of this critique of notions borrowed from psychology; the critique

itself supplies the rest. It is easily seen that the question whether the facultyof desire is always based on pleasure, or whether under certain conditions

pleasure only follows the determination of desire, is by this definition left

undecided, for it is composed only of terms belonging to the pure

understanding, i.e., of categories which contain nothing empirical. Such

precaution is very desirable in all philosophy and yet is often neglected;

namely, not to prejudge questions by adventuring definitions before the

notion has been completely analysed, which is often very late. It may be

observed through the whole course of the critical philosophy (of the

theoretical as well as the practical reason) that frequent opportunity offers of

supplying defects in the old dogmatic method of philosophy, and of

correcting errors which are not observed until we make such rational use of

these notions viewing them as a whole.

              When we have to study a particular faculty of the human mind in its

sources, its content, and its limits; then from the nature of human knowledge

we must begin with its parts, with an accurate and complete exposition of

them; complete, namely, so far as is possible in the present state of our

knowledge of its elements. But there is another thing to be attended to which

is of a more philosophical and architectonic character, namely, to grasp

correctly the idea of the whole, and from thence to get a view of all those

parts as mutually related by the aid of pure reason, and by means of their

derivation from the concept of the whole. This is only possible through the

most intimate acquaintance with the system; and those who find the first

inquiry too troublesome, and do not think it worth their while to attain such

an acquaintance, cannot reach the second stage, namely, the general view,

which is a synthetical return to that which had previously been given

analytically. It is no wonder then if they find inconsistencies everywhere,

although the gaps which these indicate are not in the system itself, but in their

own incoherent train of thought.

              I have no fear, as regards this treatise, of the reproach that I wish to

introduce a new language, since the sort of knowledge here in question has

itself somewhat of an everyday character. Nor even in the case of the former

critique could this reproach occur to anyone who had thought it through and

not merely turned over the leaves. To invent new words where the language

has no lack of expressions for given notions is a childish effort to distinguish

oneself from the crowd, if not by new and true thoughts, yet by new patches

on the old garment. If, therefore, the readers of that work know any morefamiliar expressions which are as suitable to the thought as those seem to me

to be, or if they think they can show the futility of these thoughts themselves

and hence that of the expression, they would, in the first case, very much

oblige me, for I only desire to be understood: and, in the second case, they

would deserve well of philosophy. But, as long as these thoughts stand, I very

much doubt that suitable and yet more common expressions for them can be
      6
found.

        6
               I am more afraid in the present treatise of occasional misconception

in respect of some expressions which I have chosen with the greatest care in

order that the notion to which they point may not be missed. Thus, in the

table of categories of the Practical reason under the title of Modality, the

Permitted, and forbidden (in a practical objective point of view, possible and

impossible) have almost the same meaning in common language as the next

category, duty and contrary to duty. Here, however, the former means what

coincides with, or contradicts, a merely possible practical precept (for

example, the solution of all problems of geometry and mechanics); the latter,

what is similarly related to a law actually present in the reason; and this

distinction is not quite foreign even to common language, although somewhat

unusual. For example, it is forbidden to an orator, as such, to forge new

words or constructions; in a certain degree this is permitted to a poet; in

neither case is there any question of duty. For if anyone chooses to forfeit his

reputation as an orator, no one can prevent him. We have here only to do with

the distinction of imperatives into problematical, assertorial, and apodeictic.

Similarly in the note in which I have pared the moral ideas of practical

perfection in different philosophical schools, I have distinguished the idea of

wisdom from that of holiness, although I have stated that essentially and

objectively they are the same. But in that place I understand by the former

only that wisdom to which man (the Stoic) lays claim; therefore I take it

subjectively as an attribute alleged to belong to man. (Perhaps the expression

virtue, with which also they made great show, would better mark the

characteristic of his school.) The expression of a postulate of pure practical

reason might give most occasion to misapprehension in case the reader

confounded it with the signification of the postulates in pure mathematics,

which carry apodeictic certainty with them. These, however, postulate the

possibility of an action, the object of which has been previously recognized a

priori in theory as possible, and that with perfect certainty. But the former

postulates the possibility of an object itself (God and the immortality of thesoul) from apodeictic practical laws, and therefore only for the purposes of a

practical reason. This certainty of the postulated possibility then is not at all

theoretic, and consequently not apodeictic; that is to say, it is not a known

necessity as regards the object, but a necessary supposition as regards the

subject, necessary for the obedience to its objective but practical laws. It is,

therefore, merely a necessary hypothesis. I could find no better expression for

this rational necessity, which is subjective, but yet true and unconditional.

              In this manner, then, the a priori principles of two faculties of the

mind, the faculty of cognition and that of desire, would be found and

determined as to the conditions, extent, and limits of their use, and thus a sure

foundation be paid for a scientific system of philosophy, both theoretic and

practical.

              Nothing worse could happen to these labours than that anyone

should make the unexpected discovery that there neither is, nor can be, any a

priori knowledge at all. But there is no danger of this. This would be the same

thing as if one sought to prove by reason that there is no reason. For we only

say that we know something by reason, when we are conscious that we could

have known it, even if it had not been given to us in experience; hence

rational knowledge and knowledge a priori are one and the same. It is a clear

contradiction to try to extract necessity from a principle of experience (ex

pumice aquam), and to try by this to give a judgement true universality

(without which there is no rational inference, not even inference from

analogy, which is at least a presumed universality and objective necessity).

To substitute subjective necessity, that is, custom, for objective, which exists

only in a priori judgements, is to deny to reason the power of judging about

the object, i.e., of knowing it, and what belongs to it. It implies, for example,

that we must not say of something which often or always follows a certain

antecedent state that we can conclude from this to that (for this would imply

objective necessity and the notion of an a priori connexion), but only that we

may expect similar cases (just as animals do), that is that we reject the notion

of cause altogether as false and a mere delusion. As to attempting to remedy

this want of objective and consequently universal validity by saying that we

can see no ground for attributing any other sort of knowledge to other rational

beings, if this reasoning were valid, our ignorance would do more for the

enlargement of our knowledge than all our meditation. For, then, on this very

ground that we have no knowledge of any other rational beings besides man,we should have a right to suppose them to be of the same nature as we know

ourselves to be: that is, we should really know them. I omit to mention that

universal assent does not prove the objective validity of a judgement (i.e., its

validity as a cognition), and although this universal assent should accidentally

happen, it could furnish no proof of agreement with the object; on the

contrary, it is the objective validity which alone constitutes the basis of a

necessary universal consent.

              Hume would be quite satisfied with this system of universal

empiricism, for, as is well known, he desired nothing more than that, instead

of ascribing any objective meaning to the necessity in the concept of cause, a

merely subjective one should be assumed, viz., custom, in order to deny that

reason could judge about God, freedom, and immortality; and if once his

principles were granted, he was certainly well able to deduce his conclusions

therefrom, with all logical coherence. But even Hume did not make his

empiricism so universal as to include mathematics. He holds the principles of

mathematics to be analytical; and if this were correct, they would certainly be

apodeictic also: but we could not infer from this that reason has the faculty of

forming apodeictic judgements in philosophy also — that is to say, those

which are synthetical judgements, like the judgement of causality. But if we

adopt a universal empiricism, then mathematics will be included.

              Now if this science is in contradiction with a reason that admits only

empirical principles, as it inevitably is in the antinomy in which mathematics

prove the infinite divisibility of space, which empiricism cannot admit; then

the greatest possible evidence of demonstration is in manifest contradiction

with the alleged conclusions from experience, and we are driven to ask, like

Cheselden’s blind patient, “Which deceives me, sight or touch?” (for

empiricism is based on a necessity felt, rationalism on a necessity seen). And

thus universal empiricism reveals itself as absolute scepticism. It is erroneous
                                                              7
to attribute this in such an unqualified sense to Hume, since he left at least

one certain touchstone (which can only be found in a priori principles),

although experience consists not only of feelings, but also of judgements.

        7
               Names that designate the followers of a sect have always been

accompanied with much injustice; just as if one said, “N is an Idealist.” For

although he not only admits, but even insists, that our ideas of external things

have actual objects of external things corresponding to them, yet he holds that

the form of the intuition does not depend on them but on the human mind.              However, as in this philosophical and critical age such empiricism

can scarcely be serious, and it is probably put forward only as an intellectual

exercise and for the purpose of putting in a clearer light, by contrast, the

necessity of rational a priori principles, we can only be grateful to those who

employ themselves in this otherwise uninstructive labour.

 

   Introduction. – Of the Idea of a Critique of Practical Reason.

 

 

              The theoretical use of reason was concerned with objects of the

cognitive faculty only, and a critical examination of it with reference to this

use applied properly only to the pure faculty of cognition; because this raised

the suspicion, which was afterwards confirmed, that it might easily pass

beyond its limits, and be lost among unattainable objects, or even

contradictory notions. It is quite different with the practical use of reason. In

this, reason is concerned with the grounds of determination of the will, which

is a faculty either to produce objects corresponding to ideas, or to determine

ourselves to the effecting of such objects (whether the physical power is

sufficient or not); that is, to determine our causality. For here, reason can at

least attain so far as to determine the will, and has always objective reality in

so far as it is the volition only that is in question. The first question here then

is whether pure reason of itself alone suffices to determine the will, or

whether it can be a ground of determination only as dependent on empirical

conditions. Now, here there comes in a notion of causality justified by the

critique of the pure reason, although not capable of being presented

empirically, viz., that of freedom; and if we can now discover means of

proving that this property does in fact belong to the human will (and so to the

will of all rational beings), then it will not only be shown that pure reason can

be practical, but that it alone, and not reason empirically limited, is

indubitably practical; consequently, we shall have to make a critical

examination, not of pure practical reason, but only of practical reason

generally. For when once pure reason is shown to exist, it needs no critical

examination. For reason itself contains the standard for the critical

examination of every use of it. The critique, then, of practical reason

generally is bound to prevent the empirically conditioned reason from

claiming exclusively to furnish the ground of determination of the will. If it is

proved that there is a [practical] reason, its employment is alone immanent;

the empirically conditioned use, which claims supremacy, is on the contrary

transcendent and expresses itself in demands and precepts which go quite

beyond its sphere. This is just the opposite of what might be said of pure

reason in its speculative employment.

              However, as it is still pure reason, the knowledge of which is herethe foundation of its practical employment, the general outline of the

classification of a critique of practical reason must be arranged in accordance

with that of the speculative. We must, then, have the Elements and the

Methodology of it; and in the former an Analytic as the rule of truth, and a

Dialectic as the exposition and dissolution of the illusion in the judgements of

practical reason. But the order in the subdivision of the Analytic will be the

reverse of that in the critique of the pure speculative reason. For, in the

present case, we shall commence with the principles and proceed to the

concepts, and only then, if possible, to the senses; whereas in the case of the

speculative reason we began with the senses and had to end with the

principles. The reason of this lies again in this: that now we have to do with a

will, and have to consider reason, not in its relation to objects, but to this will

and its causality. We must, then, begin with the principles of a causality not

empirically conditioned, after which the attempt can be made to establish our

notions of the determining grounds of such a will, of their application to

objects, and finally to the subject and its sense faculty. We necessarily begin

with the law of causality from freedom, that is, with a pure practical

principle, and this determines the objects to which alone it can be applied.

 

 

           First Part. – Elements of Pure Practical Reason.

 

 

                Book I: The Analytic of Pure Practical Reason.

 

 

          Chapter I. – Of the Principles of Pure Practical Reason.

 

 

                                    I. Definition.

 

 

              Practical principles are propositions which contain a general

determination of the will, having under it several practical rules. They are

subjective, or maxims, when the condition is regarded by the subject as valid

only for his own will, but are objective, or practical laws, when the condition

is recognized as objective, that is, valid for the will of every rational being.

                                        Remark.

 

              Supposing that pure reason contains in itself a practical motive, that

is, one adequate to determine the will, then there are practical laws; otherwise

all practical principles will be mere maxims. In case the will of a rational

being is pathologically affected, there may occur a conflict of the maxims

with the practical laws recognized by itself. For example, one may make it

his maxim to let no injury pass unrevenged, and yet he may see that this is

not a practical law, but only his own maxim; that, on the contrary, regarded

as being in one and the same maxim a rule for the will of every rational

being, it must contradict itself. In natural philosophy the principles of what

happens, e.g., the principle of equality of action and reaction in the

communication of motion) are at the same time laws of nature; for the use of

reason there is theoretical and determined by the nature of the object. In

practical philosophy, i.e., that which has to do only with the grounds of

determination of the will, the principles which a man makes for himself arenot laws by which one is inevitably bound; because reason in practical

matters has to do with the subject, namely, with the faculty of desire, the

special character of which may occasion variety in the rule. The practical rule

is always a product of reason, because it prescribes action as a means to the

effect. But in the case of a being with whom reason does not of itself

determine the will, this rule is an imperative, i.e., a rule characterized by

“shall,” which expresses the objective necessitation of the action and signifies

that, if reason completely determined the will, the action would inevitably

take place according to this rule. Imperatives, therefore, are objectively valid,

and are quite distinct from maxims, which are subjective principles. The

former either determine the conditions of the causality of the rational being as

an efficient cause, i.e., merely in reference to the effect and the means of

attaining it; or they determine the will only, whether it is adequate to the

effect or not. The former would be hypothetical imperatives, and contain

mere precepts of skill; the latter, on the contrary, would be categorical, and

would alone be practical laws. Thus maxims are principles, but not

imperatives. Imperatives themselves, however, when they are conditional

(i.e., do not determine the will simply as will, but only in respect to a desired

effect, that is, when they are hypothetical imperatives), are practical precepts

but not laws. Laws must be sufficient to determine the will as will, even

before I ask whether I have power sufficient for a desired effect, or the means

necessary to produce it; hence they are categorical: otherwise they are not

laws at all, because the necessity is wanting, which, if it is to be practical,

must be independent of conditions which are pathological and are therefore

only contingently connected with the will. Tell a man, for example, that he

must be industrious and thrifty in youth, in order that he may not want in old

age; this is a correct and important practical precept of the will. But it is easy

to see that in this case the will is directed to something else which it is

presupposed that it desires; and as to this desire, we must leave it to the actor

himself whether he looks forward to other resources than those of his own

acquisition, or does not expect to be old, or thinks that in case of future

necessity he will be able to make shift with little. Reason, from which alone

can spring a rule involving necessity, does, indeed, give necessity to this

precept (else it would not be an imperative), but this is a necessity dependent

on subjective conditions, and cannot be supposed in the same degree in all

subjects. But that reason may give laws it is necessary that it should only

need to presuppose itself, because rules are objectively and universally validonly when they hold without any contingent subjective conditions, which

distinguish one rational being from another. Now tell a man that he should

never make a deceitful promise, this is a rule which only concerns his will,

whether the purposes he may have can be attained thereby or not; it is the

volition only which is to be determined a priori by that rule. If now it is found

that this rule is practically right, then it is a law, because it is a categorical

imperative. Thus, practical laws refer to the will only, without considering

what is attained by its causality, and we may disregard this latter (as

belonging to the world of sense) in order to have them quite pure.

                                    II. Theorem I.

 

 

              All practical principles which presuppose an object (matter) of the

faculty of desire as the ground of determination of the will are empirical and

can furnish no practical laws.

              By the matter of the faculty of desire I mean an object the realization

of which is desired. Now, if the desire for this object precedes the practical

rule and is the condition of our making it a principle, then I say (in the first

place) this principle is in that case wholly empirical, for then what determines

the choice is the idea of an object and that relation of this idea to the subject

by which its faculty of desire is determined to its realization. Such a relation

to the subject is called the pleasure in the realization of an object. This, then,

must be presupposed as a condition of the possibility of determination of the

will. But it is impossible to know a priori of any idea of an object whether it

will be connected with pleasure or pain, or be indifferent. In such cases,

therefore, the determining principle of the choice must be empirical and,

therefore, also the practical material principle which presupposes it as a

condition.

              In the second place, since susceptibility to a pleasure or pain can be

known only empirically and cannot hold in the same degree for all rational

beings, a principle which is based on this subjective condition may serve

indeed as a maxim for the subject which possesses this susceptibility, but not

as a law even to him (because it is wanting in objective necessity, which must

be recognized a priori); it follows, therefore, that such a principle can never

furnish a practical law.                                  III. Theorem II.

 

 

              All material practical principles as such are of one and the same kind

and come under the general principle of self-love or private happiness.

              Pleasure arising from the idea of the idea of the existence of a thing,

in so far as it is to determine the desire of this thing, is founded on the

susceptibility of the subject, since it depends on the presence of an object;

hence it belongs to sense (feeling), and not to understanding, which expresses

a relation of the idea to an object according to concepts, not to the subject

according to feelings. It is, then, practical only in so far as the faculty of

desire is determined by the sensation of agreeableness which the subject

expects from the actual existence of the object. Now, a rational being’s

consciousness of the pleasantness of life uninterruptedly accompanying his

whole existence is happiness; and the principle which makes this the supreme

ground of determination of the will is the principle of self-love. All material

principles, then, which place the determining ground of the will in the

pleasure or pain to be received from the existence of any object are all of the

same kind, inasmuch as they all belong to the principle of self-love or private

happiness.

                                        Corollary.

 

              All material practical rules place the determining principle of the

will in the lower desires; and if there were no purely formal laws of the will

adequate to determine it, then we could not admit any higher desire at all.

                                        Remark I.

 

              It is surprising that men, otherwise acute, can think it possible to

distinguish between higher and lower desires, according as the ideas which

are connected with the feeling of pleasure have their origin in the senses or in

the understanding; for when we inquire what are the determining grounds of

desire, and place them in some expected pleasantness, it is of no consequence

whence the idea of this pleasing object is derived, but only how much it

pleases. Whether an idea has its seat and source in the understanding or not,

if it can only determine the choice by presupposing a feeling of pleasure in

the subject, it follows that its capability of determining the choice dependsaltogether on the nature of the inner sense, namely, that this can be agreeably

affected by it. However dissimilar ideas of objects may be, though they be

ideas of the understanding, or even of the reason in contrast to ideas of sense,

yet the feeling of pleasure, by means of which they constitute the determining

principle of the will (the expected satisfaction which impels the activity to the

production of the object), is of one and the same kind, not only inasmuch as it

can only be known empirically, but also inasmuch as it affects one and the

same vital force which manifests itself in the faculty of desire, and in this

respect can only differ in degree from every other ground of determination.

Otherwise, how could we compare in respect of magnitude two principles of

determination, the ideas of which depend upon different faculties, so as to

prefer that which affects the faculty of desire in the highest degree. The same

man may return unread an instructive book which he cannot again obtain, in

order not to miss a hunt; he may depart in the midst of a fine speech, in order

not to be late for dinner; he may leave a rational conversation, such as he

otherwise values highly, to take his place at the gaming-table; he may even

repulse a poor man whom he at other times takes pleasure in benefiting,

because he has only just enough money in his pocket to pay for his admission

to the theatre. If the determination of his will rests on the feeling of the

agreeableness or disagreeableness that he expects from any cause, it is all the

same to him by what sort of ideas he will be affected. The only thing that

concerns him, in order to decide his choice, is, how great, how long

continued, how easily obtained, and how often repeated, this agreeableness

is. Just as to the man who wants money to spend, it is all the same whether

the gold was dug out of the mountain or washed out of the sand, provided it is

everywhere accepted at the same value; so the man who cares only for the

enjoyment of life does not ask whether the ideas are of the understanding or

the senses, but only how much and how great pleasure they will give for the

longest time. It is only those that would gladly deny to pure reason the power

of determining the will, without the presupposition of any feeling, who could

deviate so far from their own exposition as to describe as quite heterogeneous

what they have themselves previously brought under one and the same

principle. Thus, for example, it is observed that we can find pleasure in the

mere exercise of power, in the consciousness of our strength of mind in

overcoming obstacles which are opposed to our designs, in the culture of our

mental talents, etc.; and we justly call these more refined pleasures and

enjoyments, because they are more in our power than others; they do notwear out, but rather increase the capacity for further enjoyment of them, and

while they delight they at the same time cultivate. But to say on this account

that they determine the will in a different way and not through sense, whereas

the possibility of the pleasure presupposes a feeling for it implanted in us,

which is the first condition of this satisfaction; this is just as when ignorant

persons that like to dabble in metaphysics imagine matter so subtle, so

supersubtle that they almost make themselves giddy with it, and then think

that in this way they have conceived it as a spiritual and yet extended being.

If with Epicurus we make virtue determine the will only by means of the

pleasure it promises, we cannot afterwards blame him for holding that this

pleasure is of the same kind as those of the coarsest senses. For we have no

reason whatever to charge him with holding that the ideas by which this

feeling is excited in us belong merely to the bodily senses. As far as can be

conjectured, he sought the source of many of them in the use of the higher

cognitive faculty, but this did not prevent him, and could not prevent him,

from holding on the principle above stated, that the pleasure itself which

those intellectual ideas give us, and by which alone they can determine the

will, is just of the same kind. Consistency is the highest obligation of a

philosopher, and yet the most rarely found. The ancient Greek schools give

us more examples of it than we find in our syncretistic age, in which a certain

shallow and dishonest system of compromise of contradictory principles is

devised, because it commends itself better to a public which is content to

know something of everything and nothing thoroughly, so as to please every

party.

              The principle of private happiness, however much understanding and

reason may be used in it, cannot contain any other determining principles for

the will than those which belong to the lower desires; and either there are no

[higher] desires at all, or pure reason must of itself alone be practical; that is,

it must be able to determine the will by the mere form of the practical rule

without supposing any feeling, and consequently without any idea of the

pleasant or unpleasant, which is the matter of the desire, and which is always

an empirical condition of the principles. Then only, when reason of itself

determines the will (not as the servant of the inclination), it is really a higher

desire to which that which is pathologically determined is subordinate, and is

really, and even specifically, distinct from the latter, so that even the slightest

admixture of the motives of the latter impairs its strength and superiority; just

as in a mathematical demonstration the least empirical condition woulddegrade and destroy its force and value. Reason, with its practical law,

determines the will immediately, not by means of an intervening feeling of

pleasure or pain, not even of pleasure in the law itself, and it is only because

it can, as pure reason, be practical, that it is possible for it to be legislative.

                                      Remark II.

 

              To be happy is necessarily the wish of every finite rational being,

and this, therefore, is inevitably a determining principle of its faculty of

desire. For we are not in possession originally of satisfaction with our whole

existence — a bliss which would imply a consciousness of our own

independent self-sufficiency this is a problem imposed upon us by our own

finite nature, because we have wants and these wants regard the matter of our

desires, that is, something that is relative to a subjective feeling of pleasure or

pain, which determines what we need in order to be satisfied with our

condition. But just because this material principle of determination can only

be empirically known by the subject, it is impossible to regard this problem

as a law; for a law being objective must contain the very same principle of

determination of the will in all cases and for all rational beings. For, although

the notion of happiness is in every case the foundation of practical relation of

the objects to the desires, yet it is only a general name for the subjective

determining principles, and determines nothing specifically; whereas this is

what alone we are concerned with in this practical problem, which cannot be

solved at all without such specific determination. For it is every man’s own

special feeling of pleasure and pain that decides in what he is to place his

happiness, and even in the same subject this will vary with the difference of

his wants according as this feeling changes, and thus a law which is

subjectively necessary (as a law of nature) is objectively a very contingent

practical principle, which can and must be very different in different subjects

and therefore can never furnish a law; since, in the desire for happiness it is

not the form (of conformity to law) that is decisive, but simply the matter,

namely, whether I am to expect pleasure in following the law, and how much.

Principles of self-love may, indeed, contain universal precepts of skill (how

to find means to accomplish one’s purpose), but in that case they are merely
                        8
theoretical principles; as, for example, how he who would like to eat bread

should contrive a mill; but practical precepts founded on them can never be

universal, for the determining principle of the desire is based on the feeling

pleasure and pain, which can never be supposed to be universally directed tothe same objects.

        8
               Propositions which in mathematics or physics are called practical

ought properly to be called technical. For they have nothing to do with the

determination of the theoretical they only point out how the certain must is to

be produced and are, therefore, just as theoretical as any propositions which

express the connection of a cause with an effect. Now whoever chooses the

effect must also choose the cause.

              Even supposing, however, that all finite rational beings were

thoroughly agreed as to what were the objects of their feelings of pleasure

and pain, and also as to the means which they must employ to attain the one

and avoid the other; still, they could by no means set up the principle of self-

love as a practical law, for this unanimity itself would be only contingent.

The principle of determination would still be only subjectively valid and

merely empirical, and would not possess the necessity which is conceived in

every law, namely, an objective necessity arising from a priori grounds;

unless, indeed, we hold this necessity to be not at all practical, but merely

physical, viz., that our action is as inevitably determined by our inclination,

as yawning when we see others yawn. It would be better to maintain that

there are no practical laws at all, but only counsels for the service of our

desires, than to raise merely subjective principles to the rank of practical

laws, which have objective necessity, and not merely subjective, and which

must be known by reason a priori, not by experience (however empirically

universal this may be). Even the rules of corresponding phenomena are only

called laws of nature (e.g., the mechanical laws), when we either know them

really a priori, or (as in the case of chemical laws) suppose that they would be

known a priori from objective grounds if our insight reached further. But in

the case of merely subjective practical principles, it is expressly made a

condition that they rest, not on objective, but on subjective conditions of

choice, and hence that they must always be represented as mere maxims,

never as practical laws. This second remark seems at first sight to be mere

verbal refinement, but it defines the terms of the most important distinction

which can come into consideration in practical investigations.

                                  IV. Theorem III.

 

 

              A rational being cannot regard his maxims as practical universallaws, unless he conceives them as principles which determine the will, not by

their matter, but by their form only.

              By the matter of a practical principle I mean the object of the will.

This object is either the determining ground of the will or it is not. In the

former case the rule of the will is subjected to an empirical condition (viz.,

the relation of the determining idea to the feeling of pleasure and pain),

consequently it can not be a practical law. Now, when we abstract from a law

all matter, i.e., every object of the will (as a determining principle), nothing is

left but the mere form of a universal legislation. Therefore, either a rational

being cannot conceive his subjective practical principles, that is, his maxims,

as being at the same time universal laws, or he must suppose that their mere

form, by which they are fitted for universal legislation, is alone what makes

them practical laws.

                                        Remark.

 

              The commonest understanding can distinguish without instruction

what form of maxim is adapted for universal legislation, and what is not.

Suppose, for example, that I have made it my maxim to increase my fortune

by every safe means. Now, I have a deposit in my hands, the owner of which

is dead and has left no writing about it. This is just the case for my maxim. I

desire then to know whether that maxim can also bold good as a universal

practical law. I apply it, therefore, to the present case, and ask whether it

could take the form of a law, and consequently whether I can by my maxim

at the same time give such a law as this, that everyone may deny a deposit of

which no one can produce a proof. I at once become aware that such a

principle, viewed as a law, would annihilate itself, because the result would

be that there would be no deposits. A practical law which I recognise as such

must be qualified for universal legislation; this is an identical proposition

and, therefore, self-evident. Now, if I say that my will is subject to a practical

law, I cannot adduce my inclination (e.g., in the present case my avarice) as a

principle of determination fitted to be a universal practical law; for this is so

far from being fitted for a universal legislation that, if put in the form of a

universal law, it would destroy itself.

              It is, therefore, surprising that intelligent men could have thought of

calling the desire of happiness a universal practical law on the ground that the

desire is universal, and, therefore, also the maxim by which everyone makesthis desire determine his will. For whereas in other cases a universal law of

nature makes everything harmonious; here, on the contrary, if we attribute to

the maxim the universality of a law, the extreme opposite of harmony will

follow, the greatest opposition and the complete destruction of the maxim

itself and its purpose. For, in that case, the will of all has not one and the

same object, but everyone has his own (his private welfare), which may

accidentally accord with the purposes of others which are equally selfish, but

it is far from sufficing for a law; because the occasional exceptions which one

is permitted to make are endless, and cannot be definitely embraced in one

universal rule. In this manner, then, results a harmony like that which a

certain satirical poem depicts as existing between a married couple bent on

going to ruin, “O, marvellous harmony, what he wishes, she wishes also”; or

like what is said of the pledge of Francis I to the Emperor Charles V, “What

my brother Charles wishes that I wish also” (viz., Milan). Empirical

principles of determination are not fit for any universal external legislation,

but just as little for internal; for each man makes his own subject the

foundation of his inclination, and in the same subject sometimes one

inclination, sometimes another, has the preponderance. To discover a law

which would govern them all under this condition, namely, bringing them all

into harmony, is quite impossible.

                                    V. Problem I.

 

 

              Supposing that the mere legislative form of maxims is alone the

sufficient determining principle of a will, to find the nature of the will which

can be determined by it alone.

              Since the bare form of the law can only be conceived by reason, and

is, therefore, not an object of the senses, and consequently does not belong to

the class of phenomena, it follows that the idea of it, which determines the

will, is distinct from all the principles that determine events in nature

according to the law of causality, because in their case the determining

principles must themselves be phenomena. Now, if no other determining

principle can serve as a law for the will except that universal legislative form,

such a will must be conceived as quite independent of the natural law of

phenomena in their mutual relation, namely, the law of causality; such

independence is called freedom in the strictest, that is, in the transcendental,sense; consequently, a will which can have its law in nothing but the mere

legislative form of the maxim is a free will.

                                  VI. Problem II.

 

 

              Supposing that a will is free, to find the law which alone is

competent to determine it necessarily.

              Since the matter of the practical law, i.e., an object of the maxim,

can never be given otherwise than empirically, and the free will is

independent on empirical conditions (that is, conditions belonging to the

world of sense) and yet is determinable, consequently a free will must find its

principle of determination in the law, and yet independently of the matter of

the law. But, besides the matter of the law, nothing is contained in it except

the legislative form. It is the legislative form, then, contained in the maxim,

which can alone constitute a principle of determination of the [free] will.

                                        Remark.

 

              Thus freedom and an unconditional practical law reciprocally imply

each other. Now I do not ask here whether they are in fact distinct, or whether

an unconditioned law is not rather merely the consciousness of a pure

practical reason and the latter identical with the positive concept of freedom;

I only ask, whence begins our knowledge of the unconditionally practical,

whether it is from freedom or from the practical law? Now it cannot begin

from freedom, for of this we cannot be immediately conscious, since the first

concept of it is negative; nor can we infer it from experience, for experience

gives us the knowledge only of the law of phenomena, and hence of the

mechanism of nature, the direct opposite of freedom. It is therefore the moral

law, of which we become directly conscious (as soon as we trace for

ourselves maxims of the will), that first presents itself to us, and leads

directly to the concept of freedom, inasmuch as reason presents it as a

principle of determination not to be outweighed by any sensible conditions,

nay, wholly independent of them. But how is the consciousness, of that moral

law possible? We can become conscious of pure practical laws just as we are

conscious of pure theoretical principles, by attending to the necessity with

which reason prescribes them and to the elimination of all empirical

conditions, which it directs. The concept of a pure will arises out of theformer, as that of a pure understanding arises out of the latter. That this is the

true subordination of our concepts, and that it is morality that first discovers

to us the notion of freedom, hence that it is practical reason which, with this

concept, first proposes to speculative reason the most insoluble problem,

thereby placing it in the greatest perplexity, is evident from the following

consideration: Since nothing in phenomena can be explained by the concept

of freedom, but the mechanism of nature must constitute the only clue;

moreover, when pure reason tries to ascend in the series of causes to the

unconditioned, it falls into an antinomy which is entangled in

incomprehensibilities on the one side as much as the other; whilst the latter

(namely, mechanism) is at least useful in the explanation of phenomena,

therefore no one would ever have been so rash as to introduce freedom into

science, had not the moral law, and with it practical reason, come in and

forced this notion upon us. Experience, however, confirms this order of

notions. Suppose some one asserts of his lustful appetite that, when the

desired object and the opportunity are present, it is quite irresistible. [Ask

him]— if a gallows were erected before the house where he finds this

opportunity, in order that he should be hanged thereon immediately after the

gratification of his lust, whether he could not then control his passion; we

need not be long in doubt what he would reply. Ask him, however — if his

sovereign ordered him, on pain of the same immediate execution, to bear

false witness against an honourable man, whom the prince might wish to

destroy under a plausible pretext, would he consider it possible in that case to

overcome his love of life, however great it may be. He would perhaps not

venture to affirm whether he would do so or not, but he must unhesitatingly

admit that it is possible to do so. He judges, therefore, that he can do a certain

thing because he is conscious that he ought, and he recognizes that he is free

— a fact which but for the moral law he would never have known.

            VII. Fundamental Law of the Pure Practical Reason.

 

 

              Act so that the maxim of thy will can always at the same time hold

good as a principle of universal legislation.

                                        Remark.

 

              Pure geometry has postulates which are practical propositions, butcontain nothing further than the assumption that we can do something if it is

required that we should do it, and these are the only geometrical propositions

that concern actual existence. They are, then, practical rules under a

problematical condition of the will; but here the rule says: We absolutely

must proceed in a certain manner. The practical rule is, therefore,

unconditional, and hence it is conceived a priori as a categorically practical

proposition by which the will is objectively determined absolutely and

immediately (by the practical rule itself, which thus is in this case a law); for

pure reason practical of itself is here directly legislative. The will is thought

as independent on empirical conditions, and, therefore, as pure will

determined by the mere form of the law, and this principle of determination is

regarded as the supreme condition of all maxims. The thing is strange

enough, and has no parallel in all the rest of our practical knowledge. For the

a priori thought of a possible universal legislation which is therefore merely

problematical, is unconditionally commanded as a law without borrowing

anything from experience or from any external will. This, however, is not a

precept to do something by which some desired effect can be attained (for

then the will would depend on physical conditions), but a rule that determines

the will a priori only so far as regards the forms of its maxims; and thus it is

at least not impossible to conceive that a law, which only applies to the

subjective form of principles, yet serves as a principle of determination by

means of the objective form of law in general. We may call the consciousness

of this fundamental law a fact of reason, because we cannot reason it out

from antecedent data of reason, e.g., the consciousness of freedom (for this is

not antecedently given), but it forces itself on us as a synthetic a priori

proposition, which is not based on any intuition, either pure or empirical. It

would, indeed, be analytical if the freedom of the will were presupposed, but

to presuppose freedom as a positive concept would require an intellectual

intuition, which cannot here be assumed; however, when we regard this law

as given, it must be observed, in order not to fall into any misconception, that

it is not an empirical fact, but the sole fact of the pure reason, which thereby

announces itself as originally legislative (sic volo, sic jubeo).

                                        Corollary.

 

              Pure reason is practical of itself alone and gives (to man) a universal

law which we call the moral law.                                        Remark.

 

              The fact just mentioned is undeniable. It is only necessary to analyse

the judgement that men pass on the lawfulness of their actions, in order to

find that, whatever inclination may say to the contrary, reason, incorruptible

and selfconstrained, always confronts the maxim of the will in any action

with the pure will, that is, with itself, considering itself as a priori practical.

Now this principle of morality, just on account of the universality of the

legislation which makes it the formal supreme determining principle of the

will, without regard to any subjective differentes, is declared by the reason to

be a law for all rational beings, in so far as they have a will, that is, a power

to determine their causality by the conception of rules; and, therefore, so far

as they are capable of acting according to principles, and consequently also

according to practical a priori principles (for these alone have the necessity

that reason requires in a principle). It is, therefore, not limited to men only,

but applies to all finite beings that possess reason and will; nay, it even

includes the Infinite Being as the supreme intelligence. In the former case,

however, the law has the form of an imperative, because in them, as rational

beings, we can suppose a pure will, but being creatures affected with wants

and physical motives, not a holy will, that is, one which would be incapable

of any maxim conflicting with the moral law. In their case, therefore, the

moral law is an imperative, which commands categorically, because the law

is unconditioned; the relation of such a will to this law is dependence under

the name of obligation, which implies a constraint to an action, though only

by reason and its objective law; and this action is called duty, because an

elective will, subject to pathological affections (though not determined by

them, and, therefore, still free), implies a wish that arises from subjective

causes and, therefore, may often be opposed to the pure objective

determining principle; whence it requires the moral constraint of a resistance

of the practical reason, which may be called an internal, but intellectual,

compulsion. In the supreme intelligence the elective will is rightly conceived

as incapable of any maxim which could not at the same time be objectively a

law; and the notion of holiness, which on that account belongs to it, places it,

not indeed above all practical laws, but above all practically restrictive laws,

and consequently above obligation and duty. This holiness of will is,

however, a practical idea, which must necessarily serve as a type to which

finite rational beings can only approximate indefinitely, and which the puremoral law, which is itself on this account called holy, constantly and rightly

holds before their eyes. The utmost that finite practical reason can effect is to

be certain of this indefinite progress of one’s maxims and of their steady

disposition to advance. This is virtue, and virtue, at least as a naturally

acquired faculty, can never be perfect, because assurance in such a case never

becomes apodeictic certainty and, when it only amounts to persuasion, is very

dangerous.

                                  VIII. Theorem IV.

 

 

              The autonomy of the will is the sole principle of all moral laws and

of all duties which conform to them; on the other hand, heteronomy of the

elective will not only cannot be the basis of any obligation, but is, on the

contrary, opposed to the principle thereof and to the morality of the will.

              In fact the sole principle of morality consists in the independence on

all matter of the law (namely, a desired object), and in the determination of

the elective will by the mere universal legislative form of which its maxim

must be capable. Now this independence is freedom in the negative sense,

and this self-legislation of the pure, and therefore practical, reason is freedom

in the positive sense. Thus the moral law expresses nothing else than the

autonomy of the pure practical reason; that is, freedom; and this is itself the

formal condition of all maxims, and on this condition only can they agree

with the supreme practical law. If therefore the matter of the volition, which

can be nothing else than the object of a desire that is connected with the law,

enters into the practical law, as the condition of its possibility, there results

heteronomy of the elective will, namely, dependence on the physical law that

we should follow some impulse or inclination. In that case the will does not

give itself the law, but only the precept how rationally to follow pathological

law; and the maxim which, in such a case, never contains the universally

legislative form, not only produces no obligation, but is itself opposed to the

principle of a pure practical reason and, therefore, also to the moral

disposition, even though the resulting action may be conformable to the law.

                                        Remark.

 

              Hence a practical precept, which contains a material (and therefore

empirical) condition, must never be reckoned a practical law. For the law ofthe pure will, which is free, brings the will into a sphere quite different from

the empirical; and as the necessity involved in the law is not a physical

necessity, it can only consist in the formal conditions of the possibility of a

law in general. All the matter of practical rules rests on subjective conditions,

which give them only a conditional universality (in case I desire this or that,

what I must do in order to obtain it), and they all turn on the principle of

private happiness. Now, it is indeed undeniable that every volition must have

an object, and therefore a matter; but it does not follow that this is the

determining principle and the condition of the maxim; for, if it is so, then this

cannot be exhibited in a universally legislative form, since in that case the

expectation of the existence of the object would be the determining cause of

the choice, and the volition must presuppose the dependence of the faculty of

desire on the existence of something; but this dependence can only be sought

in empirical conditions and, therefore, can never furnish a foundation for a

necessary and universal rule. Thus, the happiness of others may be the object

of the will of a rational being. But if it were the determining principle of the

maxim, we must assume that we find not only a rational satisfaction in the

welfare of others, but also a want such as the sympathetic disposition in some

men occasions. But I cannot assume the existence of this want in every

rational being (not at all in God). The matter, then, of the maxim may remain,

but it must not be the condition of it, else the maxim could not be fit for a

law. Hence, the mere form of law, which limits the matter, must also be a

reason for adding this matter to the will, not for presupposing it. For example,

let the matter be my own happiness. This (rule), if I attribute it to everyone

(as, in fact, I may, in the case of every finite being), can become an objective

practical law only if I include the happiness of others. Therefore, the law that

we should promote the happiness of others does not arise from the

assumption that this is an object of everyone’s choice, but merely from this,

that the form of universality which reason requires as the condition of giving

to a maxim of self-love the objective validity of a law is the principle that

determines the will. Therefore it was not the object (the happiness of others)

that determined the pure will, but it was the form of law only, by which I

restricted my maxim, founded on inclination, so as to give it the universality

of a law, and thus to adapt it to the practical reason; and it is this restriction

alone, and not the addition of an external spring, that can give rise to the

notion of the obligation to extend the maxim of my self-love to the happiness

of others.                                      Remark II.

 

              The direct opposite of the principle of morality is, when the principle

of private happiness is made the determining principle of the will, and with

this is to be reckoned, as I have shown above, everything that places the

determining principle which is to serve as a law, anywhere but in the

legislative form of the maxim. This contradiction, however, is not merely

logical, like that which would arise between rules empirically conditioned, if

they were raised to the rank of necessary principles of cognition, but is

practical, and would ruin morality altogether were not the voice of reason in

reference to the will so clear, so irrepressible, so distinctly audible, even to

the commonest men. It can only, indeed, be maintained in the perplexing

speculations of the schools, which are bold enough to shut their ears against

that heavenly voice, in order to support a theory that costs no trouble.

              Suppose that an acquaintance whom you otherwise liked were to

attempt to justify himself to you for having borne false witness, first by

alleging the, in his view, sacred duty of consulting his own happiness; then

by enumerating the advantages which he had gained thereby, pointing out the

prudence he had shown in securing himself against detection, even by

yourself, to whom he now reveals the secret, only in order that he may be

able to deny it at any time; and suppose he were then to affirm, in all

seriousness, that he has fulfilled a true human duty; you would either laugh in

his face, or shrink back from him with disgust; and yet, if a man has regulated

his principles of action solely with a view to his own advantage, you would

have nothing whatever to object against this mode of proceeding. Or suppose

some one recommends you a man as steward, as a man to whom you can

blindly trust all your affairs; and, in order to inspire you with confidence,

extols him as a prudent man who thoroughly understands his own interest,

and is so indefatigably active that he lets slip no opportunity of advancing it;

lastly, lest you should be afraid of finding a vulgar selfishness in him, praises

the good taste with which he lives; not seeking his pleasure in money-

making, or in coarse wantonness, but in the enlargement of his knowledge, in

instructive intercourse with a select circle, and even in relieving the needy;

while as to the means (which, of course, derive all their value from the end),

he is not particular, and is ready to use other people’s money for the purpose

as if it were his own, provided only he knows that he can do so safely, and

without discovery; you would either believe that the recommender wasmocking you, or that he had lost his senses. So sharply and clearly marked

are the boundaries of morality and self-love that even the commonest eye

cannot fail to distinguish whether a thing belongs to the one or the other. The

few remarks that follow may appear superfluous where the truth is so plain,

but at least they may serve to give a little more distinctness to the judgement

of common sense.

              The principle of happiness may, indeed, furnish maxims, but never

such as would be competent to be laws of the will, even if universal

happiness were made the object. For since the knowledge of this rests on

mere empirical data, since every man’s judgement on it depends very much

on his particular point of view, which is itself moreover very variable, it can

supply only general rules, not universal; that is, it can give rules which on the

average will most frequently fit, but not rules which must hold good always

and necessarily; hence, no practical laws can be founded on it. Just because in

this case an object of choice is the foundation of the rule and must therefore

precede it, the rule can refer to nothing but what is [felt], and therefore it

refers to experience and is founded on it, and then the variety of judgement

must be endless. This principle, therefore, does not prescribe the same

practical rules to all rational beings, although the rules are all included under

a common title, namely, that of happiness. The moral law, however, is

conceived as objectively necessary, only because it holds for everyone that

has reason and will.

              The maxim of self-love (prudence) only advises; the law of morality

commands. Now there is a great difference between that which we are

advised to do and that to which we are obliged.

              The commonest intelligence can easily and without hesitation see

what, on the principle of autonomy of the will, requires to be done; but on

supposition of heteronomy of the will, it is hard and requires knowledge of

the world to see what is to be done. That is to say, what duty is, is plain of

itself to everyone; but what is to bring true durable advantage, such as will

extend to the whole of one’s existence, is always veiled in impenetrable

obscurity; and much prudence is required to adapt the practical rule founded

on it to the ends of life, even tolerably, by making proper exceptions. But the

moral law commands the most punctual obedience from everyone; it must,

therefore, not be so difficult to judge what it requires to be done, that the

commonest unpractised understanding, even without worldly prudence,should fail to apply it rightly.

              It is always in everyone’s power to satisfy the categorical command

of morality; whereas it is seldom possible, and by no means so to everyone,

to satisfy the empirically conditioned precept of happiness, even with regard

to a single purpose. The reason is that in the former case there is question

only of the maxim, which must be genuine and pure; but in the latter case

there is question also of one’s capacity and physical power to realize a

desired object. A command that everyone should try to make himself happy

would be foolish, for one never commands anyone to do what he of himself

infallibly wishes to do. We must only command the means, or rather supply

them, since he cannot do everything that he wishes. But to command morality

under the name of duty is quite rational; for, in the first place, not everyone is

willing to obey its precepts if they oppose his inclinations; and as to the

means of obeying this law, these need not in this case be taught, for in this

respect whatever he wishes to do he can do.

              He who has lost at play may be vexed at himself and his folly, but if

he is conscious of having cheated at play (although he has gained thereby), he

must despise himself as soon as he compares himself with the moral law.

This must, therefore, be something different from the principle of private

happiness. For a man must have a different criterion when he is compelled to

say to himself: “I am a worthless fellow, though I have filled my purse”; and

when he approves himself, and says: “I am a prudent man, for I have

enriched my treasure.”

              Finally, there is something further in the idea of our practical reason,

which accompanies the transgression of a moral law — namely, its ill desert.

Now the notion of punishment, as such, cannot be united with that of

becoming a partaker of happiness; for although he who inflicts the

punishment may at the same time have the benevolent purpose of directing

this punishment to this end, yet it must first be justified in itself as

punishment, i.e., as mere harm, so that if it stopped there, and the person

punished could get no glimpse of kindness hidden behind this harshness, he

must yet admit that justice was done him, and that his reward was perfectly

suitable to his conduct. In every punishment, as such, there must first be

justice, and this constitutes the essence of the notion. Benevolence may,

indeed, be united with it, but the man who has deserved punishment has not

the least reason to reckon upon this. Punishment, then, is a physical evil,which, though it be not connected with moral evil as a natural consequence,

ought to be connected with it as a consequence by the principles of a moral

legislation. Now, if every crime, even without regarding the physical

consequence with respect to the actor, is in itself punishable, that is, forfeits

happiness (at least partially), it is obviously absurd to say that the crime

consisted just in this, that be has drawn punishment on himself, thereby

injuring his private happiness (which, on the principle of self-love, must be

the proper notion of all crime). According to this view, the punishment would

be the reason for calling anything a crime, and justice would, on the contrary,

consist in omitting all punishment, and even preventing that which naturally

follows; for, if this were done, there would no longer be any evil in the

action, since the harm which otherwise followed it, and on account of which

alone the action was called evil, would now be prevented. To look, however,

on all rewards and punishments as merely the machinery in the hand of a

higher power, which is to serve only to set rational creatures striving after

their final end (happiness), this is to reduce the will to a mechanism

destructive of freedom; this is so evident that it need not detain us.

              More refined, though equally false, is the theory of those who

suppose a certain special moral sense, which sense and not reason determines

the moral law, and in consequence of which the consciousness of virtue is

supposed to be directly connected with contentment and pleasure; that of

vice, with mental dissatisfaction and pain; thus reducing the whole to the

desire of private happiness. Without repeating what has been said above, I

will here only remark the fallacy they fall into. In order to imagine the

vicious man as tormented with mental dissatisfaction by the consciousness of

his transgressions, they must first represent him as in the main basis of his

character, at least in some degree, morally good; just as he who is pleased

with the consciousness of right conduct must be conceived as already

virtuous. The notion of morality and duty must, therefore, have preceded any

regard to this satisfaction, and cannot be derived from it. A man must first

appreciate the importance of what we call duty, the authority of the moral

law, and the immediate dignity which the following of it gives to the person

in his own eyes, in order to feel that satisfaction in the consciousness of his

conformity to it and the bitter remorse that accompanies the consciousness of

its transgression. It is, therefore, impossible to feel this satisfaction or

dissatisfaction prior to the knowledge of obligation, or to make it the basis of

the latter. A man must be at least half honest in order even to be able to forma conception of these feelings. I do not deny that as the human will is, by

virtue of liberty, capable of being immediately determined by the moral law,

so frequent practice in accordance with this principle of determination can, at

least, produce subjectively a feeling of satisfaction; on the contrary, it is a

duty to establish and to cultivate this, which alone deserves to be called

properly the moral feeling; but the notion of duty cannot be derived from it,

else we should have to suppose a feeling for the law as such, and thus make

that an object of sensation which can only be thought by the reason; and this,

if it is not to be a flat contradiction, would destroy all notion of duty and put

in its place a mere mechanical play of refined inclinations sometimes

contending with the coarser.

              If now we compare our formal supreme principle of pure practical

reason (that of autonomy of the will) with all previous material principles of

morality, we can exhibit them all in a table in which all possible cases are

exhausted, except the one formal principle; and thus we can show visibly that

it is vain to look for any other principle than that now proposed. In fact all

possible principles of determination of the will are either merely subjective,

and therefore empirical, or are also objective and rational; and both are either

external or internal.

              Practical Material Principles of Determination taken as the

Foundation of Morality, are:

SUBJECTIVE. EXTERNAL INTERNAL Education

(Montaigne) Physical feeling

(Epicurus) The civil Constitution

(Mandeville) Moral feeling

(Hutcheson) OBJECTIVE. INTERNAL EXTERNAL Perfection

(Wolf and the Stoics) Will of God

(Crusius and other theological Moralists)               Those of the upper table

are all empirical and evidently incapable of furnishing the universal principle

of morality; but those in the lower table are based on reason (for perfection as

a quality of things, and the highest perfection conceived as substance, that is,

God, can only be thought by means of rational concepts). But the former

notion, namely, that of perfection, may either be taken in a theoretic

signification, and then it means nothing but the completeness of each thing in

its own kind (transcendental), or that of a thing merely as a thing

(metaphysical); and with that we are not concerned here. But the notion ofperfection in a practical sense is the fitness or sufficiency of a thing for all

sorts of purposes. This perfection, as a quality of man and consequently

internal, is nothing but talent and, what strengthens or completes this, skill.

Supreme perfection conceived as substance, that is God, and consequently

external (considered practically), is the sufficiency of this being for all ends.

Ends then must first be given, relatively to which only can the notion of

perfection (whether internal in ourselves or external in God) be the

determining principle of the will. But an end — being an object which must

precede the determination of the will by a practical rule and contain the

ground of the possibility of this determination, and therefore contain also the

matter of the will, taken as its determining principle — such an end is always

empirical and, therefore, may serve for the Epicurean principle of the

happiness theory, but not for the pure rational principle of morality and duty.

Thus, talents and the improvement of them, because they contribute to the

advantages of life; or the will of God, if agreement with it be taken as the

object of the will, without any antecedent independent practical principle, can

be motives only by reason of the happiness expected therefrom. Hence it

follows, first, that all the principles here stated are material; secondly, that

they include all possible material principles; and, finally, the conclusion, that

since material principles are quite incapable of furnishing the supreme moral

law (as has been shown), the formal practical principle the pure reason

(according to which the mere form of a universal legislation must constitute

the supreme and immediate determining principle of the will) is the only one

possible which is adequate to furnish categorical imperatives, that is, practical

laws (which make actions a duty), and in general to serve as the principle of

morality, both in criticizing conduct and also in its application to the human

will to determine it.

  I. Of the Deduction of the Fundamental Principles of Pure Practical

                                        Reason.

 

 

              This Analytic shows that pure reason can be practical, that is, can of

itself determine the will independently of anything empirical; and this it

proves by a fact in which pure reason in us proves itself actually practical,

namely, the autonomy shown in the fundamental principle of morality, by

which reason determines the will to action.              It shows at the same time that this fact is inseparably connected with

the consciousness of freedom of the will, nay, is identical with it; and by this

the will of a rational being, although as belonging to the world of sense it

recognizes itself as necessarily subject to the laws of causality like other

efficient causes; yet, at the same time, on another side, namely, as a being in

itself, is conscious of existing in and being determined by an intelligible order

of things; conscious not by virtue of a special intuition of itself, but by virtue

of certain dynamical laws which determine its causality in the sensible world;

for it has been elsewhere proved that if freedom is predicated of us, it

transports us into an intelligible order of things.

              Now, if we compare with this the analytical part of the critique of

pure speculative reason, we shall see a remarkable contrast. There it was not

fundamental principles, but pure, sensible intuition (space and time), that was

the first datum that made a priori knowledge possible, though only of objects

of the senses. Synthetical principles could not be derived from mere concepts

without intuition; on the contrary, they could only exist with reference to this

intuition, and therefore to objects of possible experience, since it is the

concepts of the understanding, united with this intuition, which alone make

that knowledge possible which we call experience. Beyond objects of

experience, and therefore with regard to things as noumena, all positive

knowledge was rightly disclaimed for speculative reason. This reason,

however, went so far as to establish with certainty the concept of noumena;

that is, the possibility, nay, the necessity, of thinking them; for example, it

showed against all objections that the supposition of freedom, negatively

considered, was quite consistent with those principles and limitations of pure

theoretic reason. But it could not give us any definite enlargement of our

knowledge with respect to such objects, but, on the contrary, cut off all view

of them altogether.

              On the other hand, the moral law, although it gives no view, yet

gives us a fact absolutely inexplicable from any data of the sensible world,

and the whole compass of our theoretical use of reason, a fact which points to

a pure world of the understanding, nay, even defines it positively and enables

us to know something of it, namely, a law.

              This law (as far as rational beings are concerned) gives to the world

of sense, which is a sensible system of nature, the form of a world of the

understanding, that is, of a supersensible system of nature, without interferingwith its mechanism. Now, a system of nature, in the most general sense, is

the existence of things under laws. The sensible nature of rational beings in

general is their existence under laws empirically conditioned, which, from the

point of view of reason, is heteronomy. The supersensible nature of the same

beings, on the other hand, is their existence according to laws which are

independent of every empirical condition and, therefore, belong to the

autonomy of pure reason. And, since the laws by which the existence of

things depends on cognition are practical, supersensible nature, so far as we

can form any notion of it, is nothing else than a system of nature under the

autonomy of pure practical reason. Now, the law of this autonomy is the

moral law, which, therefore, is the fundamental law of a supersensible nature,

and of a pure world of understanding, whose counterpart must exist in the

world of sense, but without interfering with its laws. We might call the

former the archetypal world (natura archetypa), which we only know in the

reason; and the latter the ectypal world (natura ectypa), because it contains

the possible effect of the idea of the former which is the determining

principle of the will. For the moral law, in fact, transfers us ideally into a

system in which pure reason, if it were accompanied with adequate physical

power, would produce the summum bonum, and it determines our will to

give the sensible world the form of a system of rational beings.

              The least attention to oneself proves that this idea really serves as the

model for the determinations of our will.

              When the maxim which I am disposed to follow in giving testimony

is tested by the practical reason, I always consider what it would be if it were

to hold as a universal law of nature. It is manifest that in this view it would

oblige everyone to speak the truth. For it cannot hold as a universal law of

nature that statements should be allowed to have the force of proof and yet to

be purposely untrue. Similarly, the maxim which I adopt with respect to

disposing freely of my life is at once determined, when I ask myself what it

should be, in order that a system, of which it is the law, should maintain

itself. It is obvious that in such a system no one could arbitrarily put an end to

his own life, for such an arrangement would not be a permanent order of

things. And so in all similar cases. Now, in nature, as it actually is an object

of experience, the free will is not of itself determined to maxims which could

of themselves be the foundation of a natural system of universal laws, or

which could even be adapted to a system so constituted; on the contrary, itsmaxims are private inclinations which constitute, indeed, a natural whole in

conformity with pathological (physical) laws, but could not form part of a

system of nature, which would only be possible through our will acting in

accordance with pure practical laws. Yet we are, through reason, conscious of

a law to which all our maxims are subject, as though a natural order must be

originated from our will. This law, therefore, must be the idea of a natural

system not given in experience, and yet possible through freedom; a system,

therefore, which is supersensible, and to which we give objective reality, at

least in a practical point of view, since we look on it as an object of our will

as pure rational beings.

              Hence the distinction between the laws of a natural system to which

the will is subject, and of a natural system which is subject to a will (as far as

its relation to its free actions is concerned), rests on this, that in the former the

objects must be causes of the ideas which determine the will; whereas in the

latter the will is the cause of the objects; so that its causality has its

determining principle solely in the pure faculty of reason, which may

therefore be called a pure practical reason.

              There are therefore two very distinct problems: how, on the one side,

pure reason can cognise objects a priori, and how on the other side it can be

an immediate determining principle of the will, that is, of the causality of the

rational being with respect to the reality of objects (through the mere thought

of the universal validity of its own maxims as laws).

              The former, which belongs to the critique of the pure speculative

reason, requires a previous explanation, how intuitions without which no

object can be given, and, therefore, none known synthetically, are possible a

priori; and its solution turns out to be that these are all only sensible and,

therefore, do not render possible any speculative knowledge which goes

further than possible experience reaches; and that therefore all the principles

of that pure speculative reason avail only to make experience possible; either

experience of given objects or of those that may be given ad infinitum, but

never are completely given.

              The latter, which belongs to the critique of practical reason, requires

no explanation how the objects of the faculty of desire are possible, for that

being a problem of the theoretical knowledge of nature is left to the critique

of the speculative reason, but only how reason can determine the maxims ofthe will; whether this takes place only by means of empirical ideas as

principles of determination, or whether pure reason can be practical and be

the law of a possible order of nature, which is not empirically knowable. The

possibility of such a supersensible system of nature, the conception of which

can also be the ground of its reality through our own free will, does not

require any a priori intuition (of an intelligible world) which, being in this

case supersensible, would be impossible for us. For the question is only as to

the determining principle of volition in its maxims, namely, whether it is

empirical, or is a conception of the pure reason (having the legal character

belonging to it in general), and how it can be the latter. It is left to the

theoretic principles of reason to decide whether the causality of the will

suffices for the realization of the objects or not, this being an inquiry into the

possibility of the objects of the volition. Intuition of these objects is therefore

of no importance to the practical problem. We are here concerned only with

the determination of the will and the determining principles of its maxims as

a free will, not at all with the result. For, provided only that the will conforms

to the law of pure reason, then let its power in execution be what it may,

whether according to these maxims of legislation of a possible system of

nature any such system really results or not, this is no concern of the critique,

which only inquires whether, and in what way, pure reason can be practical,

that is directly determine the will.

              In this inquiry criticism may and must begin with pure practical laws

and their reality. But instead of intuition it takes as their foundation the

conception of their existence in the intelligible world, namely, the concept of

freedom. For this concept has no other meaning, and these laws are only

possible in relation to freedom of the will; but freedom being supposed, they

are necessary; or conversely freedom is necessary because those laws are

necessary, being practical postulates. It cannot be further explained how this

consciousness of the moral law, or, what is the same thing, of freedom, is

possible; but that it is admissible is well established in the theoretical critique.

              The exposition of the supreme principle of practical reason is now

finished; that is to say, it has been — shown first, what it contains, that it

subsists for itself quite a priori and independent of empirical principles; and

next in what it is distinguished from all other practical principles. With the

deduction, that is, the justification of its objective and universal validity, and

the discernment of the possibility of such a synthetical proposition a priori,we cannot expect to succeed so well as in the case of the principles of pure

theoretical reason. For these referred to objects of possible experience,

namely, to phenomena, and we could prove that these phenomena could be

known as objects of experience only by being brought under the categories in

accordance with these laws; and consequently that all possible experience

must conform to these laws. But I could not proceed in this way with the

deduction of the moral law. For this does not concern the knowledge of the

properties of objects, which may be given to the reason from some other

source; but a knowledge which can itself be the ground of the existence of the

objects, and by which reason in a rational being has causality, i.e., pure

reason, which can be regarded as a faculty immediately determining the will.

              Now all our human insight is at an end as soon as we have arrived at

fundamental powers or faculties, for the possibility of these cannot be

understood by any means, and just as little should it be arbitrarily invented

and assumed. Therefore, in the theoretic use of reason, it is experience alone

that can justify us in assuming them. But this expedient of adducing empirical

proofs, instead of a deduction from a priori sources of knowledge, is denied

us here in respect to the pure practical faculty of reason. For whatever

requires to draw the proof of its reality from experience must depend for the

grounds of its possibility on principles of experience; and pure, yet practical,

reason by its very notion cannot be regarded as such. Further, the moral law

is given as a fact of pure reason of which we are a priori conscious, and

which is apodeictically certain, though it be granted that in experience no

example of its exact fulfilment can be found. Hence, the objective reality of

the moral law cannot be proved by any deduction by any efforts of theoretical

reason, whether speculative or empirically supported, and therefore, even if

we renounced its apodeictic certainty, it could not be proved a posteriori by

experience, and yet it is firmly established of itself.

              But instead of this vainly sought deduction of the moral principle,

something else is found which was quite unexpected, namely, that this moral

principle serves conversely as the principle of the deduction of an inscrutable

faculty which no experience could prove, but of which speculative reason

was compelled at least to assume the possibility (in order to find amongst its

cosmological ideas the unconditioned in the chain of causality, so as not to

contradict itself)— I mean the faculty of freedom. The moral law, which

itself does not require a justification, proves not merely the possibility offreedom, but that it really belongs to beings who recognize this law as

binding on themselves. The moral law is in fact a law of the causality of free

agents and, therefore, of the possibility of a supersensible system of nature,

just as the metaphysical law of events in the world of sense was a law of

causality of the sensible system of nature; and it therefore determines what

speculative philosophy was compelled to leave undetermined, namely, the

law for a causality, the concept of which in the latter was only negative; and

therefore for the first time gives this concept objective reality.

              This sort of credential of the moral law, viz., that it is set forth as a

principle of the deduction of freedom, which is a causality of pure reason, is a

sufficient substitute for all a priori justification, since theoretic reason was

compelled to assume at least the possibility of freedom, in order to satisfy a

want of its own. For the moral law proves its reality, so as even to satisfy the

critique of the speculative reason, by the fact that it adds a positive definition

to a causality previously conceived only negatively, the possibility of which

was incomprehensible to speculative reason, which yet was compelled to

suppose it. For it adds the notion of a reason that directly determines the will

(by imposing on its maxims the condition of a universal legislative form);

and thus it is able for the first time to give objective, though only practical,

reality to reason, which always became transcendent when it sought to

proceed speculatively with its ideas. It thus changes the transcendent use of

reason into an immanent use (so that reason is itself, by means of ideas, an

efficient cause in the field of experience).

              The determination of the causality of beings in the world of sense, as

such, can never be unconditioned; and yet for every series of conditions there

must be something unconditioned, and therefore there must be a causality

which is determined wholly by itself. Hence, the idea of freedom as a faculty

of absolute spontaneity was not found to be a want but, as far as its

possibility is concerned, an analytic principle of pure speculative reason. But

as it is absolutely impossible to find in experience any example in accordance

with this idea, because amongst the causes of things as phenomena it would

be impossible to meet with any absolutely unconditioned determination of

causality, we were only able to defend our supposition that a freely acting

cause might be a being in the world of sense, in so far as it is considered in

the other point of view as a noumenon, showing that there is no contradiction

in regarding all its actions as subject to physical conditions so far as they arephenomena, and yet regarding its causality as physically unconditioned, in so

far as the acting being belongs to the world of understanding, and in thus

making the concept of freedom the regulative principle of reason. By this

principle I do not indeed learn what the object is to which that sort of

causality is attributed; but I remove the difficulty, for, on the one side, in the

explanation of events in the world, and consequently also of the actions of

rational beings, I leave to the mechanism of physical necessity the right of

ascending from conditioned to condition ad infinitum, while on the other side

I keep open for speculative reason the place which for it is vacant, namely,

the intelligible, in order to transfer the unconditioned thither. But I was not

able to verify this supposition; that is, to change it into the knowledge of a

being so acting, not even into the knowledge of the possibility of such a

being. This vacant place is now filled by pure practical reason with a definite

law of causality in an intelligible world (causality with freedom), namely, the

moral law. Speculative reason does not hereby gain anything as regards its

insight, but only as regards the certainty of its problematical notion of

freedom, which here obtains objective reality, which, though only practical,

is nevertheless undoubted. Even the notion of causality-the application, and

consequently the signification, of which holds properly only in relation to

phenomena, so as to connect them into experiences (as is shown by the

Critique of Pure Reason)— is not so enlarged as to extend its use beyond

these limits. For if reason sought to do this, it would have to show how the

logical relation of principle and consequence can be used synthetically in a

different sort of intuition from the sensible; that is how a causa noumenon is

possible. This it can never do; and, as practical reason, it does not even

concern itself with it, since it only places the determining principle of

causality of man as a sensible creature (which is given) in pure reason (which

is therefore called practical); and therefore it employs the notion of cause, not

in order to know objects, but to determine causality in relation to objects in

general. It can abstract altogether from the application of this notion to

objects with a view to theoretical knowledge (since this concept is always

found a priori in the understanding even independently of any intuition).

Reason, then, employs it only for a practical purpose, and hence we can

transfer the determining principle of the will into the intelligible order of

things, admitting, at the same time, that we cannot understand how the notion

of cause can determine the knowledge of these things. But reason must

cognise causality with respect to the actions of the will in the sensible worldin a definite manner; otherwise, practical reason could not really produce any

action. But as to the notion which it forms of its own causality as noumenon,

it need not determine it theoretically with a view to the cognition of its

supersensible existence, so as to give it significance in this way. For it

acquires significance apart from this, though only for practical use, namely,

through the moral law. Theoretically viewed, it remains always a pure a priori

concept of the understanding, which can be applied to objects whether they

have been given sensibly or not, although in the latter case it has no definite

theoretical significance or application, but is only a formal, though essential,

conception of the understanding relating to an object in general. The

significance which reason gives it through the moral law is merely practical,

inasmuch as the idea of the idea of the law of causality (of the will) has self

causality, or is its determining principle.

II. Of the Right that Pure Reason in its Practical use has to an Extension

              which is not possible to it in its Speculative Use.

 

 

              We have in the moral principle set forth a law of causality, the

determining principle of which is set above all the conditions of the sensible

world; we have it conceived how the will, as belonging to the intelligible

world, is determinable, and therefore we therefore we have its subject (man)

not merely conceived as belonging to a world of pure understanding, and in

this respect unknown (which the critique of speculative reason enabled us to

do), but also defined as regards his causality by means of a law which cannot

be reduced to any physical law of the sensible world; and therefore our

knowledge is extended beyond the limits of that world, a pretension which

the Critique of Pure Reason declared to be futile in all speculation. Now, how

is the practical use of pure reason here to be reconciled with the theoretical,

as to the determination of the limits of its faculty?

              David Hume, of whom we may say that he commenced the assault

on the claims of pure reason, which made a thorough investigation of it

necessary, argued thus: The notion of cause is a notion that involves the

necessity of the connexion of the existence of different things (and that, in so

far as they are different), so that, given A, I know that something quite

distinct there from, namely B, must necessarily also exist. Now necessity can

be attributed to a connection, only in so far as it is known a priori, forexperience would only enable us to know of such a connection that it exists,

not that it necessarily exists. Now, it is impossible, says he, to know a priori

and as necessary the connection between one thing and another (or between

one attribute and another quite distinct) when they have not been given in

experience. Therefore the notion of a cause is fictitious and delusive and, to

speak in the mildest way, is an illusion, only excusable inasmuch as the

custom (a subjective necessity) of perceiving certain things, or their attributes

as often associated in existence along with or in succession to one another, is

insensibly taken for an objective necessity of supposing such a connection in

the objects themselves; and thus the notion of a cause has been acquired

surreptitiously and not legitimately; nay, it can never be so acquired or

authenticated, since it demands a connection in itself vain, chimerical, and

untenable in presence of reason, and to which no object can ever correspond.

In this way was empiricism first introduced as the sole source of principles,

as far as all knowledge of the existence of things is concerned (mathematics

therefore remaining excepted); and with empiricism the most thorough

scepticism, even with regard to the whole science of nature( as philosophy).

For on such principles we can never conclude from given attributes of things

as existing to a consequence (for this would require the notion of cause,

which involves the necessity of such a connection); we can only, guided by

imagination, expect similar cases — an expectation which is never certain,

however of ten it has been fulfilled. Of no event could we say: a certain thing

must have preceded it, on which it necessarily followed; that is, it must have

a cause; and therefore, however frequent the cases we have known in which

there was such an antecedent, so that a rule could be derived from them, yet

we never could suppose it as always and necessarily so happening; we

should, therefore, be obliged to leave its share to blind chance, with which all

use of reason comes to an end; and this firmly establishes scepticism in

reference to arguments ascending from effects to causes and makes it

impregnable.

              Mathematics escaped well, so far, because Hume thought that its

propositions were analytical; that is, proceeded from one property to another,

by virtue of identity and, consequently, according to the principle of

contradiction. This, however, is not the case, since, on the contrary, they are

synthetical; and although geometry, for example, has not to do with the

existence of things, but only with their a priori properties in a possible

intuition, yet it proceeds just as in the case of the causal notion, from oneproperty (A) to another wholly distinct (B), as necessarily connected with the

former. Nevertheless, mathematical science, so highly vaunted for its

apodeictic certainty, must at last fall under this empiricism for the same

reason for which Hume put custom in the place of objective necessity in the

notion of cause and, in spite of all its pride, must consent to lower its bold

pretension of claiming assent a priori and depend for assent to the

universality of its propositions on the kindness of observers, who, when

called as witnesses, would surely not hesitate to admit that what the geometer

propounds as a theorem they have always perceived to be the fact, and,

consequently, although it be not necessarily true, yet they would permit us to

expect it to be true in the future. In this manner Hume’s empiricism leads

inevitably to scepticism, even with regard to mathematics, and consequently

in every scientific theoretical use of reason (for this belongs either to

philosophy or mathematics). Whether with such a terrible overthrow of the

chief branches of knowledge, common reason will escape better, and will not

rather become irrecoverably involved in this destruction of all knowledge, so

that from the same principles a universal scepticism should follow (affecting,

indeed, only the learned), this I will leave everyone to judge for himself.

              As regards my own labours in the critical examination of pure

reason, which were occasioned by Hume’s sceptical teaching, but went much

further and embraced the whole field of pure theoretical reason in its

synthetic use and, consequently, the field of what is called metaphysics in

general; I proceeded in the following manner with respect to the doubts

raised by the Scottish philosopher touching the notion of causality. If Hume

took the objects of experience for things in themselves (as is almost always

done), he was quite right in declaring the notion of cause to be a deception

and false illusion; for as to things in themselves, and their attributes as such,

it is impossible to see why because A is given, B, which is different, must

necessarily be also given, and therefore he could by no means admit such an

a priori knowledge of things in themselves. Still less could this acute writer

allow an empirical origin of this concept, since this is directly contradictory

to the necessity of connection which constitutes the essence of the notion of

causality, hence the notion was proscribed, and in its place was put custom in

the observation of the course of perceptions.

              It resulted, however, from my inquiries, that the objects with which

we have to do in experience are by no means things in themselves, but merelyphenomena; and that although in the case of things in themselves it is

impossible to see how, if A is supposed, it should be contradictory that B,

which is quite different from A, should not also be supposed (i.e., to see the

necessity of the connection between A as cause and B as effect); yet it can

very well be conceived that, as phenomena, they may be necessarily

connected in one experience in a certain way (e.g., with regard to time-

relations); so that they could not be separated without contradicting that

connection, by means of which this experience is possible in which they are

objects and in which alone they are cognisable by us. And so it was found to

be in fact; so that I was able not only to prove the objective reality of the

concept of cause in regard to objects of experience, but also to deduce it as an

a priori concept by reason of the necessity of the connection it implied; that

is, to show the possibility of its origin from pure understanding without any

empirical sources; and thus, after removing the source of empiricism, I was

able also to overthrow the inevitable consequence of this, namely, scepticism,

first with regard to physical science, and then with regard to mathematics (in

which empiricism has just the same grounds), both being sciences which

have reference to objects of possible experience; herewith overthrowing the

thorough doubt of whatever theoretic reason professes to discern.

              But how is it with the application of this category of causality (and

all the others; for without them there can be no knowledge of anything

existing) to things which are not objects of possible experience, but lie

beyond its bounds? For I was able to deduce the objective reality of these

concepts only with regard to objects of possible experience. But even this

very fact, that I have saved them, only in case I have proved that objects may

by means of them be thought, though not determined a priori; this it is that

gives them a place in the pure understanding, by which they are referred to

objects in general (sensible or not sensible). If anything is still wanting, it is

that which is the condition of the application of these categories, and

especially that of causality, to objects, namely, intuition; for where this is not

given, the application with a view to theoretic knowledge of the object, as a

noumenon, is impossible and, therefore, if anyone ventures on it, is (as in the

Critique of Pure Reason) absolutely forbidden. Still, the objective reality of

the concept (of causality) remains, and it can be used even of noumena, but

without our being able in the least to define the concept theoretically so as to

produce knowledge. For that this concept, even in reference to an object,

contains nothing impossible, was shown by this, that, even while applied toobjects of sense, its seat was certainly fixed in the pure understanding; and

although, when referred to things in themselves (which cannot be objects of

experience), it is not capable of being determined so as to represent a definite

object for the purpose of theoretic knowledge; yet for any other purpose (for

instance, a practical) it might be capable of being determined so as to have

such application. This could not be the case if, as Hume maintained, this

concept of causality contained something absolutely impossible to be

thought.

              In order now to discover this condition of the application of the said

concept to noumena, we need only recall why we are not content with its

application to objects of experience, but desire also to apply it to things in

themselves. It will appear, then, that it is not a theoretic but a practical

purpose that makes this a necessity. In speculation, even if we were

successful in it, we should not really gain anything in the knowledge of

nature, or generally with regard to such objects as are given, but we should

make a wide step from the sensibly conditioned (in which we have already

enough to do to maintain ourselves, and to follow carefully the chain of

causes) to the supersensible, in order to complete our knowledge of principles

and to fix its limits; whereas there always remains an infinite chasm unfilled

between those limits and what we know; and we should have hearkened to a

vain curiosity rather than a solid-desire of knowledge.

              But, besides the relation in which the understanding stands to objects

(in theoretical knowledge), it has also a relation to the faculty of desire,

which is therefore called the will, and the pure will, inasmuch as pure

understanding (in this case called reason) is practical through the mere

conception of a law. The objective reality of a pure will, or, what is the same

thing, of a pure practical reason, is given in the moral law a priori, as it were,

by a fact, for so we may name a determination of the will which is inevitable,

although it does not rest on empirical principles. Now, in the notion of a will

the notion of causality is already contained, and hence the notion of a pure

will contains that of a causality accompanied with freedom, that is, one which

is not determinable by physical laws, and consequently is not capable of any

empirical intuition in proof of its reality, but, nevertheless, completely

justifies its objective reality a priori in the pure practical law; not, indeed (as

is easily seen) for the purposes of the theoretical, but of the practical use of

reason. Now the notion of a being that has free will is the notion of a causanoumenon, and that this notion involves no contradiction, we are already

assured by the fact — that inasmuch as the concept of cause has arisen

wholly from pure understanding, and has its objective reality assured by the

deduction, as it is moreover in its origin independent of any sensible

conditions, it is, therefore, not restricted to phenomena (unless we wanted to

make a definite theoretic use of it), but can be applied equally to things that

are objects of the pure understanding. But, since this application cannot rest

on any intuition (for intuition can only be sensible), therefore, causa

noumenon, as regards the theoretic use of reason, although a possible and

thinkable, is yet an empty notion. Now, I do not desire by means of this to

understand theoretically the nature of a being, in so far as it has a pure will; it

is enough for me to have thereby designated it as such, and hence to combine

the notion of causality with that of freedom (and what is inseparable from it,

the moral law, as its determining principle). Now, this right I certainly have

by virtue of the pure, not-empirical origin of the notion of cause, since I do

not consider myself entitled to make any use of it except in reference to the

moral law which determines its reality, that is, only a practical use.

              If, with Hume, I had denied to the notion of causality all objective

reality in its [theoretic] use, not merely with regard to things in themselves

(the supersensible), but also with regard to the objects of the senses, it would

have lost all significance, and being a theoretically impossible notion would

have been declared to be quite useless; and since what is nothing cannot be

made any use of, the practical use of a concept theoretically null would have

been absurd. But, as it is, the concept of a causality free from empirical

conditions, although empty, i.e., without any appropriate intuition), is yet

theoretically possible, and refers to an indeterminate object; but in

compensation significance is given to it in the moral law and consequently in

a practical sense. I have, indeed, no intuition which should determine its

objective theoretic reality, but not the less it has a real application, which is

exhibited in concreto in intentions or maxims; that is, it has a practical reality

which can be specified, and this is sufficient to justify it even with a view to

noumena.

              Now, this objective reality of a pure concept of the understanding in

the sphere of the supersensible, once brought in, gives an objective reality

also to all the other categories, although only so far as they stand in necessary

connexion with the determining principle of the will (the moral law); a realityonly of practical application, which has not the least effect in enlarging our

theoretical knowledge of these objects, or the discernment of their nature by

pure reason. So we shall find also in the sequel that these categories refer

only to beings as intelligences, and in them only to the relation of reason to

the will; consequently, always only to the practical, and beyond this cannot

pretend to any knowledge of these beings; and whatever other properties

belonging to the theoretical representation of supersensible things may be

brought into connexion with these categories, this is not to be reckoned as

knowledge, but only as a right (in a practical point of view, however, it is a

necessity) to admit and assume such beings, even in the case where we

[conceive] supersensible beings (e.g., God) according to analogy, that is, a

purely rational relation, of which we make a practical use with reference to

what is sensible; and thus the application to the supersensible solely in a

practical point of view does not give pure theoretic reason the least

encouragement to run riot into the transcendent.

 

 

   Chapter II. – Of the Concept of an Object of Pure Practical Reason.

 

 

              By a concept of the practical reason I understand the idea of an

object as an effect possible to be produced through freedom. To be an object

of practical knowledge, as such, signifies, therefore, only the relation of the

will to the action by which the object or its opposite would be realized; and to

decide whether something is an object of pure practical reason or not is only

to discern the possibility or impossibility of willing the action by which, if we

had the required power (about which experience must decide), a certain

object would be realized. If the object be taken as the determining principle

of our desire, it must first be known whether it is physically possible by the

free use of our powers, before we decide whether it is an object of practical

reason or not. On the other hand, if the law can be considered a priori as the

determining principle of the action, and the latter therefore as determined by

pure practical reason, the judgement whether a thing is an object of pure

practical reason or not does not depend at all on the comparison with our

physical power; and the question is only whether we should will an action

that is directed to the existence of an object, if the object were in our power;

hence the previous question is only as the moral possibility of the action, for

in this case it is not the object, but the law of the will, that is the determining

principle of the action. The only objects of practical reason are therefore

those of good and evil. For by the former is meant an object necessarily

desired according to a principle of reason; by the latter one necessarily

shunned, also according to a principle of reason.

              If the notion of good is not to be derived from an antecedent

practical law, but, on the contrary, is to serve as its foundation, it can only be

the notion of something whose existence promises pleasure, and thus

determines the causality of the subject to produce it, that is to say, determines

the faculty of desire. Now, since it is impossible to discern a priori what idea

will be accompanied with pleasure and what with pain, it will depend on

experience alone to find out what is primarily good or evil. The property of

the subject, with reference to which alone this experiment can be made, is the

feeling of pleasure and pain, a receptivity belonging to the internal sense;

thus that only would be primarily good with which the sensation of pleasureis immediately connected, and that simply evil which immediately excites

pain. Since, however, this is opposed even to the usage of language, which

distinguishes the pleasant from the good, the unpleasant from the evil, and

requires that good and evil shall always be judged by reason, and, therefore,

by concepts which can be communicated to everyone, and not by mere

sensation, which is limited to individual [subjects] and their susceptibility;

and, since nevertheless, pleasure or pain cannot be connected with any idea

of an object a priori, the philosopher who thought himself obliged to make a

feeling of pleasure the foundation of his practical judgements would call that

good which is a means to the pleasant, and evil, what is a cause of

unpleasantness and pain; for the judgement on the relation of means to ends

certainly belongs to reason. But, although reason is alone capable of

discerning the connexion of means with their ends (so that the will might

even be defined as the faculty of ends, since these are always determining

principles of the desires), yet the practical maxims which would follow from

the aforesaid principle of the good being merely a means, would never

contain as the object of the will anything good in itself, but only something

good for something; the good would always be merely the useful, and that for

which it is useful must always lie outside the will, in sensation. Now if this as

a pleasant sensation were to be distinguished from the notion of good, then

there would be nothing primarily good at all, but the good would have to be

sought only in the means to something else, namely, some pleasantness.

              It is an old formula of the schools: Nihil appetimus nisi sub ratione

boni; Nihil aversamur nisi sub ratione mali, and it is used often correctly, but

often also in a manner injurious to philosophy, because the expressions boni

and mali are ambiguous, owing to the poverty of language, in consequence of

which they admit a double sense, and, therefore, inevitably bring the practical

laws into ambiguity; and philosophy, which in employing them becomes

aware of the different meanings in the same word, but can find no special

expressions for them, is driven to subtile distinctions about which there is

subsequently no unanimity, because the distinction could not be directly
                                        9
marked by any suitable expression.

        9
               Besides this, the expression sub ratione boni is also ambiguous. For

it may mean: “We represent something to ourselves as good, when and

because we desire (will) it”; or “We desire something because we represent it

to ourselves as good,” so that either the desire determines the notion of theobject as a good, or the notion of good determines the desire (the will); so

that in the first case sub ratione boni would mean, “We will something under

the idea of the good”; in the second, “In consequence of this idea,” which, as

determining the volition, must precede it.

              The German language has the good fortune to possess expressions

which do not allow this difference to be overlooked. It possesses two very

distinct concepts and especially distinct expressions for that which the Latins

express by a single word, bonum. For bonum it has das Gute [good], and das

Wohl [well, weal], for malum das Bose [evil], and das Ubel [ill, bad], or das

Well [woe]. So that we express two quite distinct judgements when we

consider in an action the good and evil of it, or our weal and woe (ill). Hence

it already follows that the above quoted psychological proposition is at least

very doubtful if it is translated: “We desire nothing except with a view to our

weal or woe”; on the other hand, if we render it thus: “Under the direction of

reason we desire nothing except so far as we esteem it good or evil,” it is

indubitably certain and at the same time quite clearly expressed.

              Well or ill always implies only a reference to our condition, as

pleasant or unpleasant, as one of pleasure or pain, and if we desire or avoid

an object on this account, it is only so far as it is referred to our sensibility

and to the feeling of pleasure or pain that it produces. But good or evil always

implies a reference to the will, as determined by the law of reason, to make

something its object; for it is never determined directly by the object and the

idea of it, but is a faculty of taking a rule of reason for or motive of an action

(by which an object may be realized). Good and evil therefore are properly

referred to actions, not to the sensations of the person, and if anything is to be

good or evil absolutely (i.e., in every respect and without any further

condition), or is to be so esteemed, it can only be the manner of acting, the

maxim of the will, and consequently the acting person himself as a good or

evil man that can be so called, and not a thing.

              However, then, men may laugh at the Stoic, who in the severest

paroxysms of gout cried out: “Pain, however thou tormentest me, I will never

admit that thou art an evil (kakov, malum)”: he was right. A bad thing it

certainly was, and his cry betrayed that; but that any evil attached to him

thereby, this he bad no reason whatever to admit, for pain did not in the least

diminish the worth of his person, but only that of his condition. If he had

been conscious of a single lie, it would have lowered his pride, but painserved only to raise it, when he was conscious that he had not deserved it by

any unrighteous action by which he had rendered himself worthy of

punishment.

              What we call good must be an object of desire in the judgement of

every rational man, and evil an object of aversion in the eyes of everyone;

therefore, in addition to sense, this judgement requires reason. So it is with

truthfulness, as opposed to lying; so with justice, as opposed to violence, &c.

But we may call a thing a bad [or ill) thing, which yet everyone must at the

same time acknowledge to be good, sometimes directly, sometimes

indirectly. The man who submits to a surgical operation feels it no doubt as a

bad thing, but by their reason he and everyone acknowledge it to be good. If a

man who delights in annoying and vexing peaceable people at last receives a

right good beating, this is no doubt a bad thing; but everyone approves it and

regards it as a good thing, even though nothing else resulted from it; nay,

even the man who receives it must in his reason acknowledge that he has met

justice, because he sees the proportion between good conduct and good

fortune, which reason inevitably places before him, here put into practice.

              No doubt our weal and woe are of very great importance in the

estimation of our practical reason, and as far as our nature as sensible beings

is concerned, our happiness is the only thing of consequence, provided it is

estimated as reason especially requires, not by the transitory sensation, but by

the influence that this has on our whole existence, and on our satisfaction

therewith; but it is not absolutely the only thing of consequence. Man is a

being who, as belonging to the world of sense, has wants, and so far his

reason has an office which it cannot refuse, namely, to attend to the interest

of his sensible nature, and to form practical maxims, even with a view to the

happiness of this life, and if possible even to that of a future. But he is not so

completely an animal as to be indifferent to what reason says on its own

account, and to use it merely as an instrument for the satisfaction of his wants

as a sensible being. For the possession of reason would not raise his worth

above that of the brutes, if it is to serve him only for the same purpose that

instinct serves in them; it would in that case be only a particular method

which nature had employed to equip man for the same ends for which it has

qualified brutes, without qualifying him for any higher purpose. No doubt

once this arrangement of nature has been made for him he requires reason in

order to take into consideration his weal and woe, but besides this hepossesses it for a higher purpose also, namely, not only to take into

consideration what is good or evil in itself, about which only pure reason,

uninfluenced by any sensible interest, can judge, but also to distinguish this

estimate thoroughly from the former and to make it the supreme condition

thereof.

              In estimating what is good or evil in itself, as distinguished from

what can be so called only relatively, the following points are to be

considered. Either a rational principle is already conceived, as of itself the

determining principle of the will, without regard to possible objects of desire

(and therefore by the more legislative form of the maxim), and in that case

that principle is a practical a priori law, and pure reason is supposed to be

practical of itself. The law in that case determines the will directly; the action

conformed to it is good in itself; a will whose maxim always conforms to this

law is good absolutely in every respect and is the supreme condition of all

good. Or the maxim of the will is consequent on a determining principle of

desire which presupposes an object of pleasure or pain, something therefore

that pleases or displeases, and the maxim of reason that we should pursue the

former and avoid the latter determines our actions as good relatively to our

inclination, that is, good indirectly, i.e., relatively to a different end to which

they are means), and in that case these maxims can never be called laws, but

may be called rational practical precepts. The end itself, the pleasure that we

seek, is in the latter case not a good but a welfare; not a concept of reason,

but an empirical concept of an object of sensation; but the use of the means

thereto, that is, the action, is nevertheless called good (because rational

deliberation is required for it), not however, good absolutely, but only

relatively to our sensuous nature, with regard to its feelings of pleasure and

displeasure; but the will whose maxim is affected thereby is not a pure will;

this is directed only to that in which pure reason by itself can be practical.

              This is the proper place to explain the paradox of method in a

critique of practical reason, namely, that the concept of good and evil must

not be determined before the moral law (of which it seems as if it must be the

foundation), but only after it and by means of it. In fact, even if we did not

know that the principle of morality is a pure a priori law determining the will,

yet, that we may not assume principles quite gratuitously, we must, at least at

first, leave it undecided, whether the will has merely empirical principles of

determination, or whether it has not also pure a priori principles; for it iscontrary to all rules of philosophical method to assume as decided that which

is the very point in question. Supposing that we wished to begin with the

concept of good, in order to deduce from it the laws of the will, then this

concept of an object (as a good) would at the same time assign to us this

object as the sole determining principle of the will. Now, since this concept

had not any practical a priori law for its standard, the criterion of good or evil

could not be placed in anything but the agreement of the object with our

feeling of pleasure or pain; and the use of reason could only consist in

determining in the first place this pleasure or pain in connexion with all the

sensations of my existence, and in the second place the means of securing to

myself the object of the pleasure. Now, as experience alone can decide what

conforms to the feeling of pleasure, and by hypothesis the practical law is to

be based on this as a condition, it follows that the possibility of a priori

practical laws would be at once excluded, because it was imagined to be

necessary first of all to find an object the concept of which, as a good, should

constitute the universal though empirical principle of determination of the

will. But what it was necessary to inquire first of all was whether there is not

an a priori determining principle of the will (and this could never be found

anywhere but in a pure practical law, in so far as this law prescribes to

maxims merely their form without regard to an object). Since, however, we

laid the foundation of all practical law in an object determined by our

conceptions of good and evil, whereas without a previous law that object

could not be conceived by empirical concepts, we have deprived ourselves

beforehand of the possibility of even conceiving a pure practical law. On the

other hand, if we had first investigated the latter analytically, we should have

found that it is not the concept of good as an object that determines the moral

law and makes it possible, but that, on the contrary, it is the moral law that

first determines the concept of good and makes it possible, so far as it

deserves the name of good absolutely.

              This remark, which only concerns the method of ultimate ethical

inquiries, is of importance. It explains at once the occasion of all the mistakes

of philosophers with respect to the supreme principle of morals. For they

sought for an object of the will which they could make the matter and

principle of a law (which consequently could not determine the will directly,

but by means of that object referred to the feeling of pleasure or pain;

whereas they ought first to have searched for a law that would determine the

will a priori and directly, and afterwards determine the object in accordancewith the will). Now, whether they placed this object of pleasure, which was

to supply the supreme conception of goodness, in happiness, in perfection, in

moral [feeling], or in the will of God, their principle in every case implied

heteronomy, and they must inevitably come upon empirical conditions of a

moral law, since their object, which was to be the immediate principle of the

will, could not be called good or bad except in its immediate relation to

feeling, which is always empirical. It is only a formal law — that is, one

which prescribes to reason nothing more than the form of its universal

legislation as the supreme condition of its maxims — that can be a priori a

determining principle of practical reason. The ancients avowed this error

without concealment by directing all their moral inquiries to the

determination of the notion of the summum bonum, which they intended

afterwards to make the determining principle of the will in the moral law;

whereas it is only far later, when the moral law has been first established for

itself, and shown to be the direct determining principle of the will, that this

object can be presented to the will, whose form is now determined a priori;

and this we shall undertake in the Dialectic of the pure practical reason. The

moderns, with whom the question of the summum bonum has gone out of

fashion, or at least seems to have become a secondary matter, hide the same

error under vague (expressions as in many other cases). It shows itself,

nevertheless, in their systems, as it always produces heteronomy of practical

reason; and from this can never be derived a moral law giving universal

commands.

              Now, since the notions of good and evil, as consequences of the a

priori determination of the will, imply also a pure practical principle, and

therefore a causality of pure reason; hence they do not originally refer to

objects (so as to be, for instance, special modes of the synthetic unity of the

manifold of given intuitions in one consciousness) like the pure concepts of

the understanding or categories of reason in its theoretic employment; on the

contrary, they presuppose that objects are given; but they are all modes

(modi) of a single category, namely, that of causality, the determining

principle of which consists in the rational conception of a law, which as a law

of freedom reason gives to itself, thereby a priori proving itself practical.

However, as the actions on the one side come under a law which is not a

physical law, but a law of freedom, and consequently belong to the conduct

of beings in and consequently the consequently belong to the beings in the

world of intelligence, yet on the other side as events in the world of sensethey belong to phenomena; hence the determinations of a practical reason are

only possible in reference to the latter and, therefore, in accordance with the

categories of the understanding; not indeed with a view to any theoretic

employment of it, i.e., so as to bring the manifold of (sensible) intuition under

one consciousness a priori; but only to subject the manifold of desires to the

unity of consciousness of a practical reason, giving it commands in the moral

law, i.e., to a pure will a priori.

              These categories of freedom — for so we choose to call them in

contrast to those theoretic categories which are categories of physical nature

— have an obvious advantage over the latter, inasmuch as the latter are only

forms of thought which designate objects in an indefinite manner by means

of universal concept of every possible intuition; the former, on the contrary,

refer to the determination of a free elective will (to which indeed no exactly

corresponding intuition can be assigned, but which has as its foundation a

pure practical a priori law, which is not the case with any concepts belonging

to the theoretic use of our cognitive faculties); hence, instead of the form of

intuition (space and time), which does not lie in reason itself, but has to be

drawn from another source, namely, the sensibility, these being elementary

practical concepts have as their foundation the form of a pure will, which is

given in reason and, therefore, in the thinking faculty itself. From this it

happens that as all precepts of pure practical reason have to do only with the

determination of the will, not with the physical conditions (of practical

ability) of the execution of one’s purpose, the practical a priori principles in

relation to the supreme principle of freedom are at once cognitions, and have

not to wait for intuitions in order to acquire significance, and that for this

remarkable reason, because they themselves produce the reality of that to

which they refer (the intention of the will), which is not the case with

theoretical concepts. Only we must be careful to observe that these categories

only apply to the practical reason; and thus they proceed in order from those

which are as yet subject to sensible conditions and morally indeterminate to

those which are free from sensible conditions and determined merely by the

moral law.

Table of the Categories of Freedom relatively to the Notions of Good and

                                          Evil.

 

              Quantity.Subjective, according to maxims (practical opinions of the individual)

Objective, according to principles (Precepts)

A priori both objective and subjective principles of freedom (laws)

              Quality.

Practical rules of action (praeceptivae)

Practical rules of omission (prohibitivae)

Practical rules of exceptions (exceptivae)

              Relation.

To personality To the condition of the person.

Reciprocal, of one person to the others of the others.

              Modality.

The Permitted and the Forbidden

Duty and the contrary to duty.

Perfect and imperfect duty.

              It will at once be observed that in this table freedom is considered as

a sort of causality not subject to empirical principles of determination, in

regard to actions possible by it, which are phenomena in the world of sense,

and that consequently it is referred to the categories which concern its

physical possibility, whilst yet each category is taken so universally that the

determining principle of that causality can be placed outside the world of

sense in freedom as a property of a being in the world of intelligence; and

finally the categories of modality introduce the transition from practical

principles generally to those of morality, but only problematically. These can

be established dogmatically only by the moral law.

              I add nothing further here in explanation of the present table, since it

is intelligible enough of itself. A division of this kind based on principles is

very useful in any science, both for the sake of thoroughness and

intelligibility. Thus, for instance, we know from the preceding table and its

first number what we must begin from in practical inquiries; namely, from

the maxims which every one founds on his own inclinations; the precepts

which hold for a species of rational beings so far as they agree in certain

inclinations; and finally the law which holds for all without regard to their

inclinations, etc. In this way we survey the whole plan of what has to be

done, every question of practical philosophy that has to be answered, and also

the order that is to be followed.                Of the Typic of the Pure Practical Judgement.

 

              It is the notions of good and evil that first determine an object of the

will. They themselves, however, are subject to a practical rule of reason

which, if it is pure reason, determines the will a priori relatively to its object.

Now, whether an action which is possible to us in the world of sense, comes

under the rule or not, is a question to be decided by the practical judgement,

by which what is said in the rule universally (in abstracto) is applied to an

action in concreto. But since a practical rule of pure reason in the first place

as practical concerns the existence of an object, and in the second place as a

practical rule of pure reason implies necessity as regards the existence of the

action and, therefore, is a practical law, not a physical law depending on

empirical principles of determination, but a law of freedom by which the will

is to be determined independently on anything empirical (merely by the

conception of a law and its form), whereas all instances that can occur of

possible actions can only be empirical, that is, belong to the experience of

physical nature; hence, it seems absurd to expect to find in the world of sense

a case which, while as such it depends only on the law of nature, yet admits

of the application to it of a law of freedom, and to which we can apply the

supersensible idea of the morally good which is to be exhibited in it in

concreto. Thus, the judgement of the pure practical reason is subject to the

same difficulties as that of the pure theoretical reason. The latter, however,

had means at hand of escaping from these difficulties, because, in regard to

the theoretical employment, intuitions were required to which pure concepts

of the understanding could be applied, and such intuitions (though only of

objects of the senses) can be given a priori and, therefore, as far as regards

the union of the manifold in them, conforming to the pure a priori concepts of

the understanding as schemata. On the other hand, the morally good is

something whose object is supersensible; for which, therefore, nothing

corresponding can be found in any sensible intuition. Judgement depending

on laws of pure practical reason seems, therefore, to be subject to special

difficulties arising from this, that a law of freedom is to be applied to actions,

which are events taking place in the world of sense, and which, so far, belong

to physical nature.

              But here again is opened a favourable prospect for the pure practical

judgement. When I subsume under a pure practical law an action possible to

me in the world of sense, I am not concerned with the possibility of the actionas an event in the world of sense. This is a matter that belongs to the decision

of reason in its theoretic use according to the law of causality, which is a pure

concept of the understanding, for which reason has a schema in the sensible

intuition. Physical causality, or the condition under which it takes place,

belongs to the physical concepts, the schema of which is sketched by

transcendental imagination. Here, however, we have to do, not with the

schema of a case that occurs according to laws, but with the schema of a law

itself (if the word is allowable here), since the fact that the will (not the action

relatively to its effect) is determined by the law alone without any other

principle, connects the notion of causality with quite different conditions

from those which constitute physical connection.

              The physical law being a law to which the objects of sensible

intuition, as such, are subject, must have a schema corresponding to it — that

is, a general procedure of the imagination (by which it exhibits a priori to the

senses the pure concept of the understanding which the law determines). But

the law of freedom (that is, of a causality not subject to sensible conditions),

and consequently the concept of the unconditionally good, cannot have any

intuition, nor consequently any schema supplied to it for the purpose of its

application in concreto. Consequently the moral law has no faculty but the

understanding to aid its application to physical objects (not the imagination);

and the understanding for the purposes of the judgement can provide for an

idea of the reason, not a schema of the sensibility, but a law, though only as

to its form as law; such a law, however, as can be exhibited in concreto in

objects of the senses, and therefore a law of nature. We can therefore call this

law the type of the moral law.

              The rule of the judgement according to laws of pure practical reason

is this: ask yourself whether, if the action you propose were to take place by a

law of the system of nature of which you were yourself a part, you could

regard it as possible by your own will. Everyone does, in fact, decide by this

rule whether actions are morally good or evil. Thus, people say: “If everyone

permitted himself to deceive, when he thought it to his advantage; or thought

himself justified in shortening his life as soon as he was thoroughly weary of

it; or looked with perfect indifference on the necessity of others; and if you

belonged to such an order of things, would you do so with the assent of your

own will?” Now everyone knows well that if he secretly allows himself to

deceive, it does not follow that everyone else does so; or if, unobserved, he isdestitute of compassion, others would not necessarily be so to him; hence,

this comparison of the maxim of his actions with a universal law of nature is

not the determining principle of his will. Such a law is, nevertheless, a type of

the estimation of the maxim on moral principles. If the maxim of the action is

not such as to stand the test of the form of a universal law of nature, then it is

morally impossible. This is the judgement even of common sense; for its

ordinary judgements, even those of experience, are always based on the law

of nature. It has it therefore always at hand, only that in cases where causality

from freedom is to be criticised, it makes that law of nature only the type of a

law of freedom, because, without something which it could use as an

example in a case of experience, it could not give the law of a pure practical

reason its proper use in practice.

              It is therefore allowable to use the system of the world of sense as

the type of a supersensible system of things, provided I do not transfer to the

latter the intuitions, and what depends on them, but merely apply to it the

form of law in general (the notion of which occurs even in the commonest

use of reason, but cannot be definitely known a priori for any other purpose

than the pure practical use of reason); for laws, as such, are so far identical,

no matter from what they derive their determining principles.

              Further, since of all the supersensible absolutely nothing [is known]

except freedom (through the moral law), and this only so far as it is

inseparably implied in that law, and moreover all supersensible objects to

which reason might lead us, following the guidance of that law, have still no

reality for us, except for the purpose of that law, and for the use of mere

practical reason; and as reason is authorized and even compelled to use

physical nature (in its pure form as an object of the understanding) as the type

of the judgement; hence, the present remark will serve to guard against

reckoning amongst concepts themselves that which belongs only to the typic

of concepts. This, namely, as a typic of the judgement, guards against the

empiricism of practical reason, which founds the practical notions of good

and evil merely on experienced consequences (so-called happiness). No

doubt happiness and the infinite advantages which would result from a will

determined by self-love, if this will at the same time erected itself into a

universal law of nature, may certainly serve as a perfectly suitable type of the

morally good, but it is not identical with it. The same typic guards also

against the mysticism of practical reason, which turns what served only as asymbol into a schema, that is, proposes to provide for the moral concepts

actual intuitions, which, however, are not sensible (intuitions of an invisible

Kingdom of God), and thus plunges into the transcendent. What is befitting

the use of the moral concepts is only the rationalism of the judgement, which

takes from the sensible system of nature only what pure reason can also

conceive of itself, that is, conformity to law, and transfers into the

supersensible nothing but what can conversely be actually exhibited by

actions in the world of sense according to the formal rule of a law of nature.

However, the caution against empiricism of practical reason is much more

important; for mysticism is quite reconcilable with the purity and sublimity of

the moral law, and, besides, it is not very natural or agreeable to common

habits of thought to strain one’s imagination to supersensible intuitions; and

hence the danger on this side is not so general. Empiricism, on the contrary,

cuts up at the roots the morality of intentions (in which, and not in actions

only, consists the high worth that men can and ought to give to themselves),

and substitutes for duty something quite different, namely, an empirical

interest, with which the inclinations generally are secretly leagued; and

empiricism, moreover, being on this account allied with all the inclinations

which (no matter what fashion they put on) degrade humanity when they are

raised to the dignity of a supreme practical principle; and as these,

nevertheless, are so favourable to everyone’s feelings, it is for that reason

much more dangerous than mysticism, which can never constitute a lasting

condition of any great number of persons.

 

 

           Chapter III. – Of the Motives of Pure Practical Reason.

 

 

              What is essential in the moral worth of actions is that the moral law

should directly determine the will. If the determination of the will takes place

in conformity indeed to the moral law, but only by means of a feeling, no

matter of what kind, which has to be presupposed in order that the law may

be sufficient to determine the will, and therefore not for the sake of the law,

then the action will possess legality, but not morality. Now, if we understand

by motive (elater animi) the subjective ground of determination of the will of

a being whose reason does not necessarily conform to the objective law, by

virtue of its own nature, then it will follow, first, that not motives can be

attributed to the Divine will, and that the motives of the human will (as well

as that of every created rational being) can never be anything else than the

moral law, and consequently that the objective principle of determination

must always and alone be also the subjectively sufficient determining

principle of the action, if this is not merely to fulfil the letter of the law,
                                10
without containing its spirit.

        10
               We may say of every action that conforms to the law, but is not

done for the sake of the law, that it is morally good in the letter, not in the

spirit (the intention).

              Since, then, for the purpose of giving the moral law influence over

the will, we must not seek for any other motives that might enable us to

dispense with the motive of the law itself, because that would produce mere

hypocrisy, without consistency; and it is even dangerous to allow other

motives (for instance, that of interest) even to cooperate along with the moral

law; hence nothing is left us but to determine carefully in what way the moral

law becomes a motive, and what effect this has upon the faculty of desire.

For as to the question how a law can be directly and of itself a determining

principle of the will (which is the essence of morality), this is, for human

reason, an insoluble problem and identical with the question: how a free will

is possible. Therefore what we have to show a priori is not why the moral law

in itself supplies a motive, but what effect it, as such, produces (or, more

correctly speaking, must produce) on the mind.              The essential point in every determination of the will by the moral

law is that being a free will it is determined simply by the moral law, not only

without the cooperation of sensible impulses, but even to the rejection of all

such, and to the checking of all inclinations so far as they might be opposed

to that law. So far, then, the effect of the moral law as a motive is only

negative, and this motive can be known a priori to be such. For all inclination

and every sensible impulse is founded on feeling, and the negative effect

produced on feeling (by the check on the inclinations) is itself feeling;

consequently, we can see a priori that the moral law, as a determining

principle of the will, must by thwarting all our inclinations produce a feeling

which may be called pain; and in this we have the first, perhaps the only,

instance in which we are able from a priori considerations to determine the

relation of a cognition (in this case of pure practical reason) to the feeling of

pleasure or displeasure. All the inclinations together (which can be reduced to

a tolerable system, in which case their satisfaction is called happiness)

constitute self-regard (solipsismus). This is either the self-love that consists in

an excessive fondness for oneself (philautia), or satisfaction with oneself

(arrogantia). The former is called particularly selfishness; the latter self-

conceit. Pure practical reason only checks selfishness, looking on it as natural

and active in us even prior to the moral law, so far as to limit it to the

condition of agreement with this law, and then it is called rational self-love.

But self-conceit reason strikes down altogether, since all claims to self-

esteem which precede agreement with the moral law are vain and

unjustifiable, for the certainty of a state of mind that coincides with this law

is the first condition of personal worth (as we shall presently show more

clearly), and prior to this conformity any pretension to worth is false and

unlawful. Now the propensity to self-esteem is one of the inclinations which

the moral law checks, inasmuch as that esteem rests only on morality.

Therefore the moral law breaks down self-conceit. But as this law is

something positive in itself, namely, the form of an intellectual causality, that

is, of freedom, it must be an object of respect; for, by opposing the subjective

antagonism of the inclinations, it weakens self-conceit; and since it even

breaks down, that is, humiliates, this conceit, it is an object of the highest

respect and, consequently, is the foundation of a positive feeling which is not

of empirical origin, but is known a priori. Therefore respect for the moral law

is a feeling which is produced by an intellectual cause, and this feeling is the

only one that we know quite a priori and the necessity of which we canperceive.

              In the preceding chapter we have seen that everything that presents

itself as an object of the will prior to the moral law is by that law itself, which

is the supreme condition of practical reason, excluded from the determining

principles of the will which we have called the unconditionally good; and that

the mere practical form which consists in the adaptation of the maxims to

universal legislation first determines what is good in itself and absolutely,

and is the basis of the maxims of a pure will, which alone is good in every

respect. However, we find that our nature as sensible beings is such that the

matter of desire (objects of inclination, whether of hope or fear) first presents

itself to us; and our pathologically affected self, although it is in its maxims

quite unfit for universal legislation; yet, just as if it constituted our entire self,

strives to put its pretensions forward first, and to have them acknowledged as

the first and original. This propensity to make ourselves in the subjective

determining principles of our choice serve as the objective determining

principle of the will generally may be called self-love; and if this pretends to

be legislative as an unconditional practical principle it may be called self-

conceit. Now the moral law, which alone is truly objective (namely, in every

respect), entirely excludes the influence of self-love on the supreme practical

principle, and indefinitely checks the self-conceit that prescribes the

subjective conditions of the former as laws. Now whatever checks our self-

conceit in our own judgement humiliates; therefore the moral law inevitably

humbles every man when he compares with it the physical propensities of his

nature. That, the idea of which as a determining principle of our will humbles

us in our self-consciousness, awakes respect for itself, so far as it is itself

positive and a determining principle. Therefore the moral law is even

subjectively a cause of respect. Now since everything that enters into self-

love belongs to inclination, and all inclination rests on feelings, and

consequently whatever checks all the feelings together in self-love has

necessarily, by this very circumstance, an influence on feeling; hence we

comprehend how it is possible to perceive a priori that the moral law can

produce an effect on feeling, in that it excludes the inclinations and the

propensity to make them the supreme practical condition, i.e., self-love, from

all participation in the supreme legislation. This effect is on one side merely

negative, but on the other side, relatively to the restricting principle of pure

practical reason, it is positive. No special kind of feeling need be assumed for

this under the name of a practical or moral feeling as antecedent to the morallaw and serving as its foundation.

              The negative effect on feeling (unpleasantness) is pathological, like

every influence on feeling and like every feeling generally. But as an effect of

the consciousness of the moral law, and consequently in relation to a

supersensible cause, namely, the subject of pure practical reason which is the

supreme lawgiver, this feeling of a rational being affected by inclinations is

called humiliation (intellectual self-depreciation); but with reference to the

positive source of this humiliation, the law, it is respect for it. There is indeed

no feeling for this law; but inasmuch as it removes the resistance out of the

way, this removal of an obstacle is, in the judgement of reason, esteemed

equivalent to a positive help to its causality. Therefore this feeling may also

be called a feeling of respect for the moral law, and for both reasons together

a moral feeling.

              While the moral law, therefore, is a formal determining principle of

action by practical pure reason, and is moreover a material though only

objective determining principle of the objects of action as called good and

evil, it is also a subjective determining principle, that is, a motive to this

action, inasmuch as it has influence on the morality of the subject and

produces a feeling conducive to the influence of the law on the will. There is

here in the subject no antecedent feeling tending to morality. For this is

impossible, since every feeling is sensible, and the motive of moral intention

must be free from all sensible conditions. On the contrary, while the sensible

feeling which is at the bottom of all our inclinations is the condition of that

impression which we call respect, the cause that determines it lies in the pure

practical reason; and this impression therefore, on account of its origin, must

be called, not a pathological but a practical effect. For by the fact that the

conception of the moral law deprives self-love of its influence, and self-

conceit of its illusion, it lessens the obstacle to pure practical reason and

produces the conception of the superiority of its objective law to the impulses

of the sensibility; and thus, by removing the counterpoise, it gives relatively

greater weight to the law in the judgement of reason (in the case of a will

affected by the aforesaid impulses). Thus the respect for the law is not a

motive to morality, but is morality itself subjectively considered as a motive,

inasmuch as pure practical reason, by rejecting all the rival pretensions of

selflove, gives authority to the law, which now alone has influence. Now it is

to be observed that as respect is an effect on feeling, and therefore on thesensibility, of a rational being, it presupposes this sensibility, and therefore

also the finiteness of such beings on whom the moral law imposes respect;

and that respect for the law cannot be attributed to a supreme being, or to any

being free from all sensibility, in whom, therefore, this sensibility cannot be

an obstacle to practical reason.

              This feeling (which we call the moral feeling) is therefore produced

simply by reason. It does not serve for the estimation of actions nor for the

foundation of the objective moral law itself, but merely as a motive to make

this of itself a maxim. But what name could we more suitably apply to this

singular feeling which cannot be compared to any pathological feeling? It is

of such a peculiar kind that it seems to be at the disposal of reason only, and

that pure practical reason.

              Respect applies always to persons only — not to things. The latter

may arouse inclination, and if they are animals (e.g., horses, dogs, etc.), even

love or fear, like the sea, a volcano, a beast of prey; but never respect.

Something that comes nearer to this feeling is admiration, and this, as an

affection, astonishment, can apply to things also, e.g., lofty mountains, the

magnitude, number, and distance of the heavenly bodies, the strength and

swiftness of many animals, etc. But all this is not respect. A man also may be

an object to me of love, fear, or admiration, even to astonishment, and yet not

be an object of respect. His jocose humour, his courage and strength, his

power from the rank be has amongst others, may inspire me with sentiments

of this kind, but still inner respect for him is wanting. Fontenelle says, “I bow

before a great man, but my mind does not bow.” I would add, before an

humble plain man, in whom I perceive uprightness of character in a higher

degree than I am conscious of in myself,— my mind bows whether I choose

it or not, and though I bear my head never so high that he may not forget my

superior rank. Why is this? Because his example exhibits to me a law that

humbles my self-conceit when I compare it with my conduct: a law, the

practicability of obedience to which I see proved by fact before my eyes.

Now, I may even be conscious of a like degree of uprightness, and yet the

respect remains. For since in man all good is defective, the law made visible

by an example still humbles my pride, my standard being furnished by a man

whose imperfections, whatever they may be, are not known to me as my own

are, and who therefore appears to me in a more favourable light. Respect is a

tribute which we cannot refuse to merit, whether we will or not; we mayindeed outwardly withhold it, but we cannot help feeling it inwardly.

              Respect is so far from being a feeling of pleasure that we only

reluctantly give way to it as regards a man. We try to find out something that

may lighten the burden of it, some fault to compensate us for the humiliation

which such which such an example causes. Even the dead are not always

secure from this criticism, especially if their example appears inimitable.

Even the moral law itself in its solemn majesty is exposed to this endeavour

to save oneself from yielding it respect. Can it be thought that it is for any

other reason that we are so ready to reduce it to the level of our familiar

inclination, or that it is for any other reason that we all take such trouble to

make it out to be the chosen precept of our own interest well understood, but

that we want to be free from the deterrent respect which shows us our own

unworthiness with such severity? Nevertheless, on the other hand, so little is

there pain in it that if once one has laid aside self-conceit and allowed

practical influence to that respect, he can never be satisfied with

contemplating the majesty of this law, and the soul believes itself elevated in

proportion as it sees the holy law elevated above it and its frail nature. No

doubt great talents and activity proportioned to them may also occasion

respect or an analogous feeling. It is very proper to yield it to them, and then

it appears as if this sentiment were the same thing as admiration. But if we

look closer we shall observe that it is always uncertain how much of the

ability is due to native talent, and how much to diligence in cultivating it.

Reason represents it to us as probably the fruit of cultivation, and therefore as

meritorious, and this notably reduces our self-conceit, and either casts a

reproach on us or urges us to follow such an example in the way that is

suitable to us. This respect, then, which we show to such a person (properly

speaking, to the law that his example exhibits) is not mere admiration; and

this is confirmed also by the fact that when the common run of admirers think

they have learned from any source the badness of such a man’s character (for

instance Voltaire’s) they give up all respect for him; whereas the true scholar

still feels it at least with regard to his talents, because he is himself engaged

in a business and a vocation which make imitation of such a man in some

degree a law.

              Respect for the moral law is, therefore, the only and the undoubted

moral motive, and this feeling is directed to no object, except on the ground

of this law. The moral law first determines the will objectively and directly inthe judgement of reason; and freedom, whose causality can be determined

only by the law, consists just in this, that it restricts all inclinations, and

consequently self-esteem, by the condition of obedience to its pure law. This

restriction now has an effect on feeling, and produces the impression of

displeasure which can be known a priori from the moral law. Since it is so far

only a negative effect which, arising from the influence of pure practical

reason, checks the activity of the subject, so far as it is determined by

inclinations, and hence checks the opinion of his personal worth (which, in

the absence of agreement with the moral law, is reduced to nothing); hence,

the effect of this law on feeling is merely humiliation. We can, therefore,

perceive this a priori, but cannot know by it the force of the pure practical law

as a motive, but only the resistance to motives of the sensibility. But since the

same law is objectively, that is, in the conception of pure reason, an

immediate principle of determination of the will, and consequently this

humiliation takes place only relatively to the purity of the law; hence, the

lowering of the pretensions of moral self-esteem, that is, humiliation on the

sensible side, is an elevation of the moral, i.e., practical, esteem for the law

itself on the intellectual side; in a word, it is respect for the law, and

therefore, as its cause is intellectual, a positive feeling which can be known a

priori. For whatever diminishes the obstacles to an activity furthers this

activity itself. Now the recognition of the moral law is the consciousness of

an activity of practical reason from objective principles, which only fails to

reveal its effect in actions because subjective (pathological) causes hinder it.

Respect for the moral law then must be regarded as a positive, though

indirect, effect of it on feeling, inasmuch as this respect weakens the

impeding influence of inclinations by humiliating selfesteem; and hence also

as a subjective principle of activity, that is, as a motive to obedience to the

law, and as a principle of the maxims of a life conformable to it. From the

notion of a motive arises that of an interest, which can never be attributed to

any being unless it possesses reason, and which signifies a motive of the will

in so far as it is conceived by the reason. Since in a morally good will the law

itself must be the motive, the moral interest is a pure interest of practical

reason alone, independent of sense. On the notion of an interest is based that

of a maxim. This, therefore, is morally good only in case it rests simply on

the interest taken in obedience to the law. All three notions, however, that of

a motive, of an interest, and of a maxim, can be applied only to finite beings.

For they all suppose a limitation of the nature of the being, in that thesubjective character of his choice does not of itself agree with the objective

law of a practical reason; they suppose that the being requires to be impelled

to action by something, because an internal obstacle opposes itself. Therefore

they cannot be applied to the Divine will.

              There is something so singular in the unbounded esteem for the pure

moral law, apart from all advantage, as it is presented for our obedience by

practical reason, the voice of which makes even the boldest sinner tremble

and compels him to hide himself from it, that we cannot wonder if we find

this influence of a mere intellectual idea on the feelings quite

incomprehensible to speculative reason and have to be satisfied with seeing

so much of this a priori that such a feeling is inseparably connected with the

conception of the moral law in every finite rational being. If this feeling of

respect were pathological, and therefore were a feeling of pleasure based on

the inner sense, it would be in vain to try to discover a connection of it with

any idea a priori. But [it] is a feeling that applies merely to what is practical,

and depends on the conception of a law, simply as to its form, not on account

of any object, and therefore cannot be reckoned either as pleasure or pain,

and yet produces an interest in obedience to the law, which we call the moral

interest, just as the capacity of taking such an interest in the law (or respect

for the moral law itself) is properly the moral feeling.

              The consciousness of a free submission of the will to the law, yet

combined with an inevitable constraint put upon all inclinations, though only

by our own reason, is respect for the law. The law that demands this respect

and inspires it is clearly no other than the moral (for no other precludes all

inclinations from exercising any direct influence on the will). An action

which is objectively practical according to this law, to the exclusion of every

determining principle of inclination, is duty, and this by reason of that

exclusion includes in its concept practical obligation, that is, a determination

to actions, however reluctantly they may be done. The feeling that arises from

the consciousness of this obligation is not pathological, as would be a feeling

produced by an object of the senses, but practical only, that is, it is made

possible by a preceding (objective) determination of the will and a causality

of the reason. As submission to the law, therefore, that is, as a command

(announcing constraint for the sensibly affected subject), it contains in it no

pleasure, but on the contrary, so far, pain in the action. On the other hand,

however, as this constraint is exercised merely by the legislation of our ownreason, it also contains something elevating, and this subjective effect on

feeling, inasmuch as pure practical reason is the sole cause of it, may be

called in this respect self-approbation, since we recognize ourselves as

determined thereto solely by the law without any interest, and are now

conscious of a quite different interest subjectively produced thereby, and

which is purely practical and free; and our taking this interest in an action of

duty is not suggested by any inclination, but is commanded and actually

brought about by reason through the practical law; whence this feeling

obtains a special name, that of respect.

              The notion of duty, therefore, requires in the action, objectively,

agreement with the law, and, subjectively in its maxim, that respect for the

law shall be the sole mode in which the will is determined thereby. And on

this rests the distinction between the consciousness of having acted according

to duty and from duty, that is, from respect for the law. The former (legality)

is possible even if inclinations have been the determining principles of the

will; but the latter (morality), moral worth, can be placed only in this, that the
                                                                          11
action is done from duty, that is, simply for the sake of the law.

        11
               If we examine accurately the notion of respect for persons as it has

been already laid down, we shall perceive that it always rests on the

consciousness of a duty which an example shows us, and that respect,

therefore. can never have any but a moral ground, and that it is very good and

even, in a psychological point of view, very useful for the knowledge of

mankind, that whenever we use this expression we should attend to this secret

and marvellous, yet often recurring, regard which men in their judgement pay

to the moral law.

              It is of the greatest importance to attend with the utmost exactness in

all moral judgements to the subjective principle of all maxims, that all the

morality of actions may be placed in the necessity of acting from duty and

from respect for the law, not from love and inclination for that which the

actions are to produce. For men and all created rational beings moral

necessity is constraint, that is obligation, and every action based on it is to be

conceived as a duty, not as a proceeding previously pleasing, or likely to be

pleasing to us of our own accord. As if indeed we could ever bring it about

that without respect for the law, which implies fear, or at least apprehension

of transgression, we of ourselves, like the independent Deity, could ever

come into possession of holiness of will by the coincidence of our will withthe pure moral law becoming as it were part of our nature, never to be shaken

(in which case the law would cease to be a command for us, as we could

never be tempted to be untrue to it).

              The moral law is in fact for the will of a perfect being a law of

holiness, but for the will of every finite rational being a law of duty, of moral

constraint, and of the determination of its actions by respect for this law and

reverence for its duty. No other subjective principle must be assumed as a

motive, else while the action might chance to be such as the law prescribes,

yet, as does not proceed from duty, the intention, which is the thing properly

in question in this legislation, is not moral.

              It is a very beautiful thing to do good to men from love to them and

from sympathetic good will, or to be just from love of order; but this is not

yet the true moral maxim of our conduct which is suitable to our position

amongst rational beings as men, when we pretend with fanciful pride to set

ourselves above the thought of duty, like volunteers, and, as if we were

independent on the command, to want to do of our own good pleasure what

we think we need no command to do. We stand under a discipline of reason

and in all our maxims must not forget our subjection to it, nor withdraw

anything therefrom, or by an egotistic presumption diminish aught of the

authority of the law (although our own reason gives it) so as to set the

determining principle of our will, even though the law be conformed to,

anywhere else but in the law itself and in respect for this law. Duty and

obligation are the only names that we must give to our relation to the moral

law. We are indeed legislative members of a moral kingdom rendered

possible by freedom, and presented to us by reason as an object of respect;

but yet we are subjects in it, not the sovereign, and to mistake our inferior

position as creatures, and presumptuously to reject the authority of the moral

law, is already to revolt from it in spirit, even though the letter of it is

fulfilled.

              With this agrees very well the possibility of such a command as:
                                                                    12
Love God above everything, and thy neighbour as thyself. For as a

command it requires respect for a law which commands love and does not

leave it to our own arbitrary choice to make this our principle. Love to God,

however, considered as an inclination (pathological love), is impossible, for

He is not an object of the senses. The same affection towards men is possible

no doubt, but cannot be commanded, for it is not in the power of any man tolove anyone at command; therefore it is only practical love that is meant in

that pith of all laws. To love God means, in this sense, to like to do His

commandments; to love one’s neighbour means to like to practise all duties

towards him. But the command that makes this a rule cannot command us to

have this disposition in actions conformed to duty, but only to endeavour

after it. For a command to like to do a thing is in itself contradictory, because

if we already know of ourselves what we are bound to do, and if further we

are conscious of liking to do it, a command would be quite needless; and if

we do it not willingly, but only out of respect for the law, a command that

makes this respect the motive of our maxim would directly counteract the

disposition commanded. That law of all laws, therefore, like all the moral

precepts of the Gospel, exhibits the moral disposition in all its perfection, in

which, viewed as an ideal of holiness, it is not attainable by any creature, but

yet is the pattern which we should strive to approach, and in an uninterrupted

but infinite progress become like to. In fact, if a rational creature could ever

reach this point, that he thoroughly likes to do all moral laws, this would

mean that there does not exist in him even the possibility of a desire that

would tempt him to deviate from them; for to overcome such a desire always

costs the subject some sacrifice and therefore requires self-compulsion, that

is, inward constraint to something that one does not quite like to do; and no

creature can ever reach this stage of moral disposition. For, being a creature,

and therefore always dependent with respect to what be requires for complete

satisfaction, he can never be quite free from desires and inclinations, and as

these rest on physical causes, they can never of themselves coincide with the

moral law, the sources of which are quite different; and therefore they make it

necessary to found the mental disposition of one’s maxims on moral

obligation, not on ready inclination, but on respect, which demands

obedience to the law, even though one may not like it; not on love, which

apprehends no inward reluctance of the will towards the law. Nevertheless,

this latter, namely, love to the law (which would then cease to be a command,

and then morality, which would have passed subjectively into holiness,

would cease to be virtue) must be the constant though unattainable goal of his

endeavours. For in the case of what we highly esteem, but yet (on account of

the consciousness of our weakness) dread, the increased facility of satisfying

it changes the most reverential awe into inclination, and respect into love; at

least this would be the perfection of a disposition devoted to the law, if it

were possible for a creature to attain it.        12
               This law is in striking contrast with the principle of private

happiness which some make the supreme principle of morality. This would

be expressed thus: Love thyself above everything, and God and thy

neighbour for thine own sake.

              This reflection is intended not so much to clear up the evangelical

command just cited, in order to prevent religious fanaticism in regard to love

of God, but to define accurately the moral disposition with regard directly to

our duties towards men, and to check, or if possible prevent, a merely moral

fanaticism which infects many persons. The stage of morality on which man

(and, as far as we can see, every rational creature) stands is respect for the

moral law. The disposition that he ought to have in obeying this is to obey it

from duty, not from spontaneous inclination, or from an endeavour taken up

from liking and unbidden; and this proper moral condition in which he can

always be is virtue, that is, moral disposition militant, and not holiness in the

fancied possession of a perfect purity of the disposition of the will. It is

nothing but moral fanaticism and exaggerated self-conceit that is infused into

the mind by exhortation to actions as noble, sublime, and magnanimous, by

which men are led into the delusion that it is not duty, that is, respect for the

law, whose yoke (an easy yoke indeed, because reason itself imposes it on us)

they must bear, whether they like it or not, that constitutes the determining

principle of their actions, and which always humbles them while they obey it;

fancying that those actions are expected from them, not from duty, but as

pure merit. For not only would they, in imitating such deeds from such a

principle, not have fulfilled the spirit of the law in the least, which consists

not in the legality of the action (without regard to principle), but in the

subjection of the mind to the law; not only do they make the motives

pathological (seated in sympathy or self-love), not moral (in the law), but

they produce in this way a vain, high-flying, fantastic way of thinking,

flattering themselves with a spontaneous goodness of heart that needs neither

spur nor bridle, for which no command is needed, and thereby forgetting their

obligation, which they ought to think of rather than merit. Indeed actions of

others which are done with great sacrifice, and merely for the sake of duty,

may be praised as noble and sublime, but only so far as there are traces which

suggest that they were done wholly out of respect for duty and not from

excited feelings. If these, however, are set before anyone as examples to be

imitated, respect for duty (which is the only true moral feeling) must be

employed as the motive — this severe holy precept which never allows ourvain self-love to dally with pathological impulses (however analogous they

may be to morality), and to take a pride in meritorious worth. Now if we

search we shall find for all actions that are worthy of praise a law of duty

which commands, and does not leave us to choose what may be agreeable to

our inclinations. This is the only way of representing things that can give a

moral training to the soul, because it alone is capable of solid and accurately

defined principles.

              If fanaticism in its most general sense is a deliberate over stepping of

the limits of human reason, then moral fanaticism is such an over stepping of

the bounds that practical pure reason sets to mankind, in that it forbids us to

place the subjective determining principle of correct actions, that is, their

moral motive, in anything but the law itself, or to place the disposition which

is thereby brought into the maxims in anything but respect for this law, and

hence commands us to take as the supreme vital principle of all morality in

men the thought of duty, which strikes down all arrogance as well as vain

self-love.

              If this is so, it is not only writers of romance or sentimental

educators (although they may be zealous opponents of sentimentalism), but

sometimes even philosophers, nay, even the severest of all, the Stoics, that

have brought in moral fanaticism instead of a sober but wise moral discipline,

although the fanaticism of the latter was more heroic, that of the former of an

insipid, effeminate character; and we may, without hypocrisy, say of the

moral teaching of the Gospel, that it first, by the purity of its moral principle,

and at the same time by its suitability to the limitations of finite beings,

brought all the good conduct of men under the discipline of a duty plainly set

before their eyes, which does not permit them to indulge in dreams of

imaginary moral perfections; and that it also set the bounds of humility (that

is, self-knowledge) to self-conceit as well as to self-love, both which are

ready to mistake their limits.

              Duty! Thou sublime and mighty name that dost embrace nothing

charming or insinuating, but requirest submission, and yet seekest not to

move the will by threatening aught that would arouse natural aversion or

terror, but merely holdest forth a law which of itself finds entrance into the

mind, and yet gains reluctant reverence (though not always obedience), a law

before which all inclinations are dumb, even though they secretly counter-

work it; what origin is there worthy of thee, and where is to be found the rootof thy noble descent which proudly rejects all kindred with the inclinations; a

root to be derived from which is the indispensable condition of the only

worth which men can give themselves?

              It can be nothing less than a power which elevates man above

himself (as a part of the world of sense), a power which connects him with an

order of things that only the understanding can conceive, with a world which

at the same time commands the whole sensible world, and with it the

empirically determinable existence of man in time, as well as the sum total of

all ends (which totality alone suits such unconditional practical laws as the

moral). This power is nothing but personality, that is, freedom and

independence on the mechanism of nature, yet, regarded also as a faculty of a

being which is subject to special laws, namely, pure practical laws given by

its own reason; so that the person as belonging to the sensible world is

subject to his own personality as belonging to the intelligible [supersensible]

world. It is then not to be wondered at that man, as belonging to both worlds,

must regard his own nature in reference to its second and highest

characteristic only with reverence, and its laws with the highest respect.

              On this origin are founded many expressions which designate the

worth of objects according to moral ideas. The moral law is holy (inviolable).

Man is indeed unholy enough, but he must regard humanity in his own

person as holy. In all creation every thing one chooses and over which one

has any power, may be used merely as means; man alone, and with him every

rational creature, is an end in himself. By virtue of the autonomy of his

freedom he is the subject of the moral law, which is holy. Just for this reason

every will, even every person’s own individual will, in relation to itself, is

restricted to the condition of agreement with the autonomy of the rational

being, that is to say, that it is not to be subject to any purpose which cannot

accord with a law which might arise from the will of the passive subject

himself; the latter is, therefore, never to be employed merely as means, but as

itself also, concurrently, an end. We justly attribute this condition even to the

Divine will, with regard to the rational beings in the world, which are His

creatures, since it rests on their personality, by which alone they are ends in

themselves.

              This respect-inspiring idea of personality which sets before our eyes

the sublimity of our nature (in its higher aspect), while at the same time it

shows us the want of accord of our conduct with it and thereby strikes downself-conceit, is even natural to the commonest reason and easily observed.

Has not every even moderately honourable man sometimes found that, where

by an otherwise inoffensive lie he might either have withdrawn himself from

an unpleasant business, or even have procured some advantages for a loved

and well-deserving friend, he has avoided it solely lest he should despise

himself secretly in his own eyes? When an upright man is in the greatest

distress, which he might have avoided if he could only have disregarded duty,

is he not sustained by the consciousness that he has maintained humanity in

its proper dignity in his own person and honoured it, that he has no reason to

be ashamed of himself in his own sight, or to dread the inward glance of self-

examination? This consolation is not happiness, it is not even the smallest

part of it, for no one would wish to have occasion for it, or would, perhaps,

even desire a life in such circumstances. But he lives, and he cannot endure

that he should be in his own eyes unworthy of life. This inward peace is

therefore merely negative as regards what can make life pleasant; it is, in fact,

only the escaping the danger of sinking in personal worth, after everything

else that is valuable has been lost. It is the effect of a respect for something

quite different from life, something in comparison and contrast with which

life with all its enjoyment has no value. He still lives only because it is his

duty, not because he finds anything pleasant in life.

              Such is the nature of the true motive of pure practical reason; it is no

other than the pure moral law itself, inasmuch as it makes us conscious of the

sublimity of our own supersensible existence and subjectively produces

respect for their higher nature in men who are also conscious of their sensible

existence and of the consequent dependence of their pathologically very

susceptible nature. Now with this motive may be combined so many charms

and satisfactions of life that even on this account alone the most prudent

choice of a rational Epicurean reflecting on the greatest advantage of life

would declare itself on the side of moral conduct, and it may even be

advisable to join this prospect of a cheerful enjoyment of life with that

supreme motive which is already sufficient of itself; but only as a

counterpoise to the attractions which vice does not fail to exhibit on the

opposite side, and not so as, even in the smallest degree, to place in this the

proper moving power when duty is in question. For that would be just the

same as to wish to taint the purity of the moral disposition in its source. The

majesty of duty has nothing to do with enjoyment of life; it has its special law

and its special tribunal, and though the two should be never so well shakentogether to be given well mixed, like medicine, to the sick soul, yet they will

soon separate of themselves; and if they do not, the former will not act; and

although physical life might gain somewhat in force, the moral life would

fade away irrecoverably.

        Critical Examination of the Analytic of Pure Practical Reason.

 

              By the critical examination of a science, or of a portion of it, which

constitutes a system by itself, I understand the inquiry and proof why it must

have this and no other systematic form, when we compare it with another

system which is based on a similar faculty of knowledge. Now practical and

speculative reason are based on the same faculty, so far as both are pure

reason. Therefore the difference in their systematic form must be determined

by the comparison of both, and the ground of this must be assigned.

              The Analytic of pure theoretic reason had to do with the knowledge

of such objects as may have been given to the understanding, and was

obliged therefore to begin from intuition and consequently (as this is always

sensible) from sensibility; and only after that could advance to concepts (of

the objects of this intuition), and could only end with principles after both

these had preceded. On the contrary, since practical reason has not to do with

objects so as to know them, but with its own faculty of realizing them (in

accordance with the knowledge of them), that is, with a will which is a

causality, inasmuch as reason contains its determining principle; since,

consequently, it has not to furnish an object of intuition, but as practical

reason has to furnish only a law (because the notion of causality always

implies the reference to a law which determines the existence of the many in

relation to one another); hence a critical examination of the Analytic of

reason, if this is to be practical reason (and this is properly the problem),

must begin with the possibility of practical principles a priori. Only after that

can it proceed to concepts of the objects of a practical reason, namely, those

of absolute good and evil, in order to assign them in accordance with those

principles (for prior to those principles they cannot possibly be given as good

and evil by any faculty of knowledge), and only then could the section be

concluded with the last chapter, that, namely, which treats of the relation of

the pure practical reason to the sensibility and of its necessary influence

thereon, which is a priori cognisable, that is, of the moral sentiment. Thus the

Analytic of the practical pure reason has the whole extent of the conditions ofits use in common with the theoretical, but in reverse order. The Analytic of

pure theoretic reason was divided into transcendental Aesthetic and

transcendental Logic, that of the practical reversely into Logic and Aesthetic

of pure practical reason (if I may, for the sake of analogy merely, use these

designations, which are not quite suitable). This logic again was there divided

into the Analytic of concepts and that of principles: here into that of

principles and concepts. The Aesthetic also had in the former case two parts,

on account of the two kinds of sensible intuition; here the sensibility is not

considered as a capacity of intuition at all, but merely as feeling (which can

be a subjective ground of desire), and in regard to it pure practical reason

admits no further division.

              It is also easy to see the reason why this division into two parts with

its subdivision was not actually adopted here (as one might have been

induced to attempt by the example of the former critique). For since it is pure

reason that is here considered in its practical use, and consequently as

proceeding from a priori principles, and not from empirical principles of

determination, hence the division of the analytic of pure practical reason must

resemble that of a syllogism; namely, proceeding from the universal in the

major premiss (the moral principle), through a minor premiss containing a

subsumption of possible actions (as good or evil) under the former, to the

conclusion, namely, the subjective determination of the will (an interest in the

possible practical good, and in the maxim founded on it). He who has been

able to convince himself of the truth of the positions occurring in the Analytic

will take pleasure in such comparisons; for they justly suggest the expectation

that we may perhaps some day be able to discern the unity of the whole

faculty of reason (theoretical as well as practical) and be able to derive all

from one principle, which, is what human reason inevitably demands, as it

finds complete satisfaction only in a perfectly systematic unity of its

knowledge.

              If now we consider also the contents of the knowledge that we can

have of a pure practical reason, and by means of it, as shown by the Analytic,

we find, along with a remarkable analogy between it and the theoretical, no

less remarkable differences. As regards the theoretical, the faculty of a pure

rational cognition a priori could be easily and evidently proved by examples

from sciences (in which, as they put their principles to the test in so many

ways by methodical use, there is not so much reason as in commonknowledge to fear a secret mixture of empirical principles of cognition). But,

that pure reason without the admixture of any empirical principle is practical

of itself, this could only be shown from the commonest practical use of

reason, by verifying the fact, that every man’s natural reason acknowledges

the supreme practical principle as the supreme law of his will — a law

completely a priori and not depending on any sensible data. It was necessary

first to establish and verify the purity of its origin, even in the judgement of

this common reason, before science could take it in hand to make use of it, as

a fact, that is, prior to all disputation about its possibility, and all the

consequences that may be drawn from it. But this circumstance may be

readily explained from what has just been said; because practical pure reason

must necessarily begin with principles, which therefore must be the first data,

the foundation of all science, and cannot be derived from it. It was possible to

effect this verification of moral principles as principles of a pure reason quite

well, and with sufficient certainty, by a single appeal to the judgement of

common sense, for this reason, that anything empirical which might slip into

our maxims as a determining principle of the will can be detected at once by

the feeling of pleasure or pain which necessarily attaches to it as exciting

desire; whereas pure practical reason positively refuses to admit this feeling

into its principle as a condition. The heterogeneity of the determining

principles (the empirical and rational) is clearly detected by this resistance of

a practically legislating reason against every admixture of inclination, and by

a peculiar kind of sentiment, which, however, does not precede the legislation

of the practical reason, but, on the contrary, is produced by this as a

constraint, namely, by the feeling of a respect such as no man has for

inclinations of whatever kind but for the law only; and it is detected in so

marked and prominent a manner that even the most uninstructed cannot fail

to see at once in an example presented to him, that empirical principles of

volition may indeed urge him to follow their attractions, but that he can never

be expected to obey anything but the pure practical law of reason alone.

              The distinction between the doctrine of happiness and the doctrine of

morality, in the former of which empirical principles constitute the entire

foundation, while in the second they do not form the smallest part of it, is the

first and most important office of the Analytic of pure practical reason; and it

must proceed in it with as much exactness and, so to speak, scrupulousness,

as any geometer in his work. The philosopher, however, has greater

difficulties to contend with here (as always in rational cognition by means ofconcepts merely without construction), because he cannot take any intuition

as a foundation (for a pure noumenon). He has, however, this advantage that,

like the chemist, he can at any time make an experiment with every man’s

practical reason for the purpose of distinguishing the moral (pure) principle

of determination from the empirical; namely, by adding the moral law (as a

determining principle) to the empirically affected will (e.g., that of the man

who would be ready to lie because he can gain something thereby). It is as if

the analyst added alkali to a solution of lime in hydrochloric acid, the acid at

once forsakes the lime, combines with the alkali, and the lime is precipitated.

Just in the same way, if to a man who is otherwise honest (or who for this

occasion places himself only in thought in the position of an honest man), we

present the moral law by which he recognises the worthlessness of the liar,

his practical reason (in forming a judgement of what ought to be done) at

once forsakes the advantage, combines with that which maintains in him

respect for his own person (truthfulness), and the advantage after it has been

separated and washed from every particle of reason (which is altogether on

the side of duty) is easily weighed by everyone, so that it can enter into

combination with reason in other cases, only not where it could be opposed to

the moral law, which reason never forsakes, but most closely unites itself

with.

              But it does not follow that this distinction between the principle of

happiness and that of morality is an opposition between them, and pure

practical reason does not require that we should renounce all claim to

happiness, but only that the moment duty is in question we should take no

account of happiness. It may even in certain respects be a duty to provide for

happiness; partly, because (including skill, wealth, riches) it contains means

for the fulfilment of our duty; partly, because the absence of it (e.g., poverty)

implies temptations to transgress our duty. But it can never be an immediate

duty to promote our happiness, still less can it be the principle of all duty.

Now, as all determining principles of the will, except the law of pure

practical reason alone (the moral law), are all empirical and, therefore, as

such, belong to the principle of happiness, they must all be kept apart from

the supreme principle of morality and never be incorporated with it as a

condition; since this would be to destroy all moral worth just as much as any

empirical admixture with geometrical principles would destroy the certainty

of mathematical evidence, which in Plato’s opinion is the most excellent

thing in mathematics, even surpassing their utility.              Instead, however, of the deduction of the supreme principle of pure

practical reason, that is, the explanation of the possibility of such a

knowledge a priori, the utmost we were able to do was to show that if we saw

the possibility of the freedom of an efficient cause, we should also see not

merely the possibility, but even the necessity, of the moral law as the

supreme practical law of rational beings, to whom we attribute freedom of

causality of their will; because both concepts are so inseparably united that

we might define practical freedom as independence of the will on anything

but the moral law. But we cannot perceive the possibility of the freedom of

an efficient cause, especially in the world of sense; we are fortunate if only

we can be sufficiently assured that there is no proof of its impossibility, and

are now, by the moral law which postulates it, compelled and therefore

authorized to assume it. However, there are still many who think that they

can explain this freedom on empirical principles, like any other physical

faculty, and treat it as a psychological property, the explanation of which

only requires a more exact study of the nature of the soul and of the motives

of the will, and not as a transcendental predicate of the causality of a being

that belongs to the world of sense (which is really the point). They thus

deprive us of the grand revelation which we obtain through practical reason

by means of the moral law, the revelation, namely, of a supersensible world

by the realization of the otherwise transcendent concept of freedom, and by

this deprive us also of the moral law itself, which admits no empirical

principle of determination. Therefore it will be necessary to add something

here as a protection against this delusion and to exhibit empiricism in its

naked superficiality.

              The notion of causality as physical necessity, in opposition to the

same notion as freedom, concerns only the existence of things so far as it is

determinable in time, and, consequently, as phenomena, in opposition to their

causality as things in themselves. Now if we take the attributes of existence

of things in time for attributes of things in themselves (which is the common

view), then it is impossible to reconcile the necessity of the causal relation

with freedom; they are contradictory. For from the former it follows that

every event, and consequently every action that takes place at a certain point

of time, is a necessary result of what existed in time preceding. Now as time

past is no longer in my power, hence every action that I perform must be the

necessary result of certain determining grounds which are not in my power,

that is, at the moment in which I am acting I am never free. Nay, even if Iassume that my whole existence is independent on any foreign cause (for

instance, God), so that the determining principles of my causality, and even

of my whole existence, were not outside myself, yet this would not in the

least transform that physical necessity into freedom. For at every moment of

time I am still under the necessity of being determined to action by that

which is not in my power, and the series of events infinite a parte priori,

which I only continue according to a predetermined order and could never

begin of myself, would be a continuous physical chain, and therefore my

causality would never be freedom.

              If, then, we would attribute freedom to a being whose existence is

determined in time, we cannot except him from the law of necessity as to all

events in his existence and, consequently, as to his actions also; for that

would be to hand him over to blind chance. Now as this law inevitably

applies to all the causality of things, so far as their existence is determinable

in time, it follows that if this were the mode in which we had also to conceive

the existence of these things in themselves, freedom must be rejected as a

vain and impossible conception. Consequently, if we would still save it, no

other way remains but to consider that the existence of a thing, so far as it is

determinable in time, and therefore its causality, according to the law of

physical necessity, belong to appearance, and to attribute freedom to the same

being as a thing in itself. This is certainly inevitable, if we would retain both

these contradictory concepts together; but in application, when we try to

explain their combination in one and the same action, great difficulties

present themselves which seem to render such a combination impracticable.

              When I say of a man who commits a theft that, by the law of

causality, this deed is a necessary result of the determining causes in

preceding time, then it was impossible that it could not have happened; how

then can the judgement, according to the moral law, make any change, and

suppose that it could have been omitted, because the law says that it ought to

have been omitted; that is, how can a man be called quite free at the same

moment, and with respect to the same action in which he is subject to an

inevitable physical necessity? Some try to evade this by saying that the

causes that determine his causality are of such a kind as to agree with a

comparative notion of freedom. According to this, that is sometimes called a

free effect, the determining physical cause of which lies within the acting

thing itself, e.g., that which a projectile performs when it is in free motion, inwhich case we use the word freedom, because while it is in flight it is not

urged by anything external; or as we call the motion of a clock a free motion,

because it moves its hands itself, which therefore do not require to be pushed

by external force; so although the actions of man are necessarily determined

by causes which precede in time, we yet call them free, because these causes

are ideas produced by our own faculties, whereby desires are evoked on

occasion of circumstances, and hence actions are wrought according to our

own pleasure. This is a wretched subterfuge with which some persons still let

themselves be put off, and so think they have solved, with a petty word —

jugglery, that difficult problem, at the solution of which centuries have

laboured in vain, and which can therefore scarcely be found so completely on

the surface. In fact, in the question about the freedom which must be the

foundation of all moral laws and the consequent responsibility, it does not

matter whether the principles which necessarily determine causality by a

physical law reside within the subject or without him, or in the former case

whether these principles are instinctive or are conceived by reason, if, as is

admitted by these men themselves, these determining ideas have the ground

of their existence in time and in the antecedent state, and this again in an

antecedent, etc. Then it matters not that these are internal; it matters not that

they have a psychological and not a mechanical causality, that is, produce

actions by means of ideas and not by bodily movements; they are still

determining principles of the causality of a being whose existence is

determinable in time, and therefore under the necessitation of conditions of

past time, which therefore, when the subject has to act, are no longer in his

power. This may imply psychological freedom (if we choose to apply this

term to a merely internal chain of ideas in the mind), but it involves physical

necessity and, therefore, leaves no room for transcendental freedom, which

must be conceived as independence on everything empirical, and,

consequently, on nature generally, whether it is an object of the internal sense

considered in time only, or of the external in time and space. Without this

freedom (in the latter and true sense), which alone is practical a priori, no

moral law and no moral imputation are possible. Just for this reason the

necessity of events in time, according to the physical law of causality, may be

called the mechanism of nature, although we do not mean by this that things

which are subject to it must be really material machines. We look here only

to the necessity of the connection of events in a time-series as it is developed

according to the physical law, whether the subject in which this developmenttakes place is called automaton materiale when the mechanical being is

moved by matter, or with Leibnitz spirituale when it is impelled by ideas; and

if the freedom of our will were no other than the latter (say the psychological

and comparative, not also transcendental, that is, absolute), then it would at

bottom be nothing better than the freedom of a turnspit, which, when once it

is wound up, accomplishes its motions of itself.

              Now, in order to remove in the supposed case the apparent

contradiction between freedom and the mechanism of nature in one and the

same action, we must remember what was said in the Critique of Pure

Reason, or what follows therefrom; viz., that the necessity of nature, which

cannot coexist with the freedom of the subject, appertains only to the

attributes of the thing that is subject to time-conditions, consequently only to

those of the acting subject as a phenomenon; that therefore in this respect the

determining principles of every action of the same reside in what belongs to

past time and is no longer in his power (in which must be included his own

past actions and the character that these may determine for him in his own

eyes as a phenomenon). But the very same subject, being on the other side

conscious of himself as a thing in himself, considers his existence also in so

far as it is not subject to time-conditions, and regards himself as only

determinable by laws which he gives himself through reason; and in this his

existence nothing is antecedent to the determination of his will, but every

action, and in general every modification of his existence, varying according

to his internal sense, even the whole series of his existence as a sensible being

is in the consciousness of his supersensible existence nothing but the result,

and never to be regarded as the determining principle, of his causality as a

noumenon. In this view now the rational being can justly say of every

unlawful action that he performs, that he could very well have left it undone;

although as appearance it is sufficiently determined in the past, and in this

respect is absolutely necessary; for it, with all the past which determines it,

belongs to the one single phenomenon of his character which he makes for

himself, in consequence of which he imputes the causality of those

appearances to himself as a cause independent of sensibility.

              With this agree perfectly the judicial sentences of that wonderful

faculty in us which we call conscience. A man may use as much art as he

likes in order to paint to himself an unlawful act, that he remembers, as an

unintentional error, a mere oversight, such as one can never altogether avoid,and therefore as something in which he was carried away by the stream of

physical necessity, and thus to make himself out innocent, yet he finds that

the advocate who speaks in his favour can by no means silence the accuser

within, if only he is conscious that at the time when he did this wrong he was

in his senses, that is, in possession of his freedom; and, nevertheless, he

accounts for his error from some bad habits, which by gradual neglect of

attention he has allowed to grow upon him to such a degree that he can regard

his error as its natural consequence, although this cannot protect him from the

blame and reproach which he casts upon himself. This is also the ground of

repentance for a long past action at every recollection of it; a painful feeling

produced by the moral sentiment, and which is practically void in so far as it

cannot serve to undo what has been done. (Hence Priestley, as a true and

consistent fatalist, declares it absurd, and he deserves to be commended for

this candour more than those who, while they maintain the mechanism of the

will in fact, and its freedom in words only, yet wish it to be thought that they

include it in their system of compromise, although they do not explain the

possibility of such moral imputation.) But the pain is quite legitimate,

because when the law of our intelligible [supersensible] existence (the moral

law) is in question, reason recognizes no distinction of time, and only asks

whether the event belongs to me, as my act, and then always morally

connects the same feeling with it, whether it has happened just now or long

ago. For in reference to the supersensible consciousness of its existence (i.e.,

freedom) the life of sense is but a single phenomenon, which, inasmuch as it

contains merely manifestations of the mental disposition with regard to the

moral law (i.e., of the character), must be judged not according to the

physical necessity that belongs to it as phenomenon, but according to the

absolute spontaneity of freedom. It may therefore be admitted that, if it were

possible to have so profound an insight into a man’s mental character as

shown by internal as well as external actions as to know all its motives, even

the smallest, and likewise all the external occasions that can influence them,

we could calculate a man’s conduct for the future with as great certainty as a

lunar or solar eclipse; and nevertheless we may maintain that the man is free.

In fact, if we were capable of a further glance, namely, an intellectual

intuition of the same subject (which indeed is not granted to us, and instead

of it we have only the rational concept), then we should perceive that this

whole chain of appearances in regard to all that concerns the moral laws

depends on the spontaneity of the subject as a thing in itself, of thedetermination of which no physical explanation can be given. In default of

this intuition, the moral law assures us of this distinction between the relation

of our actions as appearance to our sensible nature, and the relation of this

sensible nature to the supersensible substratum in us. In this view, which is

natural to our reason, though inexplicable, we can also justify some

judgements which we passed with all conscientiousness, and which yet at

first sight seem quite opposed to all equity. There are cases in which men,

even with the same education which has been profitable to others, yet show

such early depravity, and so continue to progress in it to years of manhood,

that they are thought to be born villains, and their character altogether

incapable of improvement; and nevertheless they are judged for what they do

or leave undone, they are reproached for their faults as guilty; nay, they

themselves (the children) regard these reproaches as well founded, exactly as

if in spite of the hopeless natural quality of mind ascribed to them, they

remained just as responsible as any other man. This could not happen if we

did not suppose that whatever springs from a man’s choice (as every action

intentionally performed undoubtedly does) has as its foundation a free

causality, which from early youth expresses its character in its manifestations

(i.e., actions). These, on account of the uniformity of conduct, exhibit a

natural connection, which however does not make the vicious quality of the

will necessary, but on the contrary, is the consequence of the evil principles

voluntarily adopted and unchangeable, which only make it so much the more

culpable and deserving of punishment. There still remains a difficulty in the

combination of freedom with the mechanism of nature in a being belonging

to the world of sense; a difficulty which, even after all the foregoing is

admitted, threatens freedom with complete destruction. But with this danger

there is also a circumstance that offers hope of an issue still favourable to

freedom; namely, that the same difficulty presses much more strongly (in fact

as we shall presently see, presses only) on the system that holds the existence

determinable in time and space to be the existence of things in themselves; it

does not therefore oblige us to give up our capital supposition of the ideality

of time as a mere form of sensible intuition, and consequently as a mere

manner of representation which is proper to the subject as belonging to the

world of sense; and therefore it only requires that this view be reconciled

with this idea.

              The difficulty is as follows: Even if it is admitted that the

supersensible subject can be free with respect to a given action, although, as asubject also belonging to the world of sense, he is under mechanical

conditions with respect to the same action, still, as soon as we allow that God

as universal first cause is also the cause of the existence of substance (a

proposition which can never be given up without at the same time giving up

the notion of God as the Being of all beings, and therewith giving up his all

sufficiency, on which everything in theology depends), it seems as if we must

admit that a man’s actions have their determining principle in something

which is wholly out of his power — namely, in the causality of a Supreme

Being distinct from himself and on whom his own existence and the whole

determination of his causality are absolutely dependent. In point of fact, if a

man’s actions as belonging to his modifications in time were not merely

modifications of him as appearance, but as a thing in itself, freedom could not

be saved. Man would be a marionette or an automaton, like Vaucanson’s,

prepared and wound up by the Supreme Artist. Self-consciousness would

indeed make him a thinking automaton; but the consciousness of his own

spontaneity would be mere delusion if this were mistaken for freedom, and it

would deserve this name only in a comparative sense, since, although the

proximate determining causes of its motion and a long series of their

determining causes are internal, yet the last and highest is found in a foreign

hand. Therefore I do not see how those who still insist on regarding time and

space as attributes belonging to the existence of things in themselves, can

avoid admitting the fatality of actions; or if (like the otherwise acute

Mendelssohn) they allow them to be conditions necessarily belonging to the

existence of finite and derived beings, but not to that of the infinite Supreme

Being, I do not see on what ground they can justify such a distinction, or,

indeed, how they can avoid the contradiction that meets them, when they

hold that existence in time is an attribute necessarily belonging to finite

things in themselves, whereas God is the cause of this existence, but cannot

be the cause of time (or space) itself (since this must be presupposed as a

necessary a priori condition of the existence of things); and consequently as

regards the existence of these things. His causality must be subject to

conditions and even to the condition of time; and this would inevitably bring

in everything contradictory to the notions of His infinity and independence.

On the other hand, it is quite easy for us to draw the distinction between the

attribute of the divine existence of being independent on all time-conditions,

and that of a being of the world of sense, the distinction being that between

the existence of a being in itself and that of a thing in appearance. Hence, ifthis ideality of time and space is not adopted, nothing remains but Spinozism,

in which space and time are essential attributes of the Supreme Being

Himself, and the things dependent on Him (ourselves, therefore, included) are

not substances, but merely accidents inhering in Him; since, if these things as

His effects exist in time only, this being the condition of their existence in

themselves, then the actions of these beings must be simply His actions

which He performs in some place and time. Thus, Spinozism, in spite of the

absurdity of its fundamental idea, argues more consistently than the creation

theory can, when beings assumed to be substances, and beings in themselves

existing in time, are regarded as effects of a Supreme Cause, and yet as not

[belonging] to Him and His action, but as separate substances.

              The above-mentioned difficulty is resolved briefly and clearly as

follows: If existence in time is a mere sensible mode of representation

belonging to thinking beings in the world and consequently does not apply to

them as things in themselves, then the creation of these beings is a creation of

things in themselves, since the notion of creation does not belong to the

sensible form of representation of existence or to causality, but can only be

referred to noumena. Consequently, when I say of beings in the world of

sense that they are created, I so far regard them as noumena. As it would be a

contradiction, therefore, to say that God is a creator of appearances, so also it

is a contradiction to say that as creator He is the cause of actions in the world

of sense, and therefore as appearances, although He is the cause of the

existence of the acting beings (which are noumena). If now it is possible to

affirm freedom in spite of the natural mechanism of actions as appearances

(by regarding existence in time as something that belongs only to

appearances, not to things in themselves), then the circumstance that the

acting beings are creatures cannot make the slightest difference, since

creation concerns their supersensible and not their sensible existence, and,

therefore, cannot be regarded as the determining principle of the appearances.

It would be quite different if the beings in the world as things in themselves

existed in time, since in that case the creator of substance would be at the

same time the author of the whole mechanism of this substance.

              Of so great importance is the separation of time (as well as space)

from the existence of things in themselves which was effected in the Critique

of the Pure Speculative Reason.

              It may be said that the solution here proposed involves greatdifficulty in itself and is scarcely susceptible of a lucid exposition. But is any

other solution that has been attempted, or that may be attempted, easier and

more intelligible? Rather might we say that the dogmatic teachers of

metaphysics have shown more shrewdness than candour in keeping this

difficult point out of sight as much as possible, in the hope that if they said

nothing about it, probably no one would think of it. If science is to be

advanced, all difficulties must be laid open, and we must even search for

those that are hidden, for every difficulty calls forth a remedy, which cannot

be discovered without science gaining either in extent or in exactness; and

thus even obstacles become means of increasing the thoroughness of science.

On the other hand, if the difficulties are intentionally concealed, or merely

removed by palliatives, then sooner or later they burst out into incurable

mischiefs, which bring science to ruin in an absolute scepticism.

               

              Since it is, properly speaking, the notion of freedom alone amongst

all the ideas of pure speculative reason that so greatly enlarges our

knowledge in the sphere of the supersensible, though only of our practical

knowledge, I ask myself why it exclusively possesses so great fertility,

whereas the others only designate the vacant space for possible beings of the

pure understanding, but are unable by any means to define the concept of

them. I presently find that as I cannot think anything without a category, I

must first look for a category for the rational idea of freedom with which I am

now concerned; and this is the category of causality; and although freedom, a

concept of the reason, being a transcendent concept, cannot have any

intuition corresponding to it, yet the concept of the understanding — for the

synthesis of which the former demands the unconditioned — (namely, the

concept of causality) must have a sensible intuition given, by which first its

objective reality is assured. Now, the categories are all divided into two

classes — the mathematical, which concern the unity of synthesis in the

conception of objects, and the dynamical, which refer to the unity of

synthesis in the conception of the existence of objects. The former (those of

magnitude and quality) always contain a synthesis of the homogeneous, and

it is not possible to find in this the unconditioned antecedent to what is given

in sensible intuition as conditioned in space and time, as this would itself

have to belong to space and time, and therefore be again still conditioned.

Whence it resulted in the Dialectic of Pure Theoretic Reason that the oppositemethods of attaining the unconditioned and the totality of the conditions were

both wrong. The categories of the second class (those of causality and of the

necessity of a thing) did not require this homogeneity (of the conditioned and

the condition in synthesis), since here what we have to explain is not how the

intuition is compounded from a manifold in it, but only how the existence of

the conditioned object corresponding to it is added to the existence of the

condition (added, namely, in the understanding as connected therewith); and

in that case it was allowable to suppose in the supersensible world the

unconditioned antecedent to the altogether conditioned in the world of sense

(both as regards the causal connection and the contingent existence of things

themselves), although this unconditioned remained indeterminate, and to

make the synthesis transcendent. Hence, it was found in the Dialectic of the

Pure Speculative Reason that the two apparently opposite methods of

obtaining for the conditioned the unconditioned were not really contradictory,

e.g., in the synthesis of causality to conceive for the conditioned in the series

of causes and effects of the sensible world, a causality which has no sensible

condition, and that the same action which, as belonging to the world of sense,

is always sensibly conditioned, that is, mechanically necessary, yet at the

same time may be derived from a causality not sensibly conditioned — being

the causality of the acting being as belonging to the supersensible world —

and may consequently be conceived as free. Now, the only point in question

was to change this may be into is; that is, that we should be able to show in

an actual case, as it were by a fact, that certain actions imply such a causality

(namely, the intellectual, sensibly unconditioned), whether they are actual or

only commanded, that is, objectively necessary in a practical sense. We could

not hope to find this connections in actions actually given in experience as

events of the sensible world, since causality with freedom must always be

sought outside the world of sense in the world of intelligence. But things of

sense are the only things offered to our perception and observation. Hence,

nothing remained but to find an incontestable objective principle of causality

which excludes all sensible conditions: that is, a principle in which reason

does not appeal further to something else as a determining ground of its

causality, but contains this determining ground itself by means of that

principle, and in which therefore it is itself as pure reason practical. Now, this

principle had not to be searched for or discovered; it had long been in the

reason of all men, and incorporated in their nature, and is the principle of

morality. Therefore, that unconditioned causality, with the faculty of it,namely, freedom, is no longer merely indefinitely and problematically

thought (this speculative reason could prove to be feasible), but is even as

regards the law of its causality definitely and assertorially known; and with it

the fact that a being (I myself), belonging to the world of sense, belongs also

to the supersensible world, this is also positively known, and thus the reality

of the supersensible world is established and in practical respects definitely

given, and this definiteness, which for theoretical purposes would be

transcendent, is for practical purposes immanent. We could not, however,

make a similar step as regards the second dynamical idea, namely, that of a

necessary being. We could not rise to it from the sensible world without the

aid of the first dynamical idea. For if we attempted to do so, we should have

ventured to leave at a bound all that is given to us, and to leap to that of

which nothing is given us that can help us to effect the connection of such a

supersensible being with the world of sense (since the necessary being would

have to be known as given outside ourselves). On the other hand, it is now

obvious that this connection is quite possible in relation to our own subject,

inasmuch as I know myself to be on the one side as an intelligible

[supersensible] being determined by the moral law (by means of freedom),

and on the other side as acting in the world of sense. It is the concept of

freedom alone that enables us to find the unconditioned and intelligible for

the conditioned and sensible without going out of ourselves. For it is our own

reason that by means of the supreme and unconditional practical law knows

that itself and the being that is conscious of this law (our own person) belong

to the pure world of understanding, and moreover defines the manner in

which, as such, it can be active. In this way it can be understood why in the

whole faculty of reason it is the practical reason only that can help us to pass

beyond the world of sense and give us knowledge of a supersensible order

and connection, which, however, for this very reason cannot be extended

further than is necessary for pure practical purposes.

              Let me be permitted on this occasion to make one more remark,

namely, that every step that we make with pure reason, even in the practical

sphere where no attention is paid to subtle speculation, nevertheless accords

with all the material points of the Critique of the Theoretical Reason as

closely and directly as if each step had been thought out with deliberate

purpose to establish this confirmation. Such a thorough agreement, wholly

unsought for and quite obvious (as anyone can convince himself, if he will

only carry moral inquiries up to their principles), between the most importantproposition of practical reason and the often seemingly too subtle and

needless remarks of the Critique of the Speculative Reason, occasions

surprise and astonishment, and confirms the maxim already recognized and

praised by others, namely, that in every scientific inquiry we should pursue

our way steadily with all possible exactness and frankness, without caring for

any objections that may be raised from outside its sphere, but, as far as we

can, to carry out our inquiry truthfully and completely by itself. Frequent

observation has convinced me that, when such researches are concluded, that

which in one part of them appeared to me very questionable, considered in

relation to other extraneous doctrines, when I left this doubtfulness out of

sight for a time and only attended to the business in hand until it was

completed, at last was unexpectedly found to agree perfectly with what had

been discovered separately without the least regard to those doctrines, and

without any partiality or prejudice for them. Authors would save themselves

many errors and much labour lost (because spent on a delusion) if they could

only resolve to go to work with more frankness.

 

 

                 Book II: Dialectic of Pure Practical Reason.

 

 

      Chapter I. – Of a Dialectic of Pure Practical Reason Generally.

 

 

              Pure reason always has its dialectic, whether it is considered in its

speculative or its practical employment; for it requires the absolute totality of

the conditions of what is given conditioned, and this can only be found in

things in themselves. But as all conceptions of things in themselves must be

referred to intuitions, and with us men these can never be other than sensible

and hence can never enable us to know objects as things in themselves but

only as appearances, and since the unconditioned can never be found in this

chain of appearances which consists only of conditioned and conditions; thus

from applying this rational idea of the totality of the conditions (in other

words of the unconditioned) to appearances, there arises an inevitable

illusion, as if these latter were things in themselves (for in the absence of a

warning critique they are always regarded as such). This illusion would never

be noticed as delusive if it did not betray itself by a conflict of reason with

itself, when it applies to appearances its fundamental principle of

presupposing the unconditioned to everything conditioned. By this, however,

reason is compelled to trace this illusion to its source, and search how it can

be removed, and this can only be done by a complete critical examination of

the whole pure faculty of reason; so that the antinomy of the pure reason

which is manifest in its dialectic is in fact the most beneficial error into which

human reason could ever have fallen, since it at last drives us to search for

the key to escape from this labyrinth; and when this key is found, it further

discovers that which we did not seek but yet had need of, namely, a view into

a higher and an immutable order of things, in which we even now are, and in

which we are thereby enabled by definite precepts to continue to live

according to the highest dictates of reason.

              It may be seen in detail in the Critique of Pure Reason how in its

speculative employment this natural dialectic is to be solved, and how the

error which arises from a very natural illusion may be guarded against. Butreason in its practical use is not a whit better off. As pure practical reason, it

likewise seeks to find the unconditioned for the practically conditioned

(which rests on inclinations and natural wants), and this is not as the

determining principle of the will, but even when this is given (in the moral

law) it seeks the unconditioned totality of the object of pure practical reason

under the name of the summum bonum.

              To define this idea practically, i.e., sufficiently for the maxims of our

rational conduct, is the business of practical wisdom, and this again as a

science is philosophy, in the sense in which the word was understood by the

ancients, with whom it meant instruction in the conception in which the

summum bonum was to be placed, and the conduct by which it was to be

obtained. It would be well to leave this word in its ancient signification as a

doctrine of the summum bonum, so far as reason endeavours to make this

into a science. For on the one band the restriction annexed would suit the

Greek expression (which signifies the love of wisdom), and yet at the same

time would be sufficient to embrace under the name of philosophy the love of

science: that is to say, of all speculative rational knowledge, so far as it is

serviceable to reason, both for that conception and also for the practical

principle determining our conduct, without letting out of sight the main end,

on account of which alone it can be called a doctrine of practical wisdom. On

the other hand, it would be no harm to deter the self-conceit of one who

ventures to claim the title of philosopher by holding before him in the very

definition a standard of self-estimation which would very much lower his

pretensions. For a teacher of wisdom would mean something more than a

scholar who has not come so far as to guide himself, much less to guide

others, with certain expectation of attaining so high an end: it would mean a

master in the knowledge of wisdom, which implies more than a modest man

would claim for himself. Thus philosophy as well as wisdom would always

remain an ideal, which objectively is presented complete in reason alone,

while subjectively for the person it is only the goal of his unceasing

endeavours; and no one would be justified in professing to be in possession

of it so as to assume the name of philosopher who could not also show its

infallible effects in his own person as an example (in his self-mastery and the

unquestioned interest that he takes preeminently in the general good), and

this the ancients also required as a condition of deserving that honourable

title.              We have another preliminary remark to make respecting the dialectic

of the pure practical reason, on the point of the definition of the summum

bonum (a successful solution of which dialectic would lead us to expect, as in

case of that of the theoretical reason, the most beneficial effects, inasmuch as

the self-contradictions of pure practical reason honestly stated, and not

concealed, force us to undertake a complete critique of this faculty).

              The moral law is the sole determining principle of a pure will. But

since this is merely formal (viz., as prescribing only the form of the maxim as

universally legislative), it abstracts as a determining principle from all matter

that is to say, from every object of volition. Hence, though the summum

bonum may be the whole object of a pure practical reason, i.e., a pure will,

yet it is not on that account to be regarded as its determining principle; and

the moral law alone must be regarded as the principle on which that and its

realization or promotion are aimed at. This remark is important in so delicate

a case as the determination of moral principles, where the slightest

misinterpretation perverts men’s minds. For it will have been seen from the

Analytic that, if we assume any object under the name of a good as a

determining principle of the will prior to the moral law and then deduce from

it the supreme practical principle, this would always introduce heteronomy

and crush out the moral principle.

              It is, however, evident that if the notion of the summum bonum

includes that of the moral law as its supreme condition, then the summum

bonum would not merely be an object, but the notion of it and the conception

of its existence as possible by our own practical reason would likewise be the

determining principle of the will, since in that case the will is in fact

determined by the moral law which is already included in this conception,

and by no other object, as the principle of autonomy requires. This order of

the conceptions of determination of the will must not be lost sight of, as

otherwise we should misunderstand ourselves and think we had fallen into a

contradiction, while everything remains in perfect harmony.

 

 

 Chapter II. – Of the Dialectic of Pure Reason in defining the Conception

                            of the “Summum Bonum”.

 

 

              The conception of the summum itself contains an ambiguity which

might occasion needless disputes if we did not attend to it. The summum may

mean either the supreme (supremum) or the perfect (consummatum). The

former is that condition which is itself unconditioned, i.e., is not subordinate

to any other (originarium); the second is that whole which is not a part of a

greater whole of the same kind (perfectissimum). It has been shown in the

Analytic that virtue (as worthiness to be happy) is the supreme condition of

all that can appear to us desirable, and consequently of all our pursuit of

happiness, and is therefore the supreme good. But it does not follow that it is

the whole and perfect good as the object of the desires of rational finite

beings; for this requires happiness also, and that not merely in the partial eyes

of the person who makes himself an end, but even in the judgement of an

impartial reason, which regards persons in general as ends in themselves. For

to need happiness, to deserve it, and yet at the same time not to participate in

it, cannot be consistent with the perfect volition of a rational being possessed

at the same time of all power, if, for the sake of experiment, we conceive

such a being. Now inasmuch as virtue and happiness together constitute the

possession of the summum bonum in a person, and the distribution of

happiness in exact proportion to morality (which is the worth of the person,

and his worthiness to be happy) constitutes the summum bonum of a possible

world; hence this summum bonum expresses the whole, the perfect good, in

which, however, virtue as the condition is always the supreme good, since it

has no condition above it; whereas happiness, while it is pleasant to the

possessor of it, is not of itself absolutely and in all respects good, but always

presupposes morally right behaviour as its condition.

              When two elements are necessarily united in one concept, they must

be connected as reason and consequence, and this either so that their unity is

considered as analytical (logical connection), or as synthetical (real

connection) the former following the law of identity, the latter that of

causality. The connection of virtue and happiness may therefore be

understood in two ways: either the endeavour to be virtuous and the rationalpursuit of happiness are not two distinct actions, but absolutely identical, in

which case no maxim need be made the principle of the former, other than

what serves for the latter; or the connection consists in this, that virtue

produces happiness as something distinct from the consciousness of virtue, as

a cause produces an effect.

              The ancient Greek schools were, properly speaking, only two, and in

determining the conception of the summum bonum these followed in fact one

and the same method, inasmuch as they did not allow virtue and happiness to

be regarded as two distinct elements of the summum bonum, and

consequently sought the unity of the principle by the rule of identity; but they

differed as to which of the two was to be taken as the fundamental notion.

The Epicurean said: “To be conscious that one’s maxims lead to happiness is

virtue”; the Stoic said: “To be conscious of one’s virtue is happiness.” With

the former, Prudence was equivalent to morality; with the latter, who chose a

higher designation for virtue, morality alone was true wisdom.

              While we must admire the men who in such early times tried all

imaginable ways of extending the domain of philosophy, we must at the same

time lament that their acuteness was unfortunately misapplied in trying to

trace out identity between two extremely heterogeneous notions, those of

happiness and virtue. But it agrees with the dialectical spirit of their times

(and subtle minds are even now sometimes misled in the same way) to get rid

of irreconcilable differences in principle by seeking to change them into a

mere contest about words, and thus apparently working out the identity of the

notion under different names, and this usually occurs in cases where the

combination of heterogeneous principles lies so deep or so high, or would

require so complete a transformation of the doctrines assumed in the rest of

the philosophical system, that men are afraid to penetrate deeply into the real

difference and prefer treating it as a difference in questions of form.

              While both schools sought to trace out the identity of the practical

principles of virtue and happiness, they were not agreed as to the way in

which they tried to force this identity, but were separated infinitely from one

another, the one placing its principle on the side of sense, the other on that of

reason; the one in the consciousness of sensible wants, the other in the

independence of practical reason on all sensible grounds of determination.

According to the Epicurean, the notion of virtue was already involved in the

maxim: “To promote one’s own happiness”; according to the Stoics, on theother hand, the feeling of happiness was already contained in the

consciousness of virtue. Now whatever is contained in another notion is

identical with part of the containing notion, but not with the whole, and

moreover two wholes may be specifically distinct, although they consist of

the same parts; namely if the parts are united into a whole in totally different

ways. The Stoic maintained that the virtue was the whole summum bonum,

and happiness only the consciousness of possessing it, as making part of the

state of the subject. The Epicurean maintained that happiness was the whole

summum bonum, and virtue only the form of the maxim for its pursuit; viz.,

the rational use of the means for attaining it.

              Now it is clear from the Analytic that the maxims of virtue and those

of private happiness are quite heterogeneous as to their supreme practical

principle, and, although they belong to one summum bonum which together

they make possible, yet they are so far from coinciding that they restrict and

check one another very much in the same subject. Thus the question: “How is

the summum bonum practically possible?” still remains an unsolved problem,

notwithstanding all the attempts at coalition that have hitherto been made.

The Analytic has, however, shown what it is that makes the problem difficult

to solve; namely, that happiness and morality are two specifically distinct

elements of the summum bonum and, therefore, their combination cannot be

analytically cognised (as if the man that seeks his own happiness should find

by mere analysis of his conception that in so acting he is virtuous, or as if the

man that follows virtue should in the consciousness of such conduct find that

he is already happy ipso facto), but must be a synthesis of concepts. Now

since this combination is recognised as a priori, and therefore as practically

necessary, and consequently not as derived from experience, so that the

possibility of the summum bonum does not rest on any empirical principle, it

follows that the deduction [legitimation] of this concept must be

transcendental. It is a priori (morally) necessary to produce the summum

bonum by freedom of will: therefore the condition of its possibility must rest

solely on a priori principles of cognition.

                      I. The Antinomy of Practical Reason.

 

              In the summum bonum which is practical for us, i.e., to be realized

by our will, virtue and happiness are thought as necessarily combined, so that

the one cannot be assumed by pure practical reason without the other alsobeing attached to it. Now this combination (like every other) is either

analytical or synthetical. It bas been shown that it cannot be analytical; it

must then be synthetical and, more particularly, must be conceived as the

connection of cause and effect, since it concerns a practical good, i.e., one

that is possible by means of action; consequently either the desire of

happiness must be the motive to maxims of virtue, or the maxim of virtue

must be the efficient cause of happiness. The first is absolutely impossible,

because (as was proved in the Analytic) maxims which place the determining

principle of the will in the desire of personal happiness are not moral at all,

and no virtue can be founded on them. But the second is also impossible,

because the practical connection of causes and effects in the world, as the

result of the determination of the will, does not depend upon the moral

dispositions of the will, but on the knowledge of the laws of nature and the

physical power to use them for one’s purposes; consequently we cannot

expect in the world by the most punctilious observance of the moral laws any

necessary connection of happiness with virtue adequate to the summum

bonum. Now, as the promotion of this summum bonum, the conception of

which contains this connection, is a priori a necessary object of our will and

inseparably attached to the moral law, the impossibility of the former must

prove the falsity of the latter. If then the supreme good is not possible by

practical rules, then the moral law also which commands us to promote it is

directed to vain imaginary ends and must consequently be false.

          II. Critical Solution of the Antinomy of Practical Reason.

 

              The antinomy of pure speculative reason exhibits a similar conflict

between freedom and physical necessity in the causality of events in the

world. It was solved by showing that there is no real contradiction when the

events and even the world in which they occur are regarded (as they ought to

be) merely as appearances; since one and the same acting being, as an

appearance (even to his own inner sense), has a causality in the world of

sense that always conforms to the mechanism of nature, but with respect to

the same events, so far as the acting person regards himself at the same time

as a noumenon (as pure intelligence in an existence not dependent on the

condition of time), he can contain a principle by which that causality acting

according to laws of nature is determined, but which is itself free from all

laws of nature.              It is just the same with the foregoing antinomy of pure practical

reason. The first of the two propositions, “That the endeavour after happiness

produces a virtuous mind,” is absolutely false; but the second, “That a

virtuous mind necessarily produces happiness,” is not absolutely false, but

only in so far as virtue is considered as a form of causality in the sensible

world, and consequently only if I suppose existence in it to be the only sort of

existence of a rational being; it is then only conditionally false. But as I am

not only justified in thinking that I exist also as a noumenon in a world of the

understanding, but even have in the moral law a purely intellectual

determining principle of my causality (in the sensible world), it is not

impossible that morality of mind should have a connection as cause with

happiness (as an effect in the sensible world) if not immediate yet mediate

(viz., through an intelligent author of nature), and moreover necessary; while

in a system of nature which is merely an object of the senses, this

combination could never occur except contingently and, therefore, could not

suffice for the summum bonum.

              Thus, notwithstanding this seeming conflict of practical reason with

itself, the summum bonum, which is the necessary supreme end of a will

morally determined, is a true object thereof; for it is practically possible, and

the maxims of the will which as regards their matter refer to it have objective

reality, which at first was threatened by the antinomy that appeared in the

connection of morality with happiness by a general law; but this was merely

from a misconception, because the relation between appearances was taken

for a relation of the things in themselves to these appearances.

              When we find ourselves obliged to go so far, namely, to the

connection with an intelligible world, to find the possibility of the summum

bonum, which reason points out to all rational beings as the goal of all their

moral wishes, it must seem strange that, nevertheless, the philosophers both

of ancient and modern times have been able to find happiness in accurate

proportion to virtue even in this life (in the sensible world), or have

persuaded themselves that they were conscious thereof. For Epicurus as well

as the Stoics extolled above everything the happiness that springs from the

consciousness of living virtuously; and the former was not so base in his

practical precepts as one might infer from the principles of his theory, which

he used for explanation and not for action, or as they were interpreted by

many who were misled by his using the term pleasure for contentment; on thecontrary, he reckoned the most disinterested practice of good amongst the

ways of enjoying the most intimate delight, and his scheme of pleasure (by

which he meant constant cheerfulness of mind) included the moderation and

control of the inclinations, such as the strictest moral philosopher might

require. He differed from the Stoics chiefly in making this pleasure the

motive, which they very rightly refused to do. For, on the one hand, the

virtuous Epicurus, like many well-intentioned men of this day who do not

reflect deeply enough on their principles, fell into the error of presupposing

the virtuous disposition in the persons for whom he wished to provide the

springs to virtue (and indeed the upright man cannot be happy if he is not first

conscious of his uprightness; since with such a character the reproach that his

habit of thought would oblige him to make against himself in case of

transgression and his moral self-condemnation would rob him of all

enjoyment of the pleasantness which his condition might otherwise contain).

But the question is: How is such a disposition possible in the first instance,

and such a habit of thought in estimating the worth of one’s existence, since

prior to it there can be in the subject no feeling at all for moral worth? If a

man is virtuous without being conscious of his integrity in every action, he

will certainly not enjoy life, however favourable fortune may be to him in its

physical circumstances; but can we make him virtuous in the first instance, in

other words, before he esteems the moral worth of his existence so highly, by

praising to him the peace of mind that would result from the consciousness of

an integrity for which he has no sense?

              On the other hand, however, there is here an occasion of a vitium

subreptionis, and as it were of an optical illusion, in the self-consciousness of

what one does as distinguished from what one feels — an illusion which even

the most experienced cannot altogether avoid. The moral disposition of mind

is necessarily combined with a consciousness that the will is determined

directly by the law. Now the consciousness of a determination of the faculty

of desire is always the source of a satisfaction in the resulting action; but this

pleasure, this satisfaction in oneself, is not the determining principle of the

action; on the contrary, the determination of the will directly by reason is the

source of the feeling of pleasure, and this remains a pure practical not

sensible determination of the faculty of desire. Now as this determination has

exactly the same effect within in impelling to activity, that a feeling of the

pleasure to be expected from the desired action would have had, we easily

look on what we ourselves do as something which we merely passively feel,and take the moral spring for a sensible impulse, just as it happens in the so-

called illusion of the senses (in this case the inner sense). It is a sublime thing

in human nature to be determined to actions immediately by a purely rational

law; sublime even is the illusion that regards the subjective side of this

capacity of intellectual determination as something sensible and the effect of

a special sensible feeling (for an intellectual feeling would be a

contradiction). It is also of great importance to attend to this property of our

personality and as much as possible to cultivate the effect of reason on this

feeling. But we must beware lest by falsely extolling this moral determining

principle as a spring, making its source lie in particular feelings of pleasure

(which are in fact only results), we degrade and disfigure the true genuine

spring, the law itself, by putting as it were a false foil upon it. Respect, not

pleasure or enjoyment of happiness, is something for which it is not possible

that reason should have any antecedent feeling as its foundation (for this

would always be sensible and pathological); and consciousness of immediate

obligation of the will by the law is by no means analogous to the feeling of

pleasure, although in relation to the faculty of desire it produces the same

effect, but from different sources: it is only by this mode of conception,

however, that we can attain what we are seeking, namely, that actions be

done not merely in accordance with duty (as a result of pleasant feelings), but

from duty, which must be the true end of all moral cultivation.

              Have we not, however, a word which does not express enjoyment, as

happiness does, but indicates a satisfaction in one’s existence, an analogue of

the happiness which must necessarily accompany the consciousness of

virtue? Yes this word is self-contentment which in its proper signification

always designates only a negative satisfaction in one’s existence, in which

one is conscious of needing nothing. Freedom and the consciousness of it as a

faculty of following the moral law with unyielding resolution is

independence of inclinations, at least as motives determining (though not as

affecting) our desire, and so far as I am conscious of this freedom in

following my moral maxims, it is the only source of an unaltered contentment

which is necessarily connected with it and rests on no special feeling. This

may be called intellectual contentment. The sensible contentment (improperly

so-called) which rests on the satisfaction of the inclinations, however delicate

they may be imagined to be, can never be adequate to the conception of it.

For the inclinations change, they grow with the indulgence shown them, and

always leave behind a still greater void than we had thought to fill. Hencethey are always burdensome to a rational being, and, although he cannot lay

them aside, they wrest from him the wish to be rid of them. Even an

inclination to what is right (e.g., to beneficence), though it may much

facilitate the efficacy of the moral maxims, cannot produce any. For in these

all must be directed to the conception of the law as a determining principle, if

the action is to contain morality and not merely legality. Inclination is blind

and slavish, whether it be of a good sort or not, and, when morality is in

question, reason must not play the part merely of guardian to inclination, but

disregarding it altogether must attend simply to its own interest as pure

practical reason. This very feeling of compassion and tender sympathy, if it

precedes the deliberation on the question of duty and becomes a determining

principle, is even annoying to right thinking persons, brings their deliberate

maxims into confusion, and makes them wish to be delivered from it and to

be subject to lawgiving reason alone.

              From this we can understand how the consciousness of this faculty

of a pure practical reason produces by action (virtue) a consciousness of

mastery over one’s inclinations, and therefore of independence of them, and

consequently also of the discontent that always accompanies them, and thus a

negative satisfaction with one’s state, i.e., contentment, which is primarily

contentment with one’s own person. Freedom itself becomes in this way

(namely, indirectly) capable of an enjoyment which cannot be called

happiness, because it does not depend on the positive concurrence of a

feeling, nor is it, strictly speaking, bliss, since it does not include complete

independence of inclinations and wants, but it resembles bliss in so far as the

determination of one’s will at least can hold itself free from their influence;

and thus, at least in its origin, this enjoyment is analogous to the self-

sufficiency which we can ascribe only to the Supreme Being.

              From this solution of the antinomy of practical pure reason, it

follows that in practical principles we may at least conceive as possible a

natural and necessary connection between the consciousness of morality and

the expectation of a proportionate happiness as its result, though it does not

follow that we can know or perceive this connection; that, on the other hand,

principles of the pursuit of happiness cannot possibly produce morality; that,

therefore, morality is the supreme good (as the first condition of the summum

bonum), while happiness constitutes its second element, but only in such a

way that it is the morally conditioned, but necessary consequence of theformer. Only with this subordination is the summum bonum the whole object

of pure practical reason, which must necessarily conceive it as possible, since

it commands us to contribute to the utmost of our power to its realization. But

since the possibility of such connection of the conditioned with its condition

belongs wholly to the supersensual relation of things and cannot be given

according to the laws of the world of sense, although the practical

consequences of the idea belong to the world of sense, namely, the actions

that aim at realizing the summum bonum; we will therefore endeavour to set

forth the grounds of that possibility, first, in respect of what is immediately in

our power, and then, secondly, in that which is not in our power, but which

reason presents to us as the supplement of our impotence, for the realization

of the summum bonum (which by practical principles is necessary).

III. Of the Primacy of Pure Practical Reason in its Union with the Speculative

                                        Reason.

 

              By primacy between two or more things connected by reason, I

understand the prerogative, belonging to one, of being the first determining

principle in the connection with all the rest. In a narrower practical sense it

means the prerogative of the interest of one in so far as the interest of the

other is subordinated to it, while it is not postponed to any other. To every

faculty of the mind we can attribute an interest, that is, a principle, that

contains the condition on which alone the former is called into exercise.

Reason, as the faculty of principles, determines the interest of all the powers

of the mind and is determined by its own. The interest of its speculative

employment consists in the cognition of the object pushed to the highest a

priori principles: that of its practical employment, in the determination of the

will in respect of the final and complete end. As to what is necessary for the

possibility of any employment of reason at all, namely, that its principles and

affirmations should not contradict one another, this constitutes no part of its

interest, but is the condition of having reason at all; it is only its development,

not mere consistency with itself, that is reckoned as its interest.

              If practical reason could not assume or think as given anything

further than what speculative reason of itself could offer it from its own

insight, the latter would have the primacy. But supposing that it had of itself

original a priori principles with which certain theoretical positions were

inseparably connected, while these were withdrawn from any possible insightof speculative reason (which, however, they must not contradict); then the

question is: Which interest is the superior (not which must give way, for they

are not necessarily conflicting), whether speculative reason, which knows

nothing of all that the practical offers for its acceptance, should take up these

propositions and (although they transcend it) try to unite them with its own

concepts as a foreign possession handed over to it, or whether it is justified in

obstinately following its own separate interest and, according to the canonic

of Epicurus, rejecting as vain subtlety everything that cannot accredit its

objective reality by manifest examples to be shown in experience, even

though it should be never so much interwoven with the interest of the

practical (pure) use of reason, and in itself not contradictory to the theoretical,

merely because it infringes on the interest of the speculative reason to this

extent, that it removes the bounds which this latter had set to itself, and gives

it up to every nonsense or delusion of imagination?

              In fact, so far as practical reason is taken as dependent on

pathological conditions, that is, as merely regulating the inclinations under

the sensible principle of happiness, we could not require speculative reason to

take its principles from such a source. Mohammed’s paradise, or the

absorption into the Deity of the theosophists and mystics would press their

monstrosities on the reason according to the taste of each, and one might as

well have no reason as surrender it in such fashion to all sorts of dreams. But

if pure reason of itself can be practical and is actually so, as the

consciousness of the moral law proves, then it is still only one and the same

reason which, whether in a theoretical or a practical point of view, judges

according to a priori principles; and then it is clear that although it is in the

first point of view incompetent to establish certain propositions positively,

which, however, do not contradict it, then, as soon as these propositions are

inseparably attached to the practical interest of pure reason, it must accept

them, though it be as something offered to it from a foreign source,

something that has not grown on its own ground, but yet is sufficiently

authenticated; and it must try to compare and connect them with everything

that it has in its power as speculative reason. It must remember, however, that

these are not additions to its insight, but yet are extensions of its employment

in another, namely, a practical aspect; and this is not in the least opposed to

its interest, which consists in the restriction of wild speculation.

              Thus, when pure speculative and pure practical reason are combinedin one cognition, the latter has the primacy, provided, namely, that this

combination is not contingent and arbitrary, but founded a priori on reason

itself and therefore necessary. For without this subordination there would

arise a conflict of reason with itself; since, if they were merely coordinate, the

former would close its boundaries strictly and admit nothing from the latter

into its domain, while the latter would extend its bounds over everything and

when its needs required would seek to embrace the former within them. Nor

could we reverse the order and require pure practical reason to be subordinate

to the speculative, since all interest is ultimately practical, and even that of

speculative reason is conditional, and it is only in the practical employment

of reason that it is complete.

  IV. The Immortality of the Soul as a Postulate of Pure Practical Reason.

 

              The realization of the summum bonum in the world is the necessary

object of a will determinable by the moral law. But in this will the perfect

accordance of the mind with the moral law is the supreme condition of the

summum bonum. This then must be possible, as well as its object, since it is

contained in the command to promote the latter. Now, the perfect accordance

of the will with the moral law is holiness, a perfection of which no rational

being of the sensible world is capable at any moment of his existence. Since,

nevertheless, it is required as practically necessary, it can only be found in a

progress in infinitum towards that perfect accordance, and on the principles

of pure practical reason it is necessary to assume such a practical progress as

the real object of our will.

              Now, this endless progress is only possible on the supposition of an

endless duration of the existence and personality of the same rational being

(which is called the immortality of the soul). The summum bonum, then,

practically is only possible on the supposition of the immortality of the soul;

consequently this immortality, being inseparably connected with the moral

law, is a postulate of pure practical reason (by which I mean a theoretical

proposition, not demonstrable as such, but which is an inseparable result of

an unconditional a priori practical law).

              This principle of the moral destination of our nature, namely, that it

is only in an endless progress that we can attain perfect accordance with the

moral law, is of the greatest use, not merely for the present purpose of

supplementing the impotence of speculative reason, but also with respect toreligion. In default of it, either the moral law is quite degraded from its

holiness, being made out to be indulgent and conformable to our

convenience, or else men strain their notions of their vocation and their

expectation to an unattainable goal, hoping to acquire complete holiness of

will, and so they lose themselves in fanatical theosophic dreams, which

wholly contradict self-knowledge. In both cases the unceasing effort to obey

punctually and thoroughly a strict and inflexible command of reason, which

yet is not ideal but real, is only hindered. For a rational but finite being, the

only thing possible is an endless progress from the lower to higher degrees of

moral perfection. The Infinite Being, to whom the condition of time is

nothing, sees in this to us endless succession a whole of accordance with the

moral law; and the holiness which his command inexorably requires, in order

to be true to his justice in the share which He assigns to each in the summum

bonum, is to be found in a single intellectual intuition of the whole existence

of rational beings. All that can be expected of the creature in respect of the

hope of this participation would be the consciousness of his tried character,

by which from the progress he has hitherto made from the worse to the

morally better, and the immutability of purpose which has thus become

known to him, he may hope for a further unbroken continuance of the same,
                                                                    13
however long his existence may last, even beyond this life, and thus he may

hope, not indeed here, nor in any imaginable point of his future existence, but

only in the endlessness of his duration (which God alone can survey) to be

perfectly adequate to his will (without indulgence or excuse, which do not

harmonize with justice).

        13
               It seems, nevertheless, impossible for a creature to have the

conviction of his unwavering firmness of mind in the progress towards

goodness. On this account the Christian religion makes it come only from the

same Spirit that works sanctification, that is, this firm purpose, and with it the

consciousness of steadfastness in the moral progress. But naturally one who

is conscious that he has persevered through a long portion of his life up to the

end in the progress to the better, and this genuine moral motives, may well

have the comforting hope, though not the certainty, that even in an existence

prolonged beyond this life he will continue in these principles; and although

he is never justified here in his own eyes, nor can ever hope to be so in the

increased perfection of his nature, to which he looks forward, together with

an increase of duties, nevertheless in this progress which, though it is directed

to a goal infinitely remote, yet is in God’s sight regarded as equivalent topossession, he may have a prospect of a blessed future; for this is the word

that reason employs to designate perfect well-being independent of all

contingent causes of the world, and which, like holiness, is an idea that can

be contained only in an endless progress and its totality, and consequently is

never fully attained by a creature.

      V. The Existence of God as a Postulate of Pure Practical Reason.

 

              In the foregoing analysis the moral law led to a practical problem

which is prescribed by pure reason alone, without the aid of any sensible

motives, namely, that of the necessary completeness of the first and principle

element of the summum bonum, viz., morality; and, as this can be perfectly

solved only in eternity, to the postulate of immortality. The same law must

also lead us to affirm the possibility of the second element of the summum

bonum, viz., happiness proportioned to that morality, and this on grounds as

disinterested as before, and solely from impartial reason; that is, it must lead

to the supposition of the existence of a cause adequate to this effect; in other

words, it must postulate the existence of God, as the necessary condition of

the possibility of the summum bonum (an object of the will which is

necessarily connected with the moral legislation of pure reason). We proceed

to exhibit this connection in a convincing manner.

              Happiness is the condition of a rational being in the world with

whom everything goes according to his wish and will; it rests, therefore, on

the harmony of physical nature with his whole end and likewise with the

essential determining principle of his will. Now the moral law as a law of

freedom commands by determining principles, which ought to be quite

independent of nature and of its harmony with our faculty of desire (as

springs). But the acting rational being in the world is not the cause of the

world and of nature itself. There is not the least ground, therefore, in the

moral law for a necessary connection between morality and proportionate

happiness in a being that belongs to the world as part of it, and therefore

dependent on it, and which for that reason cannot by his will be a cause of

this nature, nor by his own power make it thoroughly harmonize, as far as his

happiness is concerned, with his practical principles. Nevertheless, in the

practical problem of pure reason, i.e., the necessary pursuit of the summum

bonum, such a connection is postulated as necessary: we ought to endeavour

to promote the summum bonum, which, therefore, must be possible.Accordingly, the existence of a cause of all nature, distinct from nature itself

and containing the principle of this connection, namely, of the exact harmony

of happiness with morality, is also postulated. Now this supreme cause must

contain the principle of the harmony of nature, not merely with a law of the

will of rational beings, but with the conception of this law, in so far as they

make it the supreme determining principle of the will, and consequently not

merely with the form of morals, but with their morality as their motive, that

is, with their moral character. Therefore, the summum bonum is possible in

the world only on the supposition of a Supreme Being having a causality

corresponding to moral character. Now a being that is capable of acting on

the conception of laws is an intelligence (a rational being), and the causality

of such a being according to this conception of laws is his will; therefore the

supreme cause of nature, which must be presupposed as a condition of the

summum bonum is a being which is the cause of nature by intelligence and

will, consequently its author, that is God. It follows that the postulate of the

possibility of the highest derived good (the best world) is likewise the

postulate of the reality of a highest original good, that is to say, of the

existence of God. Now it was seen to be a duty for us to promote the

summum bonum; consequently it is not merely allowable, but it is a necessity

connected with duty as a requisite, that we should presuppose the possibility

of this summum bonum; and as this is possible only on condition of the

existence of God, it inseparably connects the supposition of this with duty;

that is, it is morally necessary to assume the existence of God.

              It must be remarked here that this moral necessity is subjective, that

is, it is a want, and not objective, that is, itself a duty, for there cannot be a

duty to suppose the existence of anything (since this concerns only the

theoretical employment of reason). Moreover, it is not meant by this that it is

necessary to suppose the existence of God as a basis of all obligation in

general (for this rests, as has been sufficiently proved, simply on the

autonomy of reason itself). What belongs to duty here is only the endeavour

to realize and promote the summum bonum in the world, the possibility of

which can therefore be postulated; and as our reason finds it not conceivable

except on the supposition of a supreme intelligence, the admission of this

existence is therefore connected with the consciousness of our duty, although

the admission itself belongs to the domain of speculative reason. Considered

in respect of this alone, as a principle of explanation, it may be called a

hypothesis, but in reference to the intelligibility of an object given us by themoral law (the summum bonum), and consequently of a requirement for

practical purposes, it may be called faith, that is to say a pure rational faith,

since pure reason (both in its theoretical and practical use) is the sole source

from which it springs.

              From this deduction it is now intelligible why the Greek schools

could never attain the solution of their problem of the practical possibility of

the summum bonum, because they made the rule of the use which the will of

man makes of his freedom the sole and sufficient ground of this possibility,

thinking that they had no need for that purpose of the existence of God. No

doubt they were so far right that they established the principle of morals of

itself independently of this postulate, from the relation of reason only to the

will, and consequently made it the supreme practical condition of the

summum bonum; but it was not therefore the whole condition of its

possibility. The Epicureans had indeed assumed as the supreme principle of

morality a wholly false one, namely that of happiness, and had substituted for

a law a maxim of arbitrary choice according to every man’s inclination; they

proceeded, however, consistently enough in this, that they degraded their

summum bonum likewise, just in proportion to the meanness of their

fundamental principle, and looked for no greater happiness than can be

attained by human prudence (including temperance and moderation of the

inclinations), and this as we know would be scanty enough and would be

very different according to circumstances; not to mention the exceptions that

their maxims must perpetually admit and which make them incapable of

being laws. The Stoics, on the contrary, had chosen their supreme practical

principle quite rightly, making virtue the condition of the summum bonum;

but when they represented the degree of virtue required by its pure law as

fully attainable in this life, they not only strained the moral powers of the

man whom they called the wise beyond all the limits of his nature, and

assumed a thing that contradicts all our knowledge of men, but also and

principally they would not allow the second element of the summum bonum,

namely, happiness, to be properly a special object of human desire, but made

their wise man, like a divinity in his consciousness of the excellence of his

person, wholly independent of nature (as regards his own contentment); they

exposed him indeed to the evils of life, but made him not subject to them (at

the same time representing him also as free from moral evil). They thus, in

fact, left out the second element of the summum bonum namely, personal

happiness, placing it solely in action and satisfaction with one’s own personalworth, thus including it in the consciousness of being morally minded, in

which they Might have been sufficiently refuted by the voice of their own

nature.

                                          14
              The doctrine of Christianity, even if we do not yet consider it as a

religious doctrine, gives, touching this point, a conception of the summum

bonum (the kingdom of God), which alone satisfies the strictest demand of

practical reason. The moral law is holy (unyielding) and demands holiness of

morals, although all the moral perfection to which man can attain is still only

virtue, that is, a rightful disposition arising from respect for the law, implying

consciousness of a constant propensity to transgression, or at least a want of

purity, that is, a mixture of many spurious (not moral) motives of obedience

to the law, consequently a self-esteem combined with humility. In respect,

then, of the holiness which the Christian law requires, this leaves the creature

nothing but a progress in infinitum, but for that very reason it justifies him in

hoping for an endless duration of his existence. The worth of a character

perfectly accordant with the moral law is infinite, since the only restriction on

all possible happiness in the judgement of a wise and all powerful distributor

of it is the absence of conformity of rational beings to their duty. But the

moral law of itself does not promise any happiness, for according to our

conceptions of an order of nature in general, this is not necessarily connected

with obedience to the law. Now Christian morality supplies this defect (of the

second indispensable element of the summum bonum) by representing the

world in which rational beings devote themselves with all their soul to the

moral law, as a kingdom of God, in which nature and morality are brought

into a harmony foreign to each of itself, by a holy Author who makes the

derived summum bonum possible. Holiness of life is prescribed to them as a

rule even in this life, while the welfare proportioned to it, namely, bliss, is

represented as attainable only in an eternity; because the former must always

be the pattern of their conduct in every state, and progress towards it is

already possible and necessary in this life; while the latter, under the name of

happiness, cannot be attained at all in this world (so far as our own power is

concerned), and therefore is made simply an object of hope. Nevertheless, the

Christian principle of morality itself is not theological (so as to be

heteronomy), but is autonomy of pure practical reason, since it does not make

the knowledge of God and His will the foundation of these laws, but only of

the attainment of the summum bonum, on condition of following these laws,

and it does not even place the proper spring of this obedience in the desiredresults, but solely in the conception of duty, as that of which the faithful

observance alone constitutes the worthiness to obtain those happy

consequences.

        14
               It is commonly held that the Christian precept of morality has no

advantage in respect of purity over the moral conceptions of the Stoics; the

distinction between them is, however, very obvious. The Stoic system made

the consciousness of strength of mind the pivot on which all moral

dispositions should turn; and although its disciples spoke of duties and even

defined them very well, yet they placed the spring and proper determining

principle of the will in an elevation of the mind above the lower springs of

the senses, which owe their power only to weakness of mind. With them

therefore, virtue was a sort of heroism in the wise man raising himself above

the animal nature of man, is sufficient for Himself, and, while he prescribes

duties to others, is himself raised above them, and is not subject to any

temptation to transgress the moral law. All this, however, they could not have

done if they had conceived this law in all its purity and strictness, as the

precept of the Gospel does. When I give the name idea to a perfection to

which nothing adequate can be given in experience, it does not follow that

the moral ideas are thing transcendent, that is something of which we could

not even determine the concept adequately, or of which it is uncertain

whether there is any object corresponding to it at all, as is the case with the

ideas of speculative reason; on the contrary, being types of practical

perfection, they serve as the indispensable rule of conduct and likewise as the

standard of comparison. Now if I consider Christian morals on their

philosophical side, then compared with the ideas of the Greek schools, they

would appear as follows: the ideas of the Cynics, the Epicureans, the Stoics,

and the Christians are: simplicity of nature, prudence, wisdom, and holiness.

In respect of the way of attaining them, the Greek schools were distinguished

from one another thus that the Cynics only required common sense, the

others the path of science, but both found the mere use of natural powers

sufficient for the purpose. Christian morality, because its precept is framed

(as a moral precept must be) so pure and unyielding, takes from man all

confidence that be can be fully adequate to it, at least in this life, but again

sets it up by enabling us to hope that if we act as well as it is in our power to

do, then what is not in our power will come in to our aid from another source,

whether we know how this may be or not. Aristotle and Plato differed only as

to the origin of our moral conceptions.              In this manner, the moral laws lead through the conception of the

summum bonum as the object and final end of pure practical reason to

religion, that is, to the recognition of all duties as divine commands, not as

sanctions, that is to say, arbitrary ordinances of a foreign and contingent in

themselves, but as essential laws of every free will in itself, which,

nevertheless, must be regarded as commands of the Supreme Being, because

it is only from a morally perfect (holy and good) and at the same time all-

powerful will, and consequently only through harmony with this will, that we

can hope to attain the summum bonum which the moral law makes it our

duty to take as the object of our endeavours. Here again, then, all remains

disinterested and founded merely on duty; neither fear nor hope being made

the fundamental springs, which if taken as principles would destroy the

whole moral worth of actions. The moral law commands me to make the

highest possible good in a world the ultimate object of all my conduct. But I

cannot hope to effect this otherwise than by the harmony of my will with that

of a holy and good Author of the world; and although the conception of the

summum bonum as a whole, in which the greatest happiness is conceived as

combined in the most exact proportion with the highest degree of moral

perfection (possible in creatures), includes my own happiness, yet it is not

this that is the determining principle of the will which is enjoined to promote

the summum bonum, but the moral law, which, on the contrary, limits by

strict conditions my unbounded desire of happiness.

              Hence also morality is not properly the doctrine how we should

make ourselves happy, but how we should become worthy of happiness. It is

only when religion is added that there also comes in the hope of participating

some day in happiness in proportion as we have endeavoured to be not

unworthy of it.

              A man is worthy to possess a thing or a state when his possession of

it is in harmony with the summum bonum. We can now easily see that all

worthiness depends on moral conduct, since in the conception of the

summum bonum this constitutes the condition of the rest (which belongs to

one’s state), namely, the participation of happiness. Now it follows from this

that morality should never be treated as a doctrine of happiness, that is, an

instruction how to become happy; for it has to do simply with the rational

condition (conditio sine qua non) of happiness, not with the means of

attaining it. But when morality has been completely expounded (whichmerely imposes duties instead of providing rules for selfish desires), then

first, after the moral desire to promote the summum bonum (to bring the

kingdom of God to us) has been awakened, a desire founded on a law, and

which could not previously arise in any selfish mind, and when for the

behoof of this desire the step to religion has been taken, then this ethical

doctrine may be also called a doctrine of happiness because the hope of

happiness first begins with religion only.

              We can also see from this that, when we ask what is God’s ultimate

end in creating the world, we must not name the happiness of the rational

beings in it, but the summum bonum, which adds a further condition to that

wish of such beings, namely, the condition of being worthy of happiness, that

is, the morality of these same rational beings, a condition which alone

contains the rule by which only they can hope to share in the former at the

hand of a wise Author. For as wisdom, theoretically considered, signifies the

knowledge of the summum bonum and, practically, the accordance of the will

with the summum bonum, we cannot attribute to a supreme independent

wisdom an end based merely on goodness. For we cannot conceive the action

of this goodness (in respect of the happiness of rational beings) as suitable to

the highest original good, except under the restrictive conditions of harmony
                  15
with the holiness of his will. Therefore, those who placed the end of

creation in the glory of God (provided that this is not conceived

anthropomorphically as a desire to be praised) have perhaps hit upon the best

expression. For nothing glorifies God more than that which is the most

estimable thing in the world, respect for his command, the observance of the

holy duty that his law imposes on us, when there is added thereto his glorious

plan of crowning such a beautiful order of things with corresponding

happiness. If the latter (to speak humanly) makes Him worthy of love, by the

former He is an object of adoration. Even men can never acquire respect by

benevolence alone, though they may gain love, so that the greatest

beneficence only procures them honour when it is regulated by worthiness.

        15
               In order to make these characteristics of these conceptions clear, I

add the remark that whilst we ascribe to God various attributes, the quality of

which we also find applicable to creatures, only that in Him they are raised to

the highest degree, e.g., power, knowledge, presence, goodness, etc., under

the designations of omnipotence, omniscience, omnipresence, etc., there are

three that are ascribed to God exclusively, and yet without the addition ofgreatness, and which are all moral He is the only holy, the only blessed, the

only wise, because these conceptions already imply the absence of limitation.

In the order of these attributes He is also the holy lawgiver (and creator), the

good governor (and preserver) and the just judge, three attributes which

include everything by which God is the object of religion, and in conformity

with which the metaphysical perfections are added of themselves in the

reason.

              That in the order of ends, man (and with him every rational being) is

an end in himself, that is, that he can never be used merely as a means by any

(not even by God) without being at the same time an end also himself, that

therefore humanity in our person must be holy to ourselves, this follows now

of itself because he is the subject of the moral law, in other words, of that

which is holy in itself, and on account of which and in agreement with which

alone can anything be termed holy. For this moral law is founded on the

autonomy of his will, as a free will which by its universal laws must

necessarily be able to agree with that to which it is to submit itself.

          VI. Of the Postulates of Pure Practical Reason Generally.

 

              They all proceed from the principle of morality, which is not a

postulate but a law, by which reason determines the will directly, which will,

because it is so determined as a pure will, requires these necessary conditions

of obedience to its precept. These postulates are not theoretical dogmas but,

suppositions practically necessary; while then they do [not] extend our

speculative knowledge, they give objective reality to the ideas of speculative

reason in general (by means of their reference to what is practical), and give

it a right to concepts, the possibility even of which it could not otherwise

venture to affirm.

              These postulates are those of immortality, freedom positively

considered (as the causality of a being so far as he belongs to the intelligible

world), and the existence of God. The first results from the practically

necessary condition of a duration adequate to the complete fulfilment of the

moral law; the second from the necessary supposition of independence of the

sensible world, and of the faculty of determining one’s will according to the

law of an intelligible world, that is, of freedom; the third from the necessary

condition of the existence of the summum bonum in such an intelligible

world, by the supposition of the supreme independent good, that is, theexistence of God.

              Thus the fact that respect for the moral law necessarily makes the

summum bonum an object of our endeavours, and the supposition thence

resulting of its objective reality, lead through the postulates of practical

reason to conceptions which speculative reason might indeed present as

problems, but could never solve. Thus it leads: 1. To that one in the solution

of which the latter could do nothing but commit paralogisms (namely, that of

immortality), because it could not lay hold of the character of permanence, by

which to complete the psychological conception of an ultimate subject

necessarily ascribed to the soul in self-consciousness, so as to make it the real

conception of a substance, a character which practical reason furnishes by the

postulate of a duration required for accordance with the moral law in the

summum bonum, which is the whole end of practical reason. 2. It leads to

that of which speculative reason contained nothing but antinomy, the solution

of which it could only found on a notion Problematically conceivable indeed,

but whose objective reality it could not prove or determine, namely, the

cosmological idea of an intelligible world and the consciousness of our

existence in it, by means of the postulate of freedom (the reality of which it

lays down by virtue of the moral law), and with it likewise the law of an

intelligible world, to which speculative reason could only point, but could not

define its conception. 3. What speculative reason was able to think, but was

obliged to leave undetermined as a mere transcendental ideal, viz., the

theological conception of the first Being, to this it gives significance (in a

practical view, that is, as a condition of the possibility of the object of a will

determined by that law), namely, as the supreme principle of the summum

bonum in an intelligible world, by means of moral legislation in it invested

with sovereign power.

              Is our knowledge, however, actually extended in this way by pure

practical reason, and is that immanent in practical reason which for the

speculative was only transcendent? Certainly, but only in a practical point of

view. For we do not thereby take knowledge of the nature of our souls, nor of

the intelligible world, nor of the Supreme Being, with respect to what they

are in themselves, but we have merely combined the conceptions of them in

the practical concept of the summum bonum as the object of our will, and this

altogether a priori, but only by means of the moral law, and merely in

reference to it, in respect of the object which it commands. But how freedomis possible, and how we are to conceive this kind of causality theoretically

and positively, is not thereby discovered; but only that there is such a

causality is postulated by the moral law and in its behoof. It is the same with

the remaining ideas, the possibility of which no human intelligence will ever

fathom, but the truth of which, on the other hand, no sophistry will ever wrest

from the conviction even of the commonest man.

VII. How is it possible to conceive an Extension of Pure Reason in a Practical

point of view, without its Knowledge as Speculative being enlarged at the

                                      same time?

 

              In order not to be too abstract, we will answer this question at once

in its application to the present case. In order to extend a pure cognition

practically, there must be an a priori purpose given, that is, an end as object

(of the will), which independently of all theological principle is presented as

practically necessary by an imperative which determines the will directly (a

categorical imperative), and in this case that is the summum bonum. This,

however, is not possible without presupposing three theoretical conceptions

(for which, because they are mere conceptions of pure reason, no

corresponding intuition can be found, nor consequently by the path of theory

any objective reality); namely, freedom, immortality, and God. Thus by the

practical law which commands the existence of the highest good possible in a

world, the possibility of those objects of pure speculative reason is

postulated, and the objective reality which the latter could not assure them.

By this the theoretical knowledge of pure reason does indeed obtain an

accession; but it consists only in this, that those concepts which otherwise it

had to look upon as problematical (merely thinkable) concepts, are now

shown assertorially to be such as actually have objects; because practical

reason indispensably requires their existence for the possibility of its object,

the summum bonum, which practically is absolutely necessary, and this

justifies theoretical reason in assuming them. But this extension of theoretical

reason is no extension of speculative, that is, we cannot make any positive

use of it in a theoretical point of view. For as nothing is accomplished in this

by practical reason, further than that these concepts are real and actually have

their (possible) objects, and nothing in the way of intuition of them is given

thereby (which indeed could not be demanded), hence the admission of this

reality does not render any synthetical proposition possible. Consequently,

this discovery does not in the least help us to extend this knowledge of oursin a speculative point of view, although it does in respect of the practical

employment of pure reason. The above three ideas of speculative reason are

still in themselves not cognitions; they are however (transcendent) thoughts,

in which there is nothing impossible. Now, by help of an apodeictic practical

law, being necessary conditions of that which it commands to be made an

object, they acquire objective reality; that is, we learn from it that they have

objects, without being able to point out how the conception of them is related

to an object, and this, too, is still not a cognition of these objects; for we

cannot thereby form any synthetical judgement about them, nor determine

their application theoretically; consequently, we can make no theoretical

rational use of them at all, in which use all speculative knowledge of reason

consists. Nevertheless, the theoretical knowledge, not indeed of these objects,

but of reason generally, is so far enlarged by this, that by the practical

postulates objects were given to those ideas, a merely problematical thought

having by this means first acquired objective reality. There is therefore no

extension of the knowledge of given supersensible objects, but an extension

of theoretical reason and of its knowledge in respect of the supersensible

generally; inasmuch as it is compelled to admit that there are such objects,

although it is not able to define them more closely, so as itself to extend this

knowledge of the objects (which have now been given it on practical

grounds, and only for practical use). For this accession, then, pure theoretical

reason, for which all those ideas are transcendent and without object, has

simply to thank its practical faculty. In this they become immanent and

constitutive, being the source of the possibility of realizing the necessary

object of pure practical reason (the summum bonum); whereas apart from this

they are transcendent, and merely regulative principles of speculative reason,

which do not require it to assume a new object beyond experience, but only

to bring its use in experience nearer to completeness. But when once reason

is in possession of this accession, it will go to work with these ideas as

speculative reason (properly only to assure the certainty of its practical use)

in a negative manner: that is, not extending but clearing up its knowledge so

as on one side to keep off anthropomorphism, as the source of superstition, or

seeming extension of these conceptions by supposed experience; and on the

other side fanaticism, which promises the same by means of supersensible

intuition or feelings of the like kind. All these are hindrances to the practical

use of pure reason, so that the removal of them may certainly be considered

an extension of our knowledge in a practical point of view, withoutcontradicting the admission that for speculative purposes reason has not in

the least gained by this.

              Every employment of reason in respect of an object requires pure

concepts of the understanding (categories), without which no object can be

conceived. These can be applied to the theoretical employment of reason, i.e.,

to that kind of knowledge, only in case an intuition (which is always sensible)

is taken as a basis, and therefore merely in order to conceive by means of —

them an object of possible experience. Now here what have to be thought by

means of the categories in order to be known are ideas of reason, which

cannot be given in any experience. Only we are not here concerned with the

theoretical knowledge of the objects of these ideas, but only with this,

whether they have objects at all. This reality is supplied by pure practical

reason, and theoretical reason has nothing further to do in this but to think

those objects by means of categories. This, as we have elsewhere clearly

shown, can be done well enough without needing any intuition (either

sensible or supersensible) because the categories have their seat and origin in

the pure understanding, simply as the faculty of thought, before and

independently of any intuition, and they always only signify an object in

general, no matter in what way it may be given to us. Now when the

categories are to be applied to these ideas, it is not possible to give them any

object in intuition; but that such an object actually exists, and consequently

that the category as a mere form of thought is here not empty but has

significance, this is sufficiently assured them by an object which practical

reason presents beyond doubt in the concept of the summum bonum, the

reality of the conceptions which are required for the possibility of the

summum bonum; without, however, effecting by this accession the least

extension of our knowledge on theoretical principles.

              When these ideas of God, of an intelligible world (the kingdom of

God), and of immortality are further determined by predicates taken from our

own nature, we must not regard this determination as a sensualizing of those

pure rational ideas (anthropomorphism), nor as a transcendent knowledge of

supersensible objects; for these predicates are no others than understanding

and will, considered too in the relation to each other in which they must be

conceived in the moral law, and therefore, only so far as a pure practical use

is made of them. As to all the rest that belongs to these conceptions

psychologically, that is, so far as we observe these faculties of oursempirically in their exercise (e.g., that the understanding of man is discursive,

and its notions therefore not intuitions but thoughts, that these follow one

another in time, that his will has its satisfaction always dependent on the

existence of its object, etc., which cannot be the case in the Supreme Being),

from all this we abstract in that case, and then there remains of the notions by

which we conceive a pure intelligence nothing more than just what is

required for the possibility of conceiving a moral law. There is then a

knowledge of God indeed, but only for practical purposes, and, if we attempt

to extend it to a theoretical knowledge, we find an understanding that has

intuitions, not thoughts, a will that is directed to objects on the existence of

which its satisfaction does not in the least depend (not to mention the

transcendental predicates, as, for example, a magnitude of existence, that is

duration, which, however, is not in time, the only possible means we have of

conceiving existence as magnitude). Now these are all attributes of which we

can form no conception that would help to the knowledge of the object, and

we learn from this that they can never be used for a theory of supersensible

beings, so that on this side they are quite incapable of being the foundation of

a speculative knowledge, and their use is limited simply to the practice of the

moral law.

              This last is so obvious, and can be proved so clearly by fact, that we

may confidently challenge all pretended natural theologians (a singular
      16
name) to specify (over and above the merely ontological predicates) one

single attribute, whether of the understanding or of the will, determining this

object of theirs, of which we could not show incontrovertibly that, if we

abstract from it everything anthropomorphic, nothing would remain to us but

the mere word, without our being able to connect with it the smallest notion

by which we could hope for an extension of theoretical knowledge. But as to

the practical, there still remains to us of the attributes of understanding and

will the conception of a relation to which objective reality is given by the

practical law (which determines a priori precisely this relation of the

understanding to the will). When once this is done, then reality is given to the

conception of the object of a will morally determined (the conception of the

summum bonum), and with it to the conditions of its possibility, the ideas of

God, freedom, and immortality, but always only relatively to the practice of

the moral law (and not for any speculative purpose).

        16
               Learning is properly only the whole content of the historicalsciences. Consequently it is only the teacher of revealed theology that can be

called a learned theologian. If, however, we choose to call a man learned who

is in possession of the rational sciences (mathematics and philosophy),

although even this would be contrary to the signification of the word (which

always counts as learning only that which one must be “learned” and which,

therefore, he cannot discover of himself by reason), even in that case the

philosopher would make too poor a figure with his knowledge of God as a

positive science to let himself be called on that account a learned man.

              According to these remarks it is now easy to find the answer to the

weighty question whether the notion of God is one belonging to physics (and

therefore also to metaphysics, which contains the pure a priori principles of

the former in their universal import) or to morals. If we have recourse to God

as the Author of all things, in order to explain the arrangements of nature or

its changes, this is at least not a physical explanation, and is a complete

confession that our philosophy has come to an end, since we are obliged to

assume something of which in itself we have otherwise no conception, in

order to be able to frame a conception of the possibility of what we see before

our eyes. Metaphysics, however, cannot enable us to attain by certain

inference from the knowledge of this world to the conception of God and to

the proof of His existence, for this reason, that in order to say that this world

could be produced only by a God (according to the conception implied by

this word) we should know this world as the most perfect whole possible; and

for this purpose should also know all possible worlds (in order to be able to

compare them with this); in other words, we should be omniscient. It is

absolutely impossible, however, to know the existence of this Being from

mere concepts, because every existential proposition, that is, every

proposition that affirms the existence of a being of which I frame a concept,

is a synthetic proposition, that is, one by which I go beyond that conception

and affirm of it more than was thought in the conception itself; namely, that

this concept in the understanding has an object corresponding to it outside the

understanding, and this it is obviously impossible to elicit by any reasoning.

There remains, therefore, only one single process possible for reason to attain

this knowledge, namely, to start from the supreme principle of its pure

practical use (which in every case is directed simply to the existence of

something as a consequence of reason) and thus determine its object. Then its

inevitable problem, namely, the necessary direction of the will to the

summum bonum, discovers to us not only the necessity of assuming such aFirst Being in reference to the possibility of this good in the world, but, what

is most remarkable, something which reason in its progress on the path of

physical nature altogether failed to find, namely, an accurately defined

conception of this First Being. As we can know only a small part of this

world, and can still less compare it with all possible worlds, we may indeed

from its order, design, and greatness, infer a wise, good, powerful, etc.,

Author of it, but not that He is all-wise, all-good, all-powerful, etc. It may

indeed very well be granted that we should be justified in supplying this

inevitable defect by a legitimate and reasonable hypothesis; namely, that

when wisdom, goodness, etc, are displayed in all the parts that offer

themselves to our nearer knowledge, it is just the same in all the rest, and that

it would therefore be reasonable to ascribe all possible perfections to the

Author of the world, but these are not strict logical inferences in which we

can pride ourselves on our insight, but only permitted conclusions in which

we may be indulged and which require further recommendation before we

can make use of them. On the path of empirical inquiry then (physics), the

conception of God remains always a conception of the perfection of the First

Being not accurately enough determined to be held adequate to the

conception of Deity. (With metaphysic in its transcendental part nothing

whatever can be accomplished.)

              When I now try to test this conception by reference to the object of

practical reason, I find that the moral principle admits as possible only the

conception of an Author of the world possessed of the highest perfection. He

must be omniscient, in order to know my conduct up to the inmost root of my

mental state in all possible cases and into all future time; omnipotent, in order

to allot to it its fitting consequences; similarly He must be omnipresent,

eternal, etc. Thus the moral law, by means of the conception of the summum

bonum as the object of a pure practical reason, determines the concept of the

First Being as the Supreme Being; a thing which the physical (and in its

higher development the metaphysical), in other words, the whole speculative

course of reason, was unable to effect. The conception of God, then, is one

that belongs originally not to physics, i.e., to speculative reason, but to

morals. The same may be said of the other conceptions of reason of which we

have treated above as postulates of it in its practical use.

              In the history of Grecian philosophy we find no distinct traces of a

pure rational theology earlier than Anaxagoras; but this is not because theolder philosophers had not intelligence or penetration enough to raise

themselves to it by the path of speculation, at least with the aid of a

thoroughly reasonable hypothesis. What could have been easier, what more

natural, than the thought which of itself occurs to everyone, to assume instead

of several causes of the world, instead of an indeterminate degree of

perfection, a single rational cause having all perfection? But the evils in the

world seemed to them to be much too serious objections to allow them to feel

themselves justified in such a hypothesis. They showed intelligence and

penetration then in this very point, that they did not allow themselves to

adopt it, but on the contrary looked about amongst natural causes to see if

they could not find in them the qualities and power required for a First Being.

But when this acute people had advanced so far in their investigations of

nature as to treat even moral questions philosophically, on which other

nations had never done anything but talk, then first they found a new and

practical want, which did not fail to give definiteness to their conception of

the First Being: and in this the speculative reason played the part of spectator,

or at best had the merit of embellishing a conception that had not grown on

its own ground, and of applying a series of confirmations from the study of

nature now brought forward for the first time, not indeed to strengthen the

authority of this conception (which was already established), but rather to

make a show with a supposed discovery of theoretical reason.

              From these remarks, the reader of the Critique of Pure Speculative

Reason will be thoroughly convinced how highly necessary that laborious

deduction of the categories was, and how fruitful for theology and morals.

For if, on the one hand, we place them in pure understanding, it is by this

deduction alone that we can be prevented from regarding them, with Plato, as

innate, and founding on them extravagant pretensions to theories of the

supersensible, to which we can see no end, and by which we should make

theology a magic lantern of chimeras; on the other hand, if we regard them as

acquired, this deduction saves us from restricting, with Epicurus, all and

every use of them, even for practical purposes, to the objects and motives of

the senses. But now that the Critique has shown by that deduction, first, that

they are not of empirical origin, but have their seat and source a priori in the

pure understanding; secondly, that as they refer to objects in general

independently of the intuition of them, hence, although they cannot effect

theoretical knowledge, except in application to empirical objects, yet when

applied to an object given by pure practical reason they enable us to conceivethe supersensible definitely, only so far, however, as it is defined by such

predicates as are necessarily connected with the pure practical purpose given

a priori and with its possibility. The speculative restriction of pure reason and

its practical extension bring it into that relation of equality in which reason in

general can be employed suitably to its end, and this example proves better

than any other that the path to wisdom, if it is to be made sure and not to be

impassable or misleading, must with us men inevitably pass through science;

but it is not till this is complete that we can be convinced that it leads to this

goal.

              VIII. Of Belief from a Requirement of Pure Reason.

 

              A want or requirement of pure reason in its speculative use leads

only to a hypothesis; that of pure practical reason to a postulate; for in the

former case I ascend from the result as high as I please in the series of causes,

not in order to give objective reality to the result (e.g., the causal connection

of things and changes in the world), but in order thoroughly to satisfy my

inquiring reason in respect of it. Thus I see before me order and design in

nature, and need not resort to speculation to assure myself of their reality, but

to explain them I have to presuppose a Deity as their cause; and then since

the inference from an effect to a definite cause is always uncertain and

doubtful, especially to a cause so precise and so perfectly defined as we have

to conceive in God, hence the highest degree of certainty to which this

presupposition can be brought is that it is the most rational opinion for us
    17
men. On the other hand, a requirement of pure practical reason is based on a

duty, that of making something (the summum bonum) the object of my will

so as to promote it with all my powers; in which case I must suppose its

possibility and, consequently, also the conditions necessary thereto, namely,

God, freedom, and immortality; since I cannot prove these by my speculative

reason, although neither can I refute them. This duty is founded on something

that is indeed quite independent of these suppositions and is of itself

apodeictically certain, namely, the moral law; and so far it needs no further

support by theoretical views as to the inner constitution of things, the secret

final aim of the order of the world, or a presiding ruler thereof, in order to

bind me in the most perfect manner to act in unconditional conformity to the

law. But the subjective effect of this law, namely, the mental disposition

conformed to it and made necessary by it, to promote the practically possible

summum bonum, this presupposes at least that the latter is possible, for itwould be practically impossible to strive after the object of a conception

which at bottom was empty and had no object. Now the above-mentioned

postulates concern only the physical or metaphysical conditions of the

possibility of the summum bonum; in a word, those which lie in the nature of

things; not, however, for the sake of an arbitrary speculative purpose, but of a

practically necessary end of a pure rational will, which in this case does not

choose, but obeys an inexorable command of reason, the foundation of which

is objective, in the constitution of things as they must be universally judged

by pure reason, and is not based on inclination; for we are in nowise justified

in assuming, on account of what we wish on merely subjective grounds, that

the means thereto are possible or that its object is real. This, then, is an

absolutely necessary requirement, and what it presupposes is not merely

justified as an allowable hypothesis, but as a postulate in a practical point of

view; and admitting that the pure moral law inexorably binds every man as a

command (not as a rule of prudence), the righteous man may say: “I will that

there be a God, that my existence in this world be also an existence outside

the chain of physical causes and in a pure world of the understanding, and

lastly, that my duration be endless; I firmly abide by this, and will not let this

faith be taken from me; for in this instance alone my interest, because I must

not relax anything of it, inevitably determines my judgement, without

regarding sophistries, however unable I may be to answer them or to oppose
                                      18
them with others more plausible.

        17
               But even here we should not be able to allege a requirement of

reason, if we had not before our eyes a problematical, but yet inevitable,

conception of reason, namely, that of an absolutely necessary being. This

conception now seeks to be defined, and this, in addition to the tendency to

extend itself, is the objective ground of a requirement of speculative reason,

namely, to have a more precise definition of the conception of a necessary

being which is to serve as the first cause of other beings, so as to make these

latter knowable by some means. Without such antecedent necessary problems

there are no requirements — at least not of pure reason — the rest are

requirements of inclination.

        18
               In the Deutsches Museum, February, 1787, there is a dissertation

by a very subtle and clear-headed man, the late Wizenmann, whose early

death is to be lamented, in which he disputes the right to argue from a want to

the objective reality of its object, and illustrates the point by the example of aman in love, who having fooled himself into an idea of beauty, which is

merely a chimera of his own brain, would fain conclude that such an object

really exists somewhere. I quite agree with him in this, in all cases where the

want is founded on inclination, which cannot necessarily postulate the

existence of its object even for the man that is affected by it, much less can it

contain a demand valid for everyone, and therefore it is merely a subjective

ground of the wish. But in the present case we have a want of reason

springing from an objective determining principle of the will, namely, the

moral law, which necessarily binds every rational being, and therefore

justifies him in assuming a priori in nature the conditions proper for it, and

makes the latter inseparable from the complete practical use of reason. It is a

duty to realize the summum bonum to the utmost of our power, therefore it

must be possible, consequently it is unavoidable for every rational being in

the world to assume what is necessary for its objective possibility. The

assumption is as necessary as the moral law, in connection with which alone

it is valid.

              In order to prevent misconception in the use of a notion as yet so

unusual as that of a faith of pure practical reason, let me be permitted to add

one more remark. It might almost seem as if this rational faith were here

announced as itself a command, namely, that we should assume the summum

bonum as possible. But a faith that is commanded is nonsense. Let the

preceding analysis, however, be remembered of what is required to be

supposed in the conception of the summum bonum, and it will be seen that it

cannot be commanded to assume this possibility, and no practical disposition

of mind is required to admit it; but that speculative reason must concede it

without being asked, for no one can affirm that it is impossible in itself that

rational beings in the world should at the same time be worthy of happiness

in conformity with the moral law and also possess this happiness

proportionately. Now in respect of the first element of the summum bonum,

namely, that which concerns morality, the moral law gives merely a

command, and to doubt the possibility of that element would be the same as

to call in question the moral law itself. But as regards the second element of

that object, namely, happiness perfectly proportioned to that worthiness, it is

true that there is no need of a command to admit its possibility in general, for

theoretical reason has nothing to say against it; but the manner in which we

have to conceive this harmony of the laws of nature with those of freedom

has in it something in respect of which we have a choice, because theoreticalreason decides nothing with apodeictic certainty about it, and in respect of

this there may be a moral interest which turns the scale.

              I had said above that in a mere course of nature in the world an

accurate correspondence between happiness and moral worth is not to be

expected and must be regarded as impossible, and that therefore the

possibility of the summum bonum cannot be admitted from this side except

on the supposition of a moral Author of the world. I purposely reserved the

restriction of this judgement to the subjective conditions of our reason, in

order not to make use of it until the manner of this belief should be defined

more precisely. The fact is that the impossibility referred to is merely

subjective, that is, our reason finds it impossible for it to render conceivable

in the way of a mere course of nature a connection so exactly proportioned

and so thoroughly adapted to an end, between two sets of events happening

according to such distinct laws; although, as with everything else in nature

that is adapted to an end, it cannot prove, that is, show by sufficient objective

reason, that it is not possible by universal laws of nature.

              Now, however, a deciding principle of a different kind comes into

play to turn the scale in this uncertainty of speculative reason. The command

to promote the summum bonum is established on an objective basis (in

practical reason); the possibility of the same in general is likewise established

on an objective basis (in theoretical reason, which has nothing to say against

it). But reason cannot decide objectively in what way we are to conceive this

possibility; whether by universal laws of nature without a wise Author

presiding over nature, or only on supposition of such an Author. Now here

there comes in a subjective condition of reason, the only way theoretically

possible for it, of conceiving the exact harmony of the kingdom of nature

with the kingdom of morals, which is the condition of the possibility of the

summum bonum; and at the same time the only one conducive to morality

(which depends on an objective law of reason). Now since the promotion of

this summum bonum, and therefore the supposition of its possibility, are

objectively necessary (though only as a result of practical reason), while at

the same time the manner in which we would conceive it rests with our own

choice, and in this choice a free interest of pure practical reason decides for

the assumption of a wise Author of the world; it is clear that the principle that

herein determines our judgement, though as a want it is subjective, yet at the

same time being the means of promoting what is objectively (practically)necessary, is the foundation of a maxim of belief in a moral point of view,

that is, a faith of pure practical reason. This, then, is not commanded, but

being a voluntary determination of our judgement, conducive to the moral

(commanded) purpose, and moreover harmonizing with the theoretical

requirement of reason, to assume that existence and to make it the foundation

of our further employment of reason, it has itself sprung from the moral

disposition of mind; it may therefore at times waver even in the well-

disposed, but can never be reduced to unbelief.

IX. Of the Wise Adaptation of Man’s Cognitive Faculties to his Practical

                                      Destination.

 

              If human nature is destined to endeavour after the summum bonum,

we must suppose also that the measure of its cognitive faculties, and

particularly their relation to one another, is suitable to this end. Now the

Critique of Pure Speculative Reason proves that this is incapable of solving

satisfactorily the most weighty problems that are proposed to it, although it

does not ignore the natural and important hints received from the same

reason, nor the great steps that it can make to approach to this great goal that

is set before it, which, however, it can never reach of itself, even with the

help of the greatest knowledge of nature. Nature then seems here to have

provided us only in a stepmotherly fashion with the faculty required for our

end.

              Suppose, now, that in this matter nature had conformed to our wish

and had given us that capacity of discernment or that enlightenment which

we would gladly possess, or which some imagine they actually possess, what

would in all probability be the consequence? Unless our whole nature were at

the same time changed, our inclinations, which always have the first word,

would first of all demand their own satisfaction, and, joined with rational

reflection, the greatest possible and most lasting satisfaction, under the name

of happiness; the moral law would afterwards speak, in order to keep them

within their proper bounds, and even to subject them all to a higher end,

which has no regard to inclination. But instead of the conflict that the moral

disposition has now to carry on with the inclinations, in which, though after

some defeats, moral strength of mind may be gradually acquired, God and

eternity with their awful majesty would stand unceasingly before our eyes

(for what we can prove perfectly is to us as certain as that of which we areassured by the sight of our eyes). Transgression of the law, would, no doubt,

be avoided; what is commanded would be done; but the mental disposition,

from which actions ought to proceed, cannot be infused by any command,

and in this case the spur of action is ever active and external, so that reason

has no need to exert itself in order to gather strength to resist the inclinations

by a lively representation of the dignity of the law: hence most of the actions

that conformed to the law would be done from fear, a few only from hope,

and none at all from duty, and the moral worth of actions, on which alone in

the eyes of supreme wisdom the worth of the person and even that of the

world depends, would cease to exist. As long as the nature of man remains

what it is, his conduct would thus be changed into mere mechanism, in

which, as in a puppet-show, everything would gesticulate well, but there

would be no life in the figures. Now, when it is quite otherwise with us, when

with all the effort of our reason we have only a very obscure and doubtful

view into the future, when the Governor of the world allows us only to

conjecture his existence and his majesty, not to behold them or prove them

clearly; and on the other hand, the moral law within us, without promising or

threatening anything with certainty, demands of us disinterested respect; and

only when this respect has become active and dominant, does it allow us by

means of it a prospect into the world of the supersensible, and then only with

weak glances: all this being so, there is room for true moral disposition,

immediately devoted to the law, and a rational creature can become worthy of

sharing in the summum bonum that corresponds to the worth of his person

and not merely to his actions. Thus what the study of nature and of man

teaches us sufficiently elsewhere may well be true here also; that the

unsearchable wisdom by which we exist is not less worthy of admiration in

what it has denied than in what it has granted.

 

 

       Second Part. – Methodology of Pure Practical Reason.

 

 

              By the methodology of pure practical reason we are not to

understand the mode of proceeding with pure practical principles (whether in

study or in exposition), with a view to a scientific knowledge of them, which

alone is what is properly called method elsewhere in theoretical philosophy

(for popular knowledge requires a manner, science a method, i.e., a process

according to principles of reason by which alone the manifold of any branch

of knowledge can become a system). On the contrary, by this methodology is

understood the mode in which we can give the laws of pure practical reason

access to the human mind and influence on its maxims, that is, by which we

can make the objectively practical reason subjectively practical also.

              Now it is clear enough that those determining principles of the will

which alone make maxims properly moral and give them a moral worth,

namely, the direct conception of the law and the objective necessity of

obeying it as our duty, must be regarded as the proper springs of actions,

since otherwise legality of actions might be produced, but not morality of

character. But it is not so clear; on the contrary, it must at first sight seem to

every one very improbable that even subjectively that exhibition of pure

virtue can have more power over the human mind, and supply a far stronger

spring even for effecting that legality of actions, and can produce more

powerful resolutions to prefer the law, from pure respect for it, to every other

consideration, than all the deceptive allurements of pleasure or of all that may

be reckoned as happiness, or even than all threatenings of pain and

misfortune. Nevertheless, this is actually the case, and if human nature were

not so constituted, no mode of presenting the law by roundabout ways and

indirect recommendations would ever produce morality of character. All

would be simple hypocrisy; the law would be hated, or at least despised,

while it was followed for the sake of one’s own advantage. The letter of the

law (legality) would be found in our actions, but not the spirit of it in our

minds (morality); and as with all our efforts we could not quite free ourselves

from reason in our judgement, we must inevitably appear in our own eyes

worthless, depraved men, even though we should seek to compensateourselves for this mortification before the inner tribunal, by enjoying the

pleasure that a supposed natural or divine law might be imagined to have

connected with it a sort of police machinery, regulating its operations by what

was done without troubling itself about the motives for doing it.

              It cannot indeed be denied that in order to bring an uncultivated or

degraded mind into the track of moral goodness some preparatory guidance is

necessary, to attract it by a view of its own advantage, or to alarm it by fear

of loss; but as soon as this mechanical work, these leading-strings have

produced some effect, then we must bring before the mind the pure moral

motive, which, not only because it is the only one that can be the foundation

of a character (a practically consistent habit of mind with unchangeable

maxims), but also because it teaches a man to feel his own dignity, gives the

mind a power unexpected even by himself, to tear himself from all sensible

attachments so far as they would fain have the rule, and to find a rich

compensation for the sacrifice he offers, in the independence of his rational

nature and the greatness of soul to which he sees that he is destined. We will

therefore show, by such observations as every one can make, that this

property of our minds, this receptivity for a pure moral interest, and

consequently the moving force of the pure conception of virtue, when it is

properly applied to the human heart, is the most powerful spring and, when a

continued and punctual observance of moral maxims is in question, the only

spring of good conduct. It must, however, be remembered that if these

observations only prove the reality of such a feeling, but do not show any

moral improvement brought about by it, this is no argument against the only

method that exists of making the objectively practical laws of pure reason

subjectively practical, through the mere force of the conception of duty; nor

does it prove that this method is a vain delusion. For as it has never yet come

into vogue, experience can say nothing of its results; one can only ask for

proofs of the receptivity for such springs, and these I will now briefly present,

and then sketch the method of founding and cultivating genuine moral

dispositions.

              When we attend to the course of conversation in mixed companies,

consisting not merely of learned persons and subtle reasoners, but also of

men of business or of women, we observe that, besides story-telling and

jesting, another kind of entertainment finds a place in them, namely,

argument; for stories, if they are to have novelty and interest, are soonexhausted, and jesting is likely to become insipid. Now of all argument there

is none in which persons are more ready to join who find any other subtle

discussion tedious, none that brings more liveliness into the company, than

that which concerns the moral worth of this or that action by which the

character of some person is to be made out. Persons, to whom in other cases

anything subtle and speculative in theoretical questions is dry and irksome,

presently join in when the question is to make out the moral import of a good

or bad action that has been related, and they display an exactness, a

refinement, a subtlety, in excogitating everything that can lessen the purity of

purpose, and consequently the degree of virtue in it, which we do not expect

from them in any other kind of speculation. In these criticisms, persons who

are passing judgement on others often reveal their own character: some, in

exercising their judicial office, especially upon the dead, seem inclined

chiefly to defend the goodness that is related of this or that deed against all

injurious charges of insincerity, and ultimately to defend the whole moral

worth of the person against the reproach of dissimulation and secret

wickedness; others, on the contrary, turn their thoughts more upon attacking

this worth by accusation and fault finding. We cannot always, however,

attribute to these latter the intention of arguing away virtue altogether out of

all human examples in order to make it an empty name; often, on the

contrary, it is only well-meant strictness in determining the true moral import

of actions according to an uncompromising law. Comparison with such a law,

instead of with examples, lowers self-conceit in moral matters very much,

and not merely teaches humility, but makes every one feel it when he

examines himself closely. Nevertheless, we can for the most part observe, in

those who defend the purity of purpose in giving examples that where there is

the presumption of uprightness they are anxious to remove even the least

spot, lest, if all examples had their truthfulness disputed, and if the purity of

all human virtue were denied, it might in the end be regarded as a mere

phantom, and so all effort to attain it be made light of as vain affectation and

delusive conceit.

              I do not know why the educators of youth have not long since made

use of this propensity of reason to enter with pleasure upon the most subtle

examination of the practical questions that are thrown up; and why they have

not, after first laying the foundation of a purely moral catechism, searched

through the biographies of ancient and modern times with the view of having

at hand instances of the duties laid down, in which, especially by comparisonof similar actions under different circumstances, they might exercise the

critical judgement of their scholars in remarking their greater or less moral

significance. This is a thing in which they would find that even early youth,

which is still unripe for speculation of other kinds, would soon become very

acute and not a little interested, because it feels the progress of its faculty of

judgement; and, what is most important, they could hope with confidence that

the frequent practice of knowing and approving good conduct in all its purity,

and on the other hand of remarking with regret or contempt the least

deviation from it, although it may be pursued only as a sport in which

children may compete with one another, yet will leave a lasting impression of

esteem on the one hand and disgust on the other; and so, by the mere habit of

looking on such actions as deserving approval or blame, a good foundation

would be laid for uprightness in the future course of life. Only I wish they

would spare them the example of so-called noble (supermeritorious) actions,

in which our sentimental books so much abound, and would refer all to duty

merely, and to the worth that a man can and must give himself in his own

eyes by the consciousness of not having transgressed it, since whatever runs

up into empty wishes and longings after inaccessible perfection produces

mere heroes of romance, who, while they pique themselves on their feeling

for transcendent greatness, release themselves in return from the observance

of common and every-day obligations, which then seem to them petty and
              19
insignificant.

        19
               It is quite proper to extol actions that display a great, unselfish,

sympathizing mind or humanity. But, in this case, we must fix attention not

so much on the elevation of soul, which is very fleeting and transitory, as on

the subjection of the heart to duty, from which a more enduring impression

may be expected, because this implies principle (whereas the former only

implies ebullitions). One need only reflect a little and he will always find a

debt that he has by some means incurred towards the human race (even if it

were only this, by the inequality of men in the civil constitution, enjoys

advantages on account of which others must be the more in want), which will

prevent the thought of duty from being repressed by the self-complacent

imagination of merit.

              But if it is asked: “What, then, is really pure morality, by which as a

touchstone we must test the moral significance of every action,” then I must

admit that it is only philosophers that can make the decision of this questiondoubtful, for to common sense it has been decided long ago, not indeed by

abstract general formulae, but by habitual use, like the distinction between

the right and left hand. We will then point out the criterion of pure virtue in

an example first, and, imagining that it is set before a boy, of say ten years

old, for his judgement, we will see whether he would necessarily judge so of

himself without being guided by his teacher. Tell him the history of an honest

man whom men want to persuade to join the calumniators of an innocent and

powerless person (say Anne Boleyn, accused by Henry VIII of England). He

is offered advantages, great gifts, or high rank; he rejects them. This will

excite mere approbation and applause in the mind of the hearer. Now begins

the threatening of loss. Amongst these traducers are his best friends, who

now renounce his friendship; near kinsfolk, who threaten to disinherit him

(he being without fortune); powerful persons, who can persecute and harass

him in all places and circumstances; a prince, who threatens him with loss of

freedom, yea, loss of life. Then to fill the measure of suffering, and that he

may feel the pain that only the morally good heart can feel very deeply, let us

conceive his family threatened with extreme distress and want, entreating him

to yield; conceive himself, though upright, yet with feelings not hard or

insensible either to compassion or to his own distress; conceive him, I say, at

the moment when he wishes that he had never lived to see the day that

exposed him to such unutterable anguish, yet remaining true to his

uprightness of purpose, without wavering or even doubting; then will my

youthful hearer be raised gradually from mere approval to admiration, from

that to amazement, and finally to the greatest veneration, and a lively wish

that be himself could be such a man (though certainly not in such

circumstances). Yet virtue is here worth so much only because it costs so

much, not because it brings any profit. All the admiration, and even the

endeavour to resemble this character, rest wholly on the purity of the moral

principle, which can only be strikingly shown by removing from the springs

of action everything that men may regard as part of happiness. Morality, then,

must have the more power over the human heart the more purely it is

exhibited. Whence it follows that, if the law of morality and the image of

holiness and virtue are to exercise any influence at all on our souls, they can

do so only so far as they are laid to heart in their purity as motives, unmixed

with any view to prosperity, for it is in suffering that they display themselves

most nobly. Now that whose removal strengthens the effect of a moving force

must have been a hindrance, consequently every admixture of motives takenfrom our own happiness is a hindrance to the influence of the moral law on

the heart. I affirm further that even in that admired action, if the motive from

which it was done was a high regard for duty, then it is just this respect for

the law that has the greatest influence on the mind of the spectator, not any

pretension to a supposed inward greatness of mind or noble meritorious

sentiments; consequently duty, not merit, must have not only the most

definite, but, when it is represented in the true light of its inviolability, the

most penetrating, influence on the mind.

              It is more necessary than ever to direct attention to this method in

our times, when men hope to produce more effect on the mind with soft,

tender feelings, or high-flown, puffing-up pretensions, which rather wither

the heart than strengthen it, than by a plain and earnest representation of duty,

which is more suited to human imperfection and to progress in goodness. To

set before children, as a pattern, actions that are called noble, magnanimous,

meritorious, with the notion of captivating them by infusing enthusiasm for

such actions, is to defeat our end. For as they are still so backward in the

observance of the commonest duty, and even in the correct estimation of it,

this means simply to make them fantastical romancers betimes. But, even

with the instructed and experienced part of mankind, this supposed spring

has, if not an injurious, at least no genuine, moral effect on the heart, which,

however, is what it was desired to produce.

              All feelings, especially those that are to produce unwonted exertions,

must accomplish their effect at the moment they are at their height and before

the calm down; otherwise they effect nothing; for as there was nothing to

strengthen the heart, but only to excite it, it naturally returns to its normal

moderate tone and, thus, falls back into its previous languor. Principles must

be built on conceptions; on any other basis there can only be paroxysms,

which can give the person no moral worth, nay, not even confidence in

himself, without which the highest good in man, consciousness of the

morality of his mind and character, cannot exist. Now if these conceptions

are to become subjectively practical, we must not rest satisfied with admiring

the objective law of morality, and esteeming it highly in reference to

humanity, but we must consider the conception of it in relation to man as an

individual, and then this law appears in a form indeed that is highly deserving

of respect, but not so pleasant as if it belonged to the element to which he is

naturally accustomed; but on the contrary as often compelling him to quit thiselement, not without self-denial, and to betake himself to a higher, in which

he can only maintain himself with trouble and with unceasing apprehension

of a relapse. In a word, the moral law demands obedience, from duty not

from predilection, which cannot and ought not to be presupposed at all.

              Let us now see, in an example, whether the conception of an action,

as a noble and magnanimous one, has more subjective moving power than if

the action is conceived merely as duty in relation to the solemn law of

morality. The action by which a man endeavours at the greatest peril of life to

rescue people from shipwreck, at last losing his life in the attempt, is

reckoned on one side as duty, but on the other and for the most part as a

meritorious action, but our esteem for it is much weakened by the notion of

duty to himself which seems in this case to be somewhat infringed. More

decisive is the magnanimous sacrifice of life for the safety of one’s country;

and yet there still remains some scruple whether it is a perfect duty to devote

one’s self to this purpose spontaneously and unbidden, and the action has not

in itself the full force of a pattern and impulse to imitation. But if an

indispensable duty be in question, the transgression of which violates the

moral law itself, and without regard to the welfare of mankind, and as it were

tramples on its holiness (such as are usually called duties to God, because in

Him we conceive the ideal of holiness in substance), then we give our most

perfect esteem to the pursuit of it at the sacrifice of all that can have any

value for the dearest inclinations, and we find our soul strengthened and

elevated by such an example, when we convince ourselves by contemplation

of it that human nature is capable of so great an elevation above every motive

that nature can oppose to it. Juvenal describes such an example in a climax

which makes the reader feel vividly the force of the spring that is contained in

the pure law of duty, as duty:

                Esto bonus miles, tutor bonus, arbiter idem

Integer; ambiguae si quando citabere testis

Incertaeque rei, Phalaris licet imperet ut sis

Falsus, et admoto dictet periuria tauro,

Summum crede nefas animam praeferre pudori,
                                              20
Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causas.

 

        20
               [Juvenal, Satirae, “Be you a good soldier, a faithful tutor, anuncorrupted umpire also; if you are summoned as a witness in a doubtful and

uncertain thing, though Phalaris should command that you should be false,

and should dictate perjuries with the bull brought to you, believe it the

highest impiety to prefer life to reputation, and for the sake of life, to lose the

causes of living.”]

              When we can bring any flattering thought of merit into our action,

then the motive is already somewhat alloyed with self-love and has therefore

some assistance from the side of the sensibility. But to postpone everything to

the holiness of duty alone, and to be conscious that we can because our own

reason recognises this as its command and says that we ought to do it, this is,

as it were, to raise ourselves altogether above the world of sense, and there is

inseparably involved in the same a consciousness of the law, as a spring of a

faculty that controls the sensibility; and although this is not always attended

with effect, yet frequent engagement with this spring, and the at first minor

attempts at using it, give hope that this effect may be wrought, and that by

degrees the greatest, and that a purely moral interest in it may be produced in

us.

              The method then takes the following course. At first we are only

concerned to make the judging of actions by moral laws a natural

employment accompanying all our own free actions, as well as the

observation of those of others, and to make it as it were a habit, and to

sharpen this judgement, asking first whether the action conforms objectively

to the moral law, and to what law; and we distinguish the law that merely

furnishes a principle of obligation from that which is really obligatory (leges

obligandi a legibus obligantibus); as, for instance, the law of what men’s

wants require from me, as contrasted with that which their rights demand, the

latter of which prescribes essential, the former only non-essential duties; and

thus we teach how to distinguish different kinds of duties which meet in the

same action. The other point to which attention must be directed is the

question whether the action was also (subjectively) done for the sake of the

moral law, so that it not only is morally correct as a deed, but also, by the

maxim from which it is done, has moral worth as a disposition. Now there is

no doubt that this practice, and the resulting culture of our reason in judging

merely of the practical, must gradually produce a certain interest even in the

law of reason, and consequently in morally good actions. For we ultimately

take a liking for a thing, the contemplation of which makes us feel that theuse of our cognitive faculties is extended; and this extension is especially

furthered by that in which we find moral correctness, since it is only in such

an order of things that reason, with its faculty of determining a priori on

principle what ought to be done, can find satisfaction. An observer of nature

takes liking at last to objects that at first offended his senses, when he

discovers in them the great adaptation of their organization to design, so that

his reason finds food in its contemplation. So Leibnitz spared an insect that

he had carefully examined with the microscope, and replaced it on its leaf,

because he had found himself instructed by the view of it and had, as it were,

received a benefit from it.

              But this employment of the faculty of judgement, which makes us

feel our own cognitive powers, is not yet the interest in actions and in their

morality itself. It merely causes us to take pleasure in engaging in such

criticism, and it gives to virtue or the disposition that conforms to moral laws

a form of beauty, which is admired, but not on that account sought after

(laudatur et alget); as everything the contemplation of which produces a

consciousness of the harmony of our powers of conception, and in which we

feel the whole of our faculty of knowledge (understanding and imagination)

strengthened, produces a satisfaction, which may also be communicated to

others, while nevertheless the existence of the object remains indifferent to

us, being only regarded as the occasion of our becoming aware of the

capacities in us which are elevated above mere animal nature. Now, however,

the second exercise comes in, the living exhibition of morality of character by

examples, in which attention is directed to purity of will, first only as a

negative perfection, in so far as in an action done from duty no motives of

inclination have any influence in determining it. By this the pupil’s attention

is fixed upon the consciousness of his freedom, and although this

renunciation at first excites a feeling of pain, nevertheless, by its withdrawing

the pupil from the constraint of even real wants, there is proclaimed to him at

the same time a deliverance from the manifold dissatisfaction in which all

these wants entangle him, and the mind is made capable of receiving the

sensation of satisfaction from other sources. The heart is freed and lightened

of a burden that always secretly presses on it, when instances of pure moral

resolutions reveal to the man an inner faculty of which otherwise he has no

right knowledge, the inward freedom to release himself from the boisterous

importunity of inclinations, to such a degree that none of them, not even the

dearest, shall have any influence on a resolution, for which we are now toemploy our reason. Suppose a case where I alone know that the wrong is on

my side, and although a free confession of it and the offer of satisfaction are

so strongly opposed by vanity, selfishness, and even an otherwise not

illegitimate antipathy to the man whose rights are impaired by me, I am

nevertheless able to discard all these considerations; in this there is implied a

consciousness of independence on inclinations and circumstances, and of the

possibility of being sufficient for myself, which is salutary to me in general

for other purposes also. And now the law of duty, in consequence of the

positive worth which obedience to it makes us feel, finds easier access

through the respect for ourselves in the consciousness of our freedom. When

this is well established, when a man dreads nothing more than to find himself,

on self-examination, worthless and contemptible in his own eyes, then every

good moral disposition can be grafted on it, because this is the best, nay, the

only guard that can keep off from the mind the pressure of ignoble and

corrupting motives.

              I have only intended to point out the most general maxims of the

methodology of moral cultivation and exercise. As the manifold variety of

duties requires special rules for each kind, and this would be a prolix affair, I

shall be readily excused if in a work like this, which is only preliminary, I

content myself with these outlines.                                      Conclusion.

 

 

              Two things fill the mind with ever new and increasing admiration

and awe, the oftener and the more steadily we reflect on them: the starry

heavens above and the moral law within. I have not to search for them and

conjecture them as though they were veiled in darkness or were in the

transcendent region beyond my horizon; I see them before me and connect

them directly with the consciousness of my existence. The former begins

from the place I occupy in the external world of sense, and enlarges my

connection therein to an unbounded extent with worlds upon worlds and

systems of systems, and moreover into limitless times of their periodic

motion, its beginning and continuance. The second begins from my invisible

self, my personality, and exhibits me in a world which has true infinity, but

which is traceable only by the understanding, and with which I discern that I

am not in a merely contingent but in a universal and necessary connection, as

I am also thereby with all those visible worlds. The former view of a

countless multitude of worlds annihilates as it were my importance as an

animal creature, which after it has been for a short time provided with vital

power, one knows not how, must again give back the matter of which it was

formed to the planet it inhabits (a mere speck in the universe). The second, on

the contrary, infinitely elevates my worth as an intelligence by my

personality, in which the moral law reveals to me a life independent of

animality and even of the whole sensible world, at least so far as may be

inferred from the destination assigned to my existence by this law, a

destination not restricted to conditions and limits of this life, but reaching into

the infinite.

              But though admiration and respect may excite to inquiry, they

cannot supply the want of it. What, then, is to be done in order to enter on

this in a useful manner and one adapted to the loftiness of the subject?

Examples may serve in this as a warning and also for imitation. The

contemplation of the world began from the noblest spectacle that the human

senses present to us, and that our understanding can bear to follow in their

vast reach; and it ended — in astrology. Morality began with the noblest

attribute of human nature, the development and cultivation of which give a

prospect of infinite utility; and ended — in fanaticism or superstition. So it iswith all crude attempts where the principal part of the business depends on

the use of reason, a use which does not come of itself, like the use of the feet,

by frequent exercise, especially when attributes are in question which cannot

be directly exhibited in common experience. But after the maxim had come

into vogue, though late, to examine carefully beforehand all the steps that

reason purposes to take, and not to let it proceed otherwise than in the track

of a previously well considered method, then the study of the structure of the

universe took quite a different direction, and thereby attained an

incomparably happier result. The fall of a stone, the motion of a sling,

resolved into their elements and the forces that are manifested in them, and

treated mathematically, produced at last that clear and henceforward

unchangeable insight into the system of the world which, as observation is

continued, may hope always to extend itself, but need never fear to be

compelled to retreat.

              This example may suggest to us to enter on the same path in treating

of the moral capacities of our nature, and may give us hope of a like good

result. We have at hand the instances of the moral judgement of reason. By

analysing these into their elementary conceptions, and in default of

mathematics adopting a process similar to that of chemistry, the separation of

the empirical from the rational elements that may be found in them, by

repeated experiments on common sense, we may exhibit both pure, and learn

with certainty what each part can accomplish of itself, so as to prevent on the

one hand the errors of a still crude untrained judgement, and on the other

hand (what is far more necessary) the extravagances of genius, by which, as

by the adepts of the philosopher’s stone, without any methodical study or

knowledge of nature, visionary treasures are promised and the true are

thrown away. In one word, science (critically undertaken and methodically

directed) is the narrow gate that leads to the true doctrine of practical

wisdom, if we understand by this not merely what one ought to do, but what

ought to serve teachers as a guide to construct well and clearly the road to

wisdom which everyone should travel, and to secure others from going

astray. Philosophy must always continue to be the guardian of this science;

and although the public does not take any interest in its subtle investigations,

it must take an interest in the resulting doctrines, which such an examination

first puts in a clear light.

  

 

 

                     The Critique of Judgement


                                     CONTENTS

 

 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 1790.
INTRODUCTION.
I. DIVISION OF PHILOSOPHY.
II. THE REALM OF PHILOSOPHY IN GENERAL.
III. THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGEMENT AS A MEANS OF CONNECTING THE TWO PARTS OF PHILOSOPHY IN A WHOLE.
IV. JUDGEMENT AS A FACULTY BY WHICH LAWS ARE PRESCRIBED A PRIORI.
V. THE PRINCIPLE OF THE FORMAL FINALITY OF NATURE IS A TRANSCENDENTAL PRINCIPLE OF JUDGEMENT.
VI. THE ASSOCIATION OF THE FEELING OF PLEASURE WITH THE CONCEPT OF THE FINALITY OF NATURE.
VII. THE AESTHETIC REPRESENTATION OF THE FINALITY OF NATURE.
VIII. THE LOGICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE FINALITY OF NATURE.
IX. JOINDER OF THE LEGISLATIONS OF UNDERSTANDING AND REASON BY MEANS OF JUDGEMENT.
FIRST PART. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGEMENT
SECTION I:  ANALYTIC OF AESTHETIC JUDGEMENT.
BOOK I –  ANALYTIC OF THE BEAUTIFUL.
                                          6
FIRST MOMENT –  OF THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE: MOMENT OF QUALITY.
§ 1. THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS AESTHETIC.
§ 2. THE DELIGHT WHICH DETERMINES THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS INDEPENDENT OF ALL INTEREST.
§ 3. DELIGHT IN THE AGREEABLE IS COUPLED WITH INTEREST.
§ 4. DELIGHT IN THE GOOD IS COUPLED WITH INTEREST.
§ 5. COMPARISON OF THE THREE SPECIFICALLY DIFFERENT KINDS OF DELIGHT.
SECOND MOMENT –  OF THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE: MOMENT OF QUANTITY.
§ 6. THE BEAUTIFUL IS THAT WHICH, APART FROM CONCEPTS, IS REPRESENTED AS THE OBJECT OF A UNIVERSAL
DELIGHT.
§ 7. COMPARISON OF THE BEAUTIFUL WITH THE AGREEABLE AND THE GOOD BY MEANS OF THE ABOVE
CHARACTERISTIC.
§ 8. IN A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE THE UNIVERSALITY OF DELIGHT IS ONLY REPRESENTED AS SUBJECTIVE.
§ 9. INVESTIGATION OF THE QUESTION OF THE RELATIVE PRIORITY IN A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE OF THE FEELING OF
PLEASURE AND THE ESTIMATING OF THE OBJECT.
THIRD MOMENT –  OF JUDGEMENTS OF TASTE: MOMENT OF THE RELATION OF THE ENDS BROUGHT UNDER
REVIEW IN SUCH JUDGEMENTS.
§ 10. FINALITY IN GENERAL.
§ 11. THE SOLE FOUNDATION OF THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS THE FORM OF FINALITY OF AN OBJECT (OR MODE OF
REPRESENTING IT).
§ 12. THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE RESTS UPON A PRIORI GROUNDS.
§ 13. THE PURE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS INDEPENDENT OF CHARM AND EMOTION.
§ 14. EXEMPLIFICATION.
§ 15. THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS ENTIRELY INDEPENDENT OF THE CONCEPT OF PERFECTION.
§ 16. A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE BY WHICH AN OBJECT IS DESCRIBED AS BEAUTIFUL, UNDER THE CONDITION OF A
DEFINITE CONCEPT, IS NOT PURE.
§ 17. IDEAL OF BEAUTY.
FOURTH MOMENT –  OF THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE: MOMENT OF THE MODALITY OF THE DELIGHT IN THE
OBJECT.
§ 18. NATURE OF THE MODALITY IN A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE.§ 19. THE SUBJECTIVE NECESSITY ATTRIBUTED TO A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS CONDITIONED.
§ 20. THE CONDITION OF THE NECESSITY ADVANCED BY A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS THE IDEA OF A COMMON SENSE.
§ 21. HAVE WE REASON FOR PRESUPPOSING A COMMON SENSE?
§ 22. THE NECESSITY OF THE UNIVERSAL ASSENT THAT IS THOUGHT IN A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE, IS A SUBJECTIVE
NECESSITY WHICH, UNDER THE PRESUPPOSITION OF A COMMON SENSE, IS REPRESENTED AS OBJECTIVE.
GENERAL REMARK ON THE FIRST SECTION OF THE ANALYTIC.
BOOK II –  ANALYTIC OF THE SUBLIME.
§ 23. TRANSITION FROM THE FACULTY OF ESTIMATING THE BEAUTIFUL TO THAT OF ESTIMATING THE SUBLIME.
§ 24. SUBDIVISION OF AN INVESTIGATION OF THE FEELING OF THE SUBLIME.
A. THE MATHEMATICALLY SUBLIME.
§ 25. DEFINITION OF THE TERM “SUBLIME”.
§ 26. THE ESTIMATION OF THE MAGNITUDE OF NATURAL THINGS REQUISITE FOR THE IDEA OF THE SUBLIME.
§ 27. QUALITY OF THE DELIGHT IN OUR ESTIMATE OF THE SUBLIME.
B. THE DYNAMICALLY SUBLIME IN NATURE.
§ 28. NATURE AS MIGHT.
§ 29. MODALITY OF THE JUDGEMENT ON THE SUBLIME IN NATURE.
GENERAL REMARK UPON THE EXPOSITION OF AESTHETIC REFLECTIVE JUDGEMENTS.
DEDUCTION OF PURE AESTHETIC JUDGEMENTS
SECTION II: DIALECTIC OF AESTHETIC JUDGEMENT.
§ 55.
§ 56. REPRESENTATION OF THE ANTINOMY OF TASTE.
§ 57. SOLUTION OF THE ANTINOMY OF TASTE.
§ 58. THE IDEALISM OF THE FINALITY ALIKE OF NATURE AND OF ART, AS THE UNIQUE PRINCIPLE OF THE AESTHETIC
JUDGEMENT.
§ 59. BEAUTY AS THE SYMBOL OF MORALITY.
§ 60. APPENDIX. THE METHODOLOGY OF TASTE.                Part I: Critique of Aesthetic Judgement

 

                        translated by James Creed Meredith              PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 1790.

 

 

              The faculty of knowledge from a priori principles may be called pure

reason, and the general investigation into its possibility and bounds the

Critique of Pure Reason. This is permissible although “pure reason,” as was

the case with the same use of terms in our first work, is only intended to

denote reason in its theoretical employment, and although there is no desire

to bring under review its faculty as practical reason and its special principles

as such. That Critique is, then, an investigation addressed simply to our

faculty of knowing things a priori. Hence it makes our cognitive faculties its

sole concern, to the exclusion of the feeling of pleasure or displeasure and the

faculty of desire; and among the cognitive faculties it confines its attention to

understanding and its a priori principles, to the exclusion of judgement and

reason, (faculties that also belong to theoretical cognition,) because it turns

out in the sequel that there is no cognitive faculty other than understanding

capable of affording constitutive a priori principles of knowledge.

Accordingly the critique which sifts these faculties one and all, so as to try

the possible claims of each of the other faculties to a share in the clear

possession of knowledge from roots of its own, retains nothing but what

understanding prescribes a priori as a law for nature as the complex of

phenomena-the form of these being similarly furnished a priori. All other
                                                    1
pure concepts it relegates to the rank of ideas, which for our faculty of

theoretical cognition are transcendent; though they are not without their use
                                                                                  2
nor redundant, but discharge certain functions as regulative principles. For

these concepts serve partly to restrain the officious pretentions of

understanding, which, presuming on its ability to supply a priori the

conditions of the possibility of all things which it is capable of knowing,

behaves as if it had thus determined these bounds as those of the possibility

of all things generally, and partly also to lead understanding, in its study of

nature, according to a principle of completeness, unattainable as this remains

for it, and so to promote the ultimate aim of all knowledge.

        1
              [The word is defined in § 17 & § 57 Remark I. See Critique of Pure

Reason, “Of the Conceptions of Pure Reason” — Section 1 & 2: “I

understand by idea a necessary conception of reason, to which no

corresponding object can be discovered in the world of sense.” (Ibid., Section2.) “They contain a certain perfection, attainable by no possible empirical

cognition; and they give to reason a systematic unity, to which the unity of

experience attempts to approximate, but can never completely attain.” (Ibid.,

“Ideal of Pure Reason”).

        2
              *[Cf. Critique of Pure Reason, Appendix.]

              Properly, therefore, it was understanding which, so far as it contains

constitutive a priori cognitive principles, has its special realm, and one,

moreover, in our faculty of knowledge that the Critique, called in a general

way that of pure reason was intended to establish in secure but particular

possession against all other competitors. In the same way reason, which

contains constitutive a priori principles solely in respect of the faculty of

desire, gets its holding assigned to it by The Critique of Practical Reason.

              But now comes judgement, which in the order of our cognitive

faculties forms a middle term between understanding and reason. Has it also

got independent a priori principles? If so, are they constitutive, or are they

merely regulative, thus indicating no special realm? And do they give a rule a

priori to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure, as the middle term between

the faculties of cognition and desire, just as understanding prescribes laws a

priori for the former and reason for the latter? This is the topic to which the

present Critique is devoted.

              A critique of pure reason, i.e., of our faculty of judging on a priori

principles, would be incomplete if the critical examination of judgement,

which is a faculty of knowledge, and as such lays claim to independent

principles, were not dealt with separately. Still, however, its principles

cannot, in a system of pure philosophy, form a separate constituent part

intermediate between the theoretical and practical divisions, but may when

needful be annexed to one or other as occasion requires. For if such a system

is some day worked out under the general name of metaphysic-and its full

and complete execution is both possible and of the utmost importance for the

employment of reason in all departments of its activity-the critical

examination of the ground for this edifice must have been previously carried

down to the very depths of the foundations of the faculty of principles

independent of experience, lest in some quarter it might give way, and

sinking, inevitably bring with it the ruin of all.

              We may readily gather, however, from the nature of the faculty ofjudgement (whose correct employment is so necessary and universally

requisite that it is just this faculty that is intended when we speak of sound

understanding) that the discovery of a peculiar principle belonging to it-and

some such it must contain in itself a priori, for otherwise it would not be a

cognitive faculty the distinctive character of which is obvious to the most

commonplace criticism-must be a task involving considerable difficulties.

For this principle is one which must not be derived from a priori concepts,

seeing that these are the property of understanding, and judgement is only

directed to their application. It has, therefore, itself to furnish a concept, and

one from which, properly, we get no cognition of a thing, but which it can

itself employ as a rule only-but not as an objective rule to which it can adapt

its judgement, because, for that, another faculty of judgement would again be

required to enable us to decide whether the case was one for the application

of the rule or not.

              It is chiefly in those estimates that are called aesthetic, and which

relate to the beautiful and sublime, whether of nature or of art, that one meets

with the above difficulty about a principle (be it subjective or objective). And

yet the critical search for a principle of judgement in their case is the most

important item in a critique of this faculty. For, although they do not of

themselves contribute a whit to the knowledge of things, they still belong

wholly to the faculty of knowledge, and evidence an immediate bearing of

this faculty upon the feeling of pleasure or displeasure according to some a

priori principle, and do so without confusing this principle with what is

capable of being a determining ground of the faculty of desire, for the latter

has its principles a priori in concepts of reason. Logical estimates of nature,

however, stand on a different footing. They deal with cases in which

experience presents a conformity to law in things, which the understanding’s

general concept of the sensible is no longer adequate to render intelligible or

explicable, and in which judgement may have recourse to itself for a principle

of the reference of the natural thing to the unknowable supersensible and,

indeed, must employ some such principle, though with a regard only to itself

and the knowledge of nature. For in these cases the application of such an a

priori principle for the cognition of what is in the world is both possible and

necessary, and withal opens out prospects which are profitable for practical

reason. But here there is no immediate reference to the feeling of pleasure or

displeasure. But this is precisely the riddle in the principle of judgement that

necessitates a separate division for this faculty in the critique-for there wasnothing to prevent the formation of logical estimates according to concepts

(from which no immediate conclusion can ever be drawn to the feeling of

pleasure or displeasure) having been treated, with a critical statement of its

limitations, in an appendage to the theoretical part of philosophy.

              The present investigation of taste, as a faculty of aesthetic

judgement, not being undertaken with a view to the formation or culture of

taste (which will pursue its course in the future, as in the past, independently

of such inquiries), but being merely directed to its transcendental aspects, I

feel assured of its indulgent criticism in respect of any shortcomings on that

score. But in all that is relevant to the transcendental aspect it must be

prepared to stand the test of the most rigorous examination. Yet even here I

venture to hope that the difficulty of unravelling a problem so involved in its

nature may serve as an excuse for a certain amount of hardly avoidable

obscurity in its solution, provided that the accuracy of our statement of the

principle is proved with all requisite clearness. I admit that the mode of

deriving the phenomena of judgement from that principle has not all the

lucidity that is rightly demanded elsewhere, where the subject is cognition by

concepts, and that I believe I have in fact attained in the second part of this

work.

              With this, then, I bring my entire critical undertaking to a close. I

shall hasten to the doctrinal part, in order, as far as possible, to snatch from

my advancing years what time may yet be favourable to the task. It is obvious

that no separate division of doctrine is reserved for the faculty of judgement,

seeing that, with judgement, critique takes the place of theory; but, following

the division of philosophy into theoretical and practical, and of pure

philosophy in the same way, the whole ground will be covered by the

metaphysics of nature and of morals.                                INTRODUCTION.

 

 

                            I. Division of Philosophy.

 

 

              Philosophy may be said to contain the principles of the rational

cognition that concepts afford us of things (not merely, as with logic, the

principles of the form of thought in general irrespective of the objects), and,

thus interpreted, the course, usually adopted, of dividing it into theoretical

and practical is perfectly sound. But this makes imperative a specific

distinction on the part of the concepts by which the principles of this rational

cognition get their object assigned to them, for if the concepts are not distinct

they fail to justify a division, which always presupposes that the principles

belonging to the rational cognition of the several parts of the science in

question are themselves mutually exclusive.

              Now there are but two kinds of concepts, and these yield a

corresponding number of distinct principles of the possibility of their objects.

The concepts referred to are those of nature and that of freedom. By the first

of these, a theoretical cognition from a priori principles becomes possible. In

respect of such cognition, however, the second, by its very concept, imports

no more than a negative principle (that of simple antithesis), while for the

determination of the will, on the other hand, it establishes fundamental

principles which enlarge the scope of its activity, and which on that account

are called practical. Hence the division of philosophy falls properly into two

parts, quite distinct in their principles-a theoretical, as philosophy of nature,

and a practical, as philosophy of morals (for this is what the practical

legislation of reason by the concept of freedom is called). Hitherto, however,

in the application of these expressions to the division of the different

principles, and with them to the division of philosophy, a gross misuse of the

terms has prevailed; for what is practical according to concepts of nature bas

been taken as identical with what is practical according to the concept of

freedom, with the result that a division has been made under these heads of

theoretical and practical, by which, in effect, there has been no division at all

(seeing that both parts might have similar principles).              The will-for this is what is said-is the faculty of desire and, as such,

is just one of the many natural causes in the world, the one, namely, which

acts by concepts; and whatever is represented as possible (or necessary)

through the efficacy of will is called practically possible (or necessary): the

intention being to distinguish its possibility (or necessity) from the physical

possibility or necessity of an effect the causality of whose cause is not

determined to its production by concepts (but rather, as with lifeless matter,

by mechanism, and, as with the lower animals, by instinct). Now, the

question in respect of the practical faculty: whether, that is to say, the

concept, by which the causality of the will gets its rule, is a concept of nature

or of freedom, is here left quite open.

              The latter distinction, however, is essential. For, let the concept

determining the causality be a concept of nature, and then the principles are

technically-practical; but, let it be a concept of freedom, and they are

morally-practical. Now, in the division of a rational science the difference

between objects that require different principles for their cognition is the

difference on which everything turns. Hence technically-practical principles

belong to theoretical philosophy (natural science), whereas those morally-

practical alone form the second part, that is, practical philosophy (ethical

science).

              All technically-practical rules (i.e., those of art and skill generally, or

even of prudence, as a skill in exercising an influence over men and their

wills) must, so far as their principles rest upon concepts, be reckoned only as

corollaries to theoretical philosophy. For they only touch the possibility of

things according to concepts of nature, and this embraces, not alone the

means discoverable in nature for the purpose, but even the will itself (as a

faculty of desire, and consequently a natural faculty), so far as it is

determinable on these rules by natural motives. Still these practical rules are

not called laws (like physical laws), but only precepts. This is due to the fact

that the will does not stand simply under the natural concept, but also under

the concept of freedom. In the latter connection its principles are called laws,

and these principles, with the addition of what follows them, alone constitute

the second at practical part of philosophy.

              The solution of the problems of pure geometry is not allocated to a

special part of that science, nor does the art of land-surveying merit the name

of practical, in contradistinction to pure, as a second part of the generalscience of geometry, and with equally little, or perhaps less, right can the

mechanical or chemical art of experiment or of observation be ranked as a

practical part of the science of nature, or, in fine, domestic, agricultural, or

political economy, the art of social intercourse, the principles of dietetics, or

even general instruction as to the attainment of happiness, or as much as the

control of the inclinations or the restraining of the affections with a view

thereto, be denominated practical philosophy-not to mention forming these

latter in a second part of philosophy in general. For, between them all, the

above contain nothing more than rules of skill, which are thus only

technically practical-the skill being directed to producing an effect which is

possible according to natural concepts of causes and effects. As these

concepts belong to theoretical philosophy, they are subject to those precepts

as mere corollaries of theoretical philosophy (i.e., as corollaries of natural

science), and so cannot claim any place in any special philosophy called

practical. On the other hand, the morally practical precepts, which are

founded entirely on the concept of freedom, to the complete exclusion of

grounds taken from nature for the determination of the will, form quite a

special kind of precepts. These, too, like the rules obeyed by nature, are,

without qualification, called laws-though they do not, like the latter, rest on

sensible conditions, but upon a supersensible principle-and they must needs

have a separate part of philosophy allotted to them as their own,

corresponding to the theoretical part, and termed practical philosophy capable

              Hence it is evident that a complex of practical precepts furnished by

philosophy does not form a special part of philosophy, co-ordinate with the

theoretical, by reason of its precepts being practical-for that they might be,

notwithstanding that their principles were derived wholly from the theoretical

knowledge of nature (as technically-practical rules). But an adequate reason

only exists where their principle, being in no way borrowed from the concept

of nature, which is always sensibly conditioned, rests consequently on the

supersensible, which the concept of freedom alone makes cognizable by

means of its formal laws, and where, therefore, they are morally-practical, i.

e., not merely precepts and its and rules in this or that interest, but laws

independent of all antecedent reference to ends or aims.                  II. The Realm of Philosophy in General.

 

 

              The employment of our faculty of cognition from principles, and

with it philosophy, is coextensive with the applicability of a priori concepts.

              Now a division of the complex of all the objects to which those

concepts are referred for the purpose, where possible, of compassing their

knowledge, may be made according to the varied competence or

incompetence of our faculty in that connection.

              Concepts, so far as they are referred to objects apart from the

question of whether knowledge of them is possible or not, have their field,

which is determined simply by the relation in which their object stands to our

faculty of cognition in general. The part of this field in which knowledge is

possible for us is a territory (territorium) for these concepts and the requisite

cognitive faculty. The part of the territory over which they exercise

legislative authority is the realm (ditio) of these concepts, and their

appropriate cognitive faculty. Empirical concepts have, therefore, their

territory, doubtless, in nature as the complex of all sensible objects, but they

have no realm (only a dwelling-place, domicilium), for, although they are

formed according to law, they are not themselves legislative, but the rules

founded on them are empirical and, consequently, contingent.

              Our entire faculty of cognition has two realms, that of natural

concepts and that of the concept of freedom, for through both it prescribes

laws a priori. In accordance with this distinction, then, philosophy is divisible

into theoretical and practical. But the territory upon which its realm is

established, and over which it exercises its legislative authority, is still always

confined to the complex of the objects of all possible experience, taken as no

more than mere phenomena, for otherwise legislation by the understanding in

respect of them is unthinkable.

              The function of prescribing laws by means of concepts of nature is

discharged by understanding and is theoretical. That of prescribing laws by

means of the concept of freedom is discharged by reason and is merely

practical. It is only in the practical sphere that reason can prescribe laws; inrespect of theoretical knowledge (of nature) it can only (as by the

understanding advised in the law) deduce from given logical consequences,

which still always remain restricted to nature. But we cannot reverse this and

say that where rules are practical reason is then and there legislative, since the

rules might be technically practical.

              Understanding and reason, therefore, have two distinct jurisdictions

over one and the same territory of experience. But neither can interfere with

the other. For the concept of freedom just as little disturbs the legislation of

nature, as the concept of nature influences legislation through the concept of

freedom. That it is possible for us at least to think without contradiction of

both these jurisdictions, and their appropriate faculties, as co-existing in the

same subject, was shown by the Critique of Pure Reason, since it disposed of

the objections on the other side by detecting their dialectical illusion.

              Still, how does it happen that these two different realms do not form

one realm, seeing that, while they do not limit each other in their legislation,

they continually do so in their effects in the sensible world? The explanation

lies in the fact that the concept of nature represents its objects in intuition

doubtless, yet not as things in-themselves, but as mere phenomena, whereas

the concept of freedom represents in its object what is no doubt a thing-in-

itself, but it does not make it intuitable, and further that neither the one nor

the other is capable, therefore, of furnishing a theoretical cognition of its

object (or even of the thinking subject) as a thing-in-itself, or, as this would

be, of the supersensible idea of which has certainly to be introduced as the

basis of the possibility of all those objects of experience, although it cannot

itself ever be elevated or extended into a cognition.

              Our entire cognitive faculty is, therefore, presented with an

unbounded, but, also, inaccessible field-the field of the supersensible-in

which we seek in vain for a territory, and on which, therefore, we can have

no realm for theoretical cognition, be it for concepts of understanding or of

reason. This field we must indeed occupy with ideas in the interest as well of

the theoretical as the practical employment of reason, but, in connection with

the laws arising from the concept of freedom, we cannot procure for these

ideas any but practical reality, which, accordingly, fails to advance our

theoretical cognition one step towards the supersensible.

              Albeit, then, between the realm of the natural concept, as thesensible, and the realm of the concept of freedom, as the supersensible, there

is a great gulf fixed, so that it is not possible to pass from the to the latter (by

means of the theoretical employment of reason), just as if they were so many

separate worlds, the first of which is powerless to exercise influence on the

second: still the latter is meant to influence the former-that is to say, the

concept of freedom is meant to actualize in the sensible world the end

proposed by its laws; and nature must consequently also be capable of being

regarded in such a way that in the conformity to law of its form it at least

harmonizes with the possibility of the ends to be effectuated in it according to

the laws of freedom. There must, therefore, be a ground of the unity of the

supersensible that lies at the basis of nature, with what the concept of

freedom contains in a practical way, and although the concept of this ground

neither theoretically nor practically attains to a knowledge of it, and so has no

peculiar realm of its own, still it renders possible the transition from the mode

of thought according to the principles of the one to that according to the

principles of the other.III. The Critique of Judgement as a means of connecting the two Parts of

                                Philosophy in a whole.

 

 

              The critique which deals with what our cognitive faculties are

capable of yielding a priori has properly speaking no realm in respect of

objects; for it is not a doctrine, its sole business being to investigate whether,

having regard to the general bearings of our faculties, a doctrine is possible

by their means, and if so, how. Its field extends to all their pretentions, with a

view to confining them within their legitimate bounds. But what is shut out of

the division of philosophy may still be admitted as a principal part into the

general critique of our faculty of pure cognition, in the event, namely, of its

containing principles which are not in themselves available either for

theoretical or practical employment.

              Concepts of nature contain the ground of all theoretical cognition a

priori and rest, as we saw, upon the legislative authority of understanding.

The concept of freedom contains the ground of all sensuously unconditioned

practical precepts a priori, and rests upon that of reason. Both faculties,

therefore, besides their application in point of logical form to principles of

whatever origin, have, in addition, their own peculiar jurisdiction in the

matter of their content, and so, there being no further (a priori) jurisdiction

above them, the division of philosophy into theoretical and practical is

justified.

              But there is still further in the family of our higher cognitive

faculties a middle term between understanding and reason. This is judgement,

of which we may reasonably presume by analogy that it may likewise

contain, if not a special authority to prescribe laws, still a principle peculiar to

itself upon which laws are sought, although one merely subjective a priori.

This principle, even if it has no field of objects appropriate to it as its realm,

may still have some territory or other with a certain character, for which just

this very principle alone may be valid.

              But in addition to the above considerations there is yet (to judge by

analogy) a further ground, upon which judgement may be brought into line

with another arrangement of our powers of representation, and one thatappears to be of even greater importance than that of its kinship with the

family of cognitive faculties. For all faculties of the soul, or capacities, are

reducible to three, which do not admit of any further derivation from a

common ground: the faculty of knowledge, the feeling of pleasure or
                                          3
displeasure, and the faculty of desire. For the faculty of cognition

understanding alone is legislative, if (as must be the case where it is

considered on its own account free of confusion with the faculty of desire)

this faculty, as that of theoretical cognition, is referred to nature, in respect of

which alone (as phenomenon) it is possible for us to prescribe laws by means

of a priori concepts of nature, which are properly pure concepts of

understanding. For the faculty of desire, as a higher faculty operating under

the concept of freedom, only reason (in which alone this concept has a place)

prescribes laws a priori. Now between the faculties of knowledge and desire

stands the feeling of pleasure, just as judgement is intermediate between

understanding and reason. Hence we may, provisionally at least, assume that

judgement likewise contains an a priori principle of its own, and that, since

pleasure or displeasure is necessarily combined with the faculty of desire (be

it antecedent to its principle, as with the lower desires, or, as with the higher,

only supervening upon its determination by the moral law), it will effect a

transition from the faculty of pure knowledge, i.e., from the realm of

concepts of nature, to that of the concept of freedom, just as i its logical

employment it makes possible the transition from understanding to reason.

        3
              Where one has reason to suppose that a relation subsists between

concepts that are used as empirical principles and the faculty of pure

cognition a priori, it is worth while attempting, in consideration of this

connection, to give them a transcendental definition-a definition, that is, by

pure categories, so far as these by themselves adequately indicate the

distinction of the concept in question from others. This course follows that of

the mathematician, who leaves the empirical data of his problem

indeterminate, and only brings their relation in pure synthesis under the

concepts of pure arithmetic, and thus generalizes his solution.-I have been

taken to task for adopting a similar procedure and fault had been found with

my definition of the faculty of desire as a faculty which by means of its

representations is the cause of the cause of the actuality of the objects of

those representations: for mere wishes would still be desires, and yet in their

case every one is ready to abandon all claim to being able by means of them

alone to call their object into existence. — But this proves no more than thepresence of desires in man by which he is in contradiction with himself. For

in such a case he seeks the production of the object by means of his

representation alone, without any hope of its being effectual, since he is

conscious that his mechanical powers (if I may so call those which are not

psychological), which would have to be determined by that representation,

are either unequal to the task of realizing the object (by the intervention of

means, therefore) or else are addressed to what is quite impossible, as, for

example, to undo the past (O mihi praeteritos, etc.) or, to be able to annihilate

the interval that, with intolerable delay, divides us from the wished for

moment. — Now, conscious as we are in such fantastic desires of the

inefficiency of our representations (or even of their futility), as causes of their

objects, there is still involved in every wish a reference of the same as cause,

and therefore the representation of its causality, and this is especially

discernible where the wish, as longing, is an affection. For such affections,

since they dilate the heart and render it inert and thus exhaust its powers,

show that a strain is kept on being exerted and re-exerted on these powers by

the representations, but that the mind is allowed continually to relapse and get

languid upon recognition of the impossibility before it. Even prayers for the

aversion of great, and, so far as we can see, inevitable evils, and many

superstitious means for attaining ends impossible of attainment by natural

means, prove the causal reference of representations to their objects-a

causality which not even the consciousness of inefficiency for producing the

effect can deter from straining towards it. But why our nature should be

furnished with a propensity to consciously vain desires is a teleological

problem of anthropology. It would seem that were we not to be determined to

the exertion of our power before we had assured ourselves of the efficiency

of our faculty for producing an object, our power would remain to a large

extent unused. For as a rule we only first learn to know our powers by

making trial of them. This deceit of vain desires is therefore only the result of

a beneficent disposition in our nature.

              Hence, despite the fact of philosophy being only divisible into two

principal parts, the theoretical and the practical, and despite the fact of all that

we may have to say of the special principles of judgement having to be

assigned to its theoretical part, i.e., to rational cognition according to

concepts of nature: still the Critique of Pure Reason, which must settle this

whole question before the above system is taken in hand, so as to substantiate

its possibility, consists of three parts: the Critique of pure understanding, ofpure judgement, and of pure reason, which faculties are called pure on the

ground of their being legislative a priori.  IV. Judgement as a Faculty by which Laws are prescribed a priori.

 

 

              Judgement in general is the faculty of thinking the particular as

contained under the universal. If the universal (the rule, principle, or law) is

given, then the judgement which subsumes the particular under it is

determinant. This is so even where such a judgement is transcendental and, as

such, provides the conditions a priori in conformity with which alone

subsumption under that universal can be effected. If, however, only the

particular is given and the universal has to be found for it, then the judgement

is simply reflective.

              The determinant judgement determines under universal

transcendental laws furnished by understanding and is subsumptive only; the

law is marked out for it a priori, and it has no need to devise a law for its own

guidance to enable it to subordinate the particular in nature to the universal.

But there are such manifold forms of nature, so many modifications, as it

were, of the universal transcendental concepts of nature, left undetermined by

the laws furnished by pure understanding a priori as above mentioned, and

for the reason that these laws only touch the general possibility of a nature (as

an object of sense), that there must needs also be laws in this behalf. These

laws, being empirical, may be contingent as far as the light of our

understanding goes, but still, if they are to be called laws (as the concept of a

nature requires), they must be regarded as necessary on a principle, unknown

though it be to us, of the unity of the manifold. The reflective judgement

which is compelled to ascend from the particular in nature to the universal

stands, therefore, in need of a principle. This principle it cannot borrow from

experience, because what it has to do is to establish just the unity of all

empirical principles under higher, though likewise empirical, principles, and

thence the possibility of the systematic subordination of higher and lower.

Such a transcendental principle, therefore, the reflective judgement can only

give as a law from and to itself. It cannot derive it from any other quarter (as

it would then be a determinant judgement). Nor can it prescribe it to nature,

for reflection on the laws of nature adjusts itself to nature, and not nature to

the conditions according to which we strive to obtain a concept of it-a

concept that is quite contingent in respect of these conditions.              Now the principle sought can only be this: as universal laws of

nature have their ground in our understanding, which prescribes them to

nature (though only according to the universal concept of it as nature),

particular empirical laws must be regarded, in respect of that which is left

undetermined in them by these universal laws, according to a unity such as

they would have if an understanding (though it be not ours) had supplied

them for the benefit of our cognitive faculties, so as to render possible a

system of experience according to particular natural laws. This is not to be

taken as implying that such an understanding must be actually assumed (for it

is only the reflective judgement which avails itself of this idea as a principle

for the purpose of reflection and not for determining anything); but this

faculty rather gives by this means a law to itself alone and not to nature.

              Now the concept of an object, so far as it contains at the same time

the ground of the actuality of this object, is called its end, and the agreement

of a thing with that constitution of things which is only possible according to

ends, is called the finality of its form. Accordingly the principle of

judgement, in respect of the form of the things of nature under empirical laws

generally, is the finality of nature in its multiplicity. In other words, by this

concept nature is represented as if an understanding contained the ground of

the unity of the manifold of its empirical laws.

              The finality of nature is, therefore, a particular a priori concept,

which bas its origin solely in the reflective judgement. For we cannot ascribe

to the products of nature anything like a reference of nature in them to ends,

but we can only make use of this concept to reflect upon them in respect of

the nexus of phenomena in nature-a nexus given according to empirical laws.

Furthermore, this concept is entirely different from practical finality (in

human art or even morals), though it is doubtless thought after this analogy.  V. The Principle of the formal finality of Nature is a transcendental

                              Principle of Judgement.

 

 

              A transcendental principle is one through which we represent a

priori the universal condition under which alone things can become objects of

our cognition generally. A principle, on the other band, is called metaphysical

where it represents a priori the condition under which alone objects whose

concept has to be given empirically may become further determined a priori.

Thus the principle of the cognition of bodies as substances, and as changeable

substances, is transcendental where the statement is that their change must

have a cause: but it is metaphysical where it asserts that their change must

have an external cause. For, in the first case, bodies need only be thought

through ontological predicates (pure concepts of understanding) e.g., as

substance, to enable the proposition to be cognized a priori; whereas, in the

second case, the empirical concept of a body (as a movable thing in space)

must be introduced to support the proposition, although, once this is done, it

may be seen quite a priori that the latter predicate (movement only by means

of an external cause) applies to body. In this way, as I shall show presently,

the principle of the finality of nature (in the multiplicity of its empirical laws)

is a transcendental principle. For the concept of objects, regarded as standing

under this principle, is only the pure concept of objects of possible empirical

cognition generally, and involves nothing empirical. On the other band, the

principle of practical finality, implied in the idea of the determination of a

free will, would be a metaphysical principle, because the concept of a faculty

of desire, as will, has to be given empirically, i.e., is not included among

transcendental predicates. But both these principles are, none the less, not

empirical, but a priori principles; because no further experience is required

for the synthesis of the predicate with the empirical concept of the subject of

their judgements, but it may be apprehended quite a priori.

              That the concept of a finality of nature belongs to transcendental

principles is abundantly evident from the maxims of judgement upon which

we rely a priori in the investigation of nature, and which yet have to do with

no more than the possibility of experience, and consequently of the

knowledge of nature-but of nature not merely in a general way, but asdetermined by a manifold of particular laws. These maxims crop up

frequently enough in the course of this science, though only in a scattered

way. They are aphorisms of metaphysical wisdom, making their appearance

in a number of rules the necessity of which cannot be demonstrated from

concepts. “Nature takes the shortest way (lex parsimoniae); yet it makes no

leap, either in the sequence of its changes, or in the juxtaposition of

specifically different forms (lex continui in natura); its vast variety in

empirical laws is for all that, unity under a few principles (principia praeter

necessitatem non sunt multiplicanda)”; and so forth.

              If we propose to assign the origin of these elementary rules, and

attempt to do so on psychological lines, we go straight in the teeth of their

sense. For they tell us, not what happens, i.e., according to what rule our

powers of judgement actually discharge their functions, and how we judge,

but how we ought to judge; and we cannot get this logical objective necessity

where the principles are merely empirical. Hence the finality of nature for our

cognitive faculties and their employment, which manifestly radiates from

them, is a transcendental principle of judgements, and so needs also a

transcendental deduction, by means of which the ground for this mode of

judging must be traced to the a priori sources of knowledge.

              Now, looking at the grounds of the possibility of an experience, the

first thing, of course, that meets us is something necessary-namely, the

universal laws apart from which nature in general (as an object of sense)

cannot be thought. These rest on the categories, applied to the formal

conditions of all intuition possible for us, so far as it is also given a priori.

Under these laws, judgement is determinant; for it bas nothing else to do than

to subsume under given laws. For instance, understanding says: all change

has its cause (universal law of nature); transcendental judgement has nothing

further to do than to furnish a priori the condition of subsumption under the

concept of understanding placed before it: this we get in the succession of the

determinations of one and the same thing. Now for nature in general, as an

object of possible experience, that law is cognized as absolutely necessary.

But besides this formal time-condition, the objects of empirical cognition are

determined, or, so far as we can judge a priori, are determinable, in divers

ways, so that specifically differentiated natures, over and above what they

have in common as things of nature in general, are further capable of being

causes in an infinite variety of ways; and each of these modes must, on theconcept of a cause in general, have its rule, which is a law, and, consequently,

imports necessity: although owing to the constitution and limitations of our

faculties of cognition we may entirely fail to see this necessity. Accordingly,

in respect of nature’s merely empirical laws, we must think in nature a

possibility of an endless multiplicity of empirical laws, which yet are

contingent so far as our insight goes, i.e., cannot be cognized a priori. In

respect of these we estimate the unity of nature according to empirical laws,

and the possibility of the unity of experience, as a system according to

empirical laws, to be contingent. But, now, such a unity is one which must be

necessarily presupposed and assumed, as otherwise we should not have a

thoroughgoing connection of empirical cognition in a whole of experience.

For the universal laws of nature, while providing, certainly, for such a

connection among things generically, as things of nature in general, do not do

so for them specifically as such particular things of nature. Hence judgement

is compelled, for its own guidance, to adopt it as an a priori principle, that

what is for human insight contingent in the particular (empirical) laws of

nature contains nevertheless unity of law in the synthesis of its manifold in an

intrinsically possible experience-unfathomable, though still thinkable, as such

unity may, no doubt, be for us. Consequently, as the unity of law in a

synthesis, which is cognized by us in obedience to a necessary aim (a need of

understanding), though recognized at the same time as contingent, is

represented as a finality of objects (here of nature), so judgement, which, in

respect of things under possible (yet to be discovered) empirical laws, is

merely reflective, must regard nature in respect of the latter according to a

principle of finality for our cognitive faculty, which then finds expression in

the above maxims of judgement. Now this transcendental concept of a

finality of nature is neither a concept of nature nor of freedom, since it

attributes nothing at all to the object, i.e., to nature, but only represents the

unique mode in which we must proceed in our reflection upon the objects of

nature with a view to getting a thoroughly interconnected whole of

experience, and so is a subjective principle, i.e., maxim, of judgement. For

this reason, too, just as if it were a lucky chance that favoured us, we are

rejoiced (properly speaking, relieved of a want) where we meet with such

systematic unity under merely empirical laws: although we must necessarily

assume the presence of such a unity, apart from any ability on our part to

apprehend or prove its existence.

              In order to convince ourselves of the correctness of this deduction ofthe concept before us, and the necessity of assuming it as a transcendental

principle of cognition, let us just bethink ourselves of the magnitude of the

task. We have to form a connected experience from given perceptions of a

nature containing a maybe endless multiplicity of empirical laws, and this

problem has its seat a priori in our understanding. This understanding is no

doubt a priori in possession of universal laws of nature, apart from which

nature would be incapable of being an object of experience at all. But over

and above this it needs a certain order of nature in its particular rules which

are only capable of being brought to its knowledge empirically, and which, so

far as it is concerned are contingent. These rules, without which we would

have no means of advance from the universal analogy of a possible

experience in general to a particular, must be regarded by understanding as

laws, i.e., as necessary-for otherwise they would not form an order of nature-

though it be unable to cognize or ever get an insight into their necessity.

Albeit, then, it can determine nothing a priori in respect of these (objects), it

must, in pursuit of such empirical so-called laws, lay at the basis of all

reflection upon them an a priori principle, to the effect, namely, that a

cognizable order of nature is possible according to them. A principle of this

kind is expressed in the following propositions. There is in nature a

subordination of genera and species comprehensible by us: Each of these

genera again approximates to the others on a common principle, so that a

transition may be possible from one to the other, and thereby to a higher

genus: While it seems at outset unavoidable for our understanding to assume

for the specific variety of natural operations a like number of various kinds of

causality, yet these may all be reduced to a small number of principles, the

quest for which is our business; and so forth. This adaptation of nature to our

cognitive faculties is presupposed a priori by judgement on behalf of its

reflection upon it according to empirical laws. But understanding all the

while recognizes it objectively as contingent, and it is merely judgement that

attributes it to nature as transcendental finality, i.e., a finality in respect of the

subject’s faculty of cognition. For, were it not for this presupposition, we

should have no order of nature in accordance with empirical laws, and,

consequently, no guiding-thread for an experience that has to be brought to

bear upon these in all their variety, or for an investigation of them.

              For it is quite conceivable that, despite all the uniformity of the

things of nature according to universal laws, without which we would not

have the form of general empirical knowledge at all, the specific variety ofthe empirical laws of nature, with their effects, might still be so great as to

make it impossible for our understanding to discover in nature an intelligible

order, to divide its products into genera and species so as to avail ourselves of

the principles of explanation and comprehension of one for explaining and

interpreting another, and out of material coming to hand in such confusion

(properly speaking only infinitely multiform and ill-adapted to our power-of

apprehension) to make a consistent context of experience.

              Thus judgement, also, is equipped with an a priori principle for the

possibility of nature, but only in a subjective respect. By means of this it

prescribes a law, not to nature (as autonomy), but to itself (as heautonomy),

to guide its reflection upon nature. This law may be called the law of the

specification of nature in respect of its empirical laws. It is not one cognized

a priori in nature, but judgement adopts it in the interests of a natural order,

cognizable by our understanding, in the division which it makes of nature’s

universal laws when it seeks to subordinate to them a variety of particular

laws. So when it is said that nature specifies its universal laws on a principle

of finality for our cognitive faculties, i.e., of suitability for the human

understanding and its necessary function of finding the universal for the

particular presented to it by perception, and again for varieties (which are, of

course, common for each species) connection in the unity of principle, we do

not thereby either prescribe a law to nature, or learn one from it by

observation-although the principle in question may be confirmed by this

means. For it is not a principle of the determinant but merely of the reflective

judgement. All that is intended is that, no matter what is the order and

disposition of nature in respect of its universal laws, we must investigate its

empirical laws throughout on that principle and the maxims founded thereon,

because only so far as that principle applies can we make any headway in the

employment of our understanding in experience, or gain knowledge.VI. The Association of the Feeling of Pleasure with the Concept of the

                                  Finality of Nature.

 

 

              The conceived harmony of nature in the manifold of its particular

laws with our need of finding universality of principles for it must, so far as

our insight goes, be deemed contingent, but withal indispensable for the

requirements of our understanding, and, consequently, a finality by which

nature is in accord with our aim, but only so far as this is directed to

knowledge. The universal laws of understanding, which are equally laws of

nature, are, although arising from spontaneity, just as necessary for nature as

the laws of motion applicable to matter. Their origin does not presuppose any

regard to our cognitive faculties, seeing that it is only by their means that we

first come by any conception of the meaning of a knowledge of things (of

nature), and they of necessity apply to nature as object of our cognition in

general. But it is contingent, so far as we can see, that the order of nature in

its particular laws, with their wealth of at least possible variety and

heterogeneity transcending all our powers of comprehension, should still in

actual fact be commensurate with these powers. To find out this order is an

undertaking on the part of our understanding, which pursues it with a regard

to a necessary end of its own, that, namely, of introducing into nature unity of

principle. This end must, then, be attributed to nature by judgement, since no

law can be here prescribed to it by understanding.

              The attainment of every aim is coupled with a feeling of pleasure.

Now where such attainment has for its condition a representation a priori-as

here a principle for the reflective judgement in general-the feeling of pleasure

also is determined by a ground which is a priori and valid for all men: and

that, too, merely by virtue of the reference of the object to our faculty of

cognition. As the concept of finality here takes no cognizance whatever of the

faculty of desire, it differs entirely from all practical finality of nature.

              As a matter of fact, we do not, and cannot, find in ourselves the

slightest effect on the feeling of pleasure from the coincidence of perceptions

with the laws in accordance with the universal concepts of nature (the

categories), since in their case understanding necessarily follows the bent ofits own nature without ulterior aim. But, while this is so, the discovery, on the

other hand, that two or more empirical heterogeneous laws of nature are

allied under one principle that embraces them both, is the ground of a very

appreciable pleasure, often even of admiration, and such, too, as does not

wear off even though we are already familiar enough with its object. It is true

that we no longer notice any decided pleasure in the comprehensibility of

nature, or in the unity of its divisions into genera and species, without which

the empirical concepts, that afford us our knowledge of nature in its particular

laws, would not be possible. Still it is certain that the pleasure appeared in

due course, and only by reason of the most ordinary experience being

impossible without it, bas it become gradually fused with simple cognition,

and no longer arrests particular attention. Something, then, that makes us

attentive in our estimate of nature to its finality for our understanding-an

endeavour to bring, where possible, its heterogeneous laws under higher,

though still always empirical, laws-is required, in order that, on meeting with

success, pleasure may be felt in this their accord with our cognitive faculty,

which accord is regarded by us as purely contingent. As against this, a

representation of nature would be altogether displeasing to us, were we to be

forewarned by it that, on the least investigation carried beyond the

commonest experience, we should come in contact with such a heterogeneity

of its laws as would make the union of its particular laws under universal

empirical laws impossible for our understanding. For this would conflict with

the principle of the subjectively final specification of nature in its genera, and

with our own reflective judgement in respect thereof.

              Yet this presupposition of judgement is so indeterminate on the

question of the extent of the prevalence of that ideal finality of nature for our

cognitive faculties, that if we are told that a more searching or enlarged

knowledge of nature, derived from observation, must eventually bring us into

contact with a multiplicity of laws that no human understanding could reduce

to a principle, we can reconcile ourselves to the thought. But still we listen

more gladly to others who hold out to us the hope that the more intimately we

come to know the secrets of nature, or the better we are able to compare it

with external members as yet unknown to us, the more simple shall we find it

in its principles, and the further our experience advances the more

harmonious shall we find it in the apparent heterogeneity of its empirical

laws. For our judgement makes it imperative upon us to proceed on the

principle of the conformity of nature to our faculty of cognition, so far as thatprinciple extends, without deciding-for the rule is not given to us by a

determinant judgement-whether bounds are anywhere set to it or not. For,

while in respect of the rational employment of our cognitive faculty, bounds

may be definitely determined, in the empirical field no such determination of

bounds is possible.      VII. The Aesthetic Representation of the Finality of Nature.

 

 

              That which is purely subjective in the representation of an object,

i.e., what constitutes its reference to the subject, not to the object, is its

aesthetic quality. On the other hand, that which in such a representation

serves, or is available, for the determination of the object (for or purpose of

knowledge), is its logical validity. In the cognition of an object of sense, both

sides are presented conjointly. In the sense-representation of external things,

the quality of space in which we intuite them is the merely subjective side of

my representation of them (by which what the things are in themselves as

objects is left quite open), and it is on account of that reference that the object

in being intuited in space is also thought merely as phenomenon. But despite

its purely subjective quality, space is still a constituent of the knowledge of

things as phenomena. Sensation (here external) also agrees in expressing a

merely subjective side of our representations of external things, but one

which is properly their matter (through which we are given something with

real existence), just as space is the mere a priori form of the possibility of

their intuition; and so sensation is, none the less, also employed in the

cognition of external objects.

              But that subjective side of a representation which is incapable of

becoming an element of cognition, is the pleasure or displeasure connected

with it; for through it I cognize nothing in the object of the representation,

although it may easily be the result of the operation of some cognition or

other. Now the finality of a thing, so far as represented in our perception of it,

is in no way a quality of the object itself (for a quality of this kind is not one

that can be perceived), although it may be inferred from a cognition of things.

In the finality, therefore, which is prior to the cognition of an object, and

which, even apart from any desire to make use of the representation of it for

the purpose of a cognition, is yet immediately connected with it, we have the

subjective quality belonging to it that is incapable of becoming a constituent

of knowledge. Hence we only apply the term final to the object on account of

its representation being immediately coupled with the feeling of pleasure: and

this representation itself is an aesthetic representation of the finality. The only

question is whether such a representation of finality exists at all.              If pleasure is connected with the mere apprehension (apprehensio) of

the form of an object of intuition, apart from any reference it may have to a

concept for the purpose of a definite cognition, this does not make the

representation referable to the object, but solely to the subject. In such a case,

the pleasure can express nothing but the conformity of the object to the

cognitive faculties brought into play in the reflective judgement, and so far as

they are in play, and hence merely a subjective formal finality of the object.

For that apprehension of forms in the imagination can never take place

without the reflective judgement, even when it has no intention of so doing,

comparing them at least with its faculty of referring intuitions to concepts. If,

now, in this comparison, imagination (as the faculty of intuitions a priori) is

undesignedly brought into accord with understanding (as the faculty of

concepts), by means of a given representation, and a feeling of pleasure is

thereby aroused, then the object must be regarded as final for the reflective

judgement. A judgement of this kind is an aesthetic judgement upon the

finality of the object, which does not depend upon any present concept of the

object, and does not provide one. When the form of an object (as opposed to

the matter of its representation, as sensation) is, in the mere act of reflecting

upon it, without regard to any concept to be obtained from it, estimated as the

ground of a pleasure in the representation of such an object, then this pleasure

is also judged to be combined necessarily with the representation of it, and so

not merely for the subject apprehending this form, but for all in general who

pass judgement. The object is then called beautiful; and the faculty of judging

by means of such a pleasure (and so also with universal validity) is called

taste. For since the ground of the pleasure is made to reside merely in the

form of the object for reflection generally, consequently not in any sensation

of the object, and without any reference, either, to any concept that might

have something or other in view, it is with the conformity to law in the

empirical employment of judgement generally (unity of imagination and

understanding) in the subject, and with this alone, that the representation of

the object in reflection, the conditions of which are universally valid a priori,

accords. And, as this accordance of the object with the faculties of the subject

is contingent, it gives rise to a representation of a finality on the part of the

object in respect of the cognitive faculties of the subject.

              Here, now, is a pleasure which-as is the case with all pleasure or

displeasure that is not brought about through the agency of the concept of

freedom (i.e., through the antecedent determination of the higher faculty ofdesire by means of pure reason)-no concepts could ever enable us to regard as

necessarily connected with the representation of an object. It must always be

only through reflective perception that it is cognized as conjoined with this

representation. As with all empirical judgements, it is, consequently, unable

to announce objective necessity or lay claim to a priori validity. But, then, the

judgement of taste in fact only lays claim, like every other empirical

judgement, to be valid for every one, and, despite its inner contingency this is

always possible. The only point that is strange or out of the way about it is

that it is not an empirical concept, but a feeling of pleasure (and so not a

concept at all), that is yet exacted from every one by the judgement of taste,

just as if it were a predicate united to the cognition of the object, and that is

meant to be conjoined with its representation.

              A singular empirical judgement, as for example, the judgement of

one who perceives a movable drop of water in a rock-crystal, rightly looks to

every one finding the fact as stated, since the judgement has been formed

according to the universal conditions of the determinant judgement under the

laws of a possible experience generally. In the same way, one who feels

pleasure in simple reflection on the form of an object, without having any

concept in mind, rightly lays claim to the agreement of every one, although

this judgement is empirical and a singular judgement. For the ground of this

pleasure is found in the universal, though subjective, condition of reflective

judgements, namely the final harmony of an object (be it a product of nature

or of art) with the mutual relation of the faculties of cognition (imagination

and understanding), which are requisite for every empirical cognition. The

pleasure in judgements of taste is, therefore, dependent doubtless on an

empirical representation, and cannot be united a priori to any concept (one

cannot determine a priori what object will be in accordance with taste or not-

one must find out the object that is so); but then it is only made the

determining ground of this judgement by virtue of our consciousness of its

resting simply upon reflection and the universal, though only subjective,

conditions of the harmony of that reflection with the knowledge of objects

generally, for which the form of the object is final.

              This is why judgements of taste are subjected to a critique in respect

of their possibility. For their possibility presupposes an a priori principle,

although that principle is neither a cognitive principle for understanding nor a

practical principle for the will, and is thus in no way determinant a priori.              Susceptibility to pleasure arising from reflection on the forms of

things (whether of nature or of art) betokens, however, not only a finality on

the part of objects in their relation to the reflective judgement in the subject,

in accordance with the concept of nature, but also, conversely, a finality on

the part of the subject, answering to the concept of freedom, in respect of the

form, or even formlessness of objects. The result is that the aesthetic

judgement refers not merely, as a judgement of taste, to the beautiful, but

also, as springing from a higher intellectual feeling, to the sublime. Hence the

above-mentioned Critique of Aesthetic judgement must be divided on these

lines into two main parts.        VIII. The Logical Representation of the Finality of Nature.

 

 

              There are two ways in which finality may be represented in an object

given in experience. It may be made to turn on what is purely subjective. In

this case the object is considered in respect of its form as present in

apprehension (apprehensio) prior to any concept; and the harmony of this

form with the cognitive faculties, promoting the combination of the intuition

with concepts for cognition generally, is represented as a finality of the form

of the object. Or, on the other hand, the representation of finality may be

made to turn on what is objective, in which case it is represented as the

harmony of the form of the object with the possibility of the thing itself

according to an antecedent concept of it containing the ground of this form.

We have seen that the representation of the former kind of finality rests on

the pleasure immediately felt in mere reflection on the form of the object. But

that of the latter kind of finality, as it refers the form of the object, not to the

subject’s cognitive faculties engaged in its apprehension, but to a definite

cognition of the object under a given concept, bas nothing to do with a

feeling of pleasure in things, but only understanding and its estimate of them.

Where the concept of an object is given, the function of judgement, in its

employment of that concept for cognition, consists in presentation (exhibitio),

i. e., in placing beside the concept an intuition corresponding to it. Here it

may be that our own imagination is the agent employed, as in the case of art,

where we realize a preconceived concept of an object which we set before

ourselves as an end. Or the agent may be nature in its technic (as in the case

of organic bodies), when we read into it our own concept of an end to assist

our estimate of its product. In this case what is represented is not a mere

finality of nature in the form of the thing, but this very product as a natural

end. Although our concept that nature, in its empirical laws, is subjectively

final in its forms is in no way a concept of the object, but only a principle of

judgement for providing itself with concepts in the vast multiplicity of nature,

so that it may be able to take its bearings, yet, on the analogy of an end, as it

were a regard to our cognitive faculties is here attributed to nature. Natural

beauty may, therefore, be looked on as the presentation of the concept of

formal, i. e., merely subjective, finality and natural ends as the presentation ofthe concept of a real, i.e., objective, finality. The former of these we estimate

by taste (aesthetically by means of the feeling of pleasure), the latter by

understanding and reason (logically according to concepts).

              On these considerations is based the division of the Critique of

judgement into that of the aesthetic and the teleological judgement. By the

first is meant the faculty of estimating formal finality (otherwise called

subjective) by the feeling of pleasure or displeasure, by the second, the

faculty of estimating the real finality (objective) of nature by understanding

and, reason.

              In a Critique of judgement the part dealing with aesthetic judgement

is essentially relevant, as it alone contains a principle introduced by

judgement completely a priori as the basis of its reflection upon nature. This

is the principle of nature’s formal finality for our cognitive faculties in its

particular (empirical) laws-a principle without which understanding could not

feel itself at home in nature: whereas no reason is assignable a priori, nor is

so much as the possibility of one apparent from the concept of nature as an

object of experience, whether in its universal or in its particular aspects, why

there should be objective ends of nature, i. e., things only possible as natural

ends. But it is only judgement that, without being itself possessed a priori of a

principle in that behalf, in actually occurring cases (of certain products)

contains the rule for making use of the concept of ends in the interest of

reason, after that the above transcendental principle has already prepared

understanding to apply to nature the concept of an end (at least in respect of

its form).

              But the transcendental principle by which a finality of nature in its

subjective reference to our cognitive faculties, is represented in the form of a

thing as a principle of its estimation, leaves quite undetermined the question

of where and in what cases we have to make our estimate of the object as a

product according to a principle of finality, instead of simply according to

universal laws of nature. It resigns to the aesthetic judgement the task of

deciding the conformity of this product (in its form) to our cognitive faculties

as a question of taste (a matter which the aesthetic judgement decides, not by

any harmony with concepts, but by feeling). On the other hand, judgement as

teleologically employed assigns the determinate conditions under which

something (e. g., an organized body) is to be estimated after the idea of an

end of nature. But it can adduce no principle from the concept of nature, as anobject of experience, to give it its authority to ascribe a priori to nature a

reference to ends, or even only indeterminately to assume them from actual

experience in the case of such products. The reason of this is that, in order to

be able merely empirically to cognize objective finality in a certain object,

many particular experiences must be collected and reviewed under the unity

of their principle. Aesthetic judgement is, therefore, a special faculty of

estimating according to a rule, but not according to concepts. The teleological

is not a special faculty, but only general reflective judgement proceeding, as

it always does in theoretical cognition, according to concepts, but in respect

of certain objects of nature, following special principles-those, namely, of a

judgement that is merely reflective and does not determine objects. Hence, as

regards its application, it belongs to the theoretical part of philosophy, and on

account of its special principles, which are not determinant, as principles

belonging to doctrine have to be, it must also form a special part of the

Critique. On the other hand, the aesthetic judgement contributes nothing to

the cognition of its objects. Hence it must only be allocated to the Critique of

the judging subject and of its faculties of knowledge so far as these are

capable of possessing a priori principles, be their use (theoretical or practical)

otherwise what it may-a Critique which is the propaedeutic of all philosophy.IX. Joinder of the Legislations of Understanding and Reason by means

                                    of Judgement.

 

 

              Understanding prescribes laws a priori for nature as an object of

sense, so that we may have a theoretical knowledge of it in a possible

experience. Reason prescribes laws a priori for freedom and its peculiar

causality as the supersensible in the subject, so that we may have a purely

practical knowledge. The realm of the concept of nature under the one

legislation, and that of the concept of freedom under the other, are completely

cut off from all reciprocal influence, that they might severally (each

according to its own principles) exert upon the other, by the broad gulf that

divides the supersensible from phenomena. The concept of freedom

determines nothing in respect of the theoretical cognition of nature; and the

concept of nature likewise nothing in respect of the practical laws of freedom.

To that extent, then, it is not possible to throw a bridge from the one realm to

the other. Yet although the determining grounds of causality according to the

concept of freedom (and the practical rule that this contains) have no place in

nature, and the sensible cannot determine the supersensible in the subject;

still the converse is possible (not, it is true, in respect of the knowledge of

nature, but of the consequences arising from the supersensible and bearing on

the sensible). So much indeed is implied in the concept of a causality by

freedom, the operation of which, in conformity with the formal laws of

freedom, is to take effect in the word. The word cause, however, in its

application to the supersensible only signifies the ground that determines the

causality of things of nature to an effect in conformity with their appropriate

natural laws, but at the same time also in unison with the formal principle of

the laws of reason-a ground which, while its possibility is impenetrable, may

still be completely cleared of the charge of contradiction that it is alleged to
        4
involve. The effect in accordance with the concept of freedom is the final

end which (or the manifestation of which in the sensible world) is to exist,

and this presupposes the condition of the possibility of that end in nature (i.

e., in the nature of the subject as a being of the sensible world, namely, as

man). It is so presupposed a priori, and without regard to the practical, by

judgement. This faculty, with its concept of a finality of nature, provides uswith the mediating concept between concepts of nature and the concept of

freedom-a concept that makes possible the transition from the pure theoretical

[legislation of understanding] to the pure practical [legislation of reason] and

from conformity to law in accordance with the former to final ends according

to the latter. For through that concept we cognize the possibility of the final

end that can only be actualized in nature and in harmony with its laws.

        4
              One of the various supposed contradictions in this complete

distinction of the causality of nature from that through freedom is expressed

in the objection that when I speak of hindrances opposed by nature to

causality according to laws of freedom (moral laws) or of assistance lent to it

by nature, I am all the time admitting an influence of the former upon the

latter. But the misinterpretation is easily avoided, if attention is only paid to

the meaning of the statement. The resistance or furtherance is not between

nature and freedom, but between the former as phenomenon and the effects

of the latter as phenomena in the world of sense. Even the causality of

freedom (of pure and practical reason) is the causality of a natural cause

subordinated to freedom (a causality of the subject regarded as man, and

consequently as a phenomenon), and one, the ground of whose determination

is contained in the intelligible, that is thought under freedom, in a manner that

is not further or otherwise explicable (just as in the case of that intelligible

that forms the supersensible substrate of nature.)

              Understanding, by the possibility of its supplying a priori laws for

nature, furnishes a proof of the fact that nature is cognized by us only as

phenomenon, and in so doing points to its having a supersensible substrate;

but this substrate it leaves quite undetermined. judgement by the a priori

principle of its estimation of nature according to its possible particular laws

provides this supersensible substrate (within as well as without us) with

determinability through the intellectual faculty. But reason gives

determination to the same a priori by its practical law. Thus judgement makes

possible the transition from the realm of the concept of nature to that of the

concept of freedom.

              In respect of the faculties of the soul generally, regarded as higher

faculties, i.e., as faculties containing an autonomy, understanding is the one

that contains the constitutive a priori principles for the faculty of cognition

(the theoretical knowledge of nature). The feeling pleasure and displeasure is

provided for by the judgement in its independence from concepts and fromsensations that refer to the determination of the faculty of desire and would

thus be capable of being immediately practical. For the faculty of desire there

is reason, which is practical without mediation of any pleasure of whatsoever

origin, and which determines for it, as a higher faculty, the final end that is

attended at the same time with pure intellectual delight in the object.

judgement’s concept of a finality of nature falls, besides, under the head of

natural concepts, but only as a regulative principle of the cognitive faculties-

although the aesthetic judgement on certain objects (of nature or of art) which

occasions that concept, is a constitutive principle in respect of the feeling of

pleasure or displeasure. The spontaneity in the play of the cognitive faculties

whose harmonious accord contains the ground of this pleasure, makes the

concept in question, in its consequences, a suitable mediating link connecting

the realm of the concept of nature with that of the concept of freedom, as this

accord at the same time promotes the sensibility of the mind for or moral

feeling. The following table may facilitate the review of all the above
                                      5
faculties in their systematic unity.

        5
              It has been thought somewhat suspicious that my divisions in pure

philosophy should almost always come out threefold. But it is due to the

nature of the case. If a division is to be a priori it must be either analytic,

according to the law of contradiction-and then it is always twofold (quodlibet

ens est aut A aut non A)-Or else it is synthetic. If it is to be derived in the

latter case from a priori concepts (not, as in mathematics, from the a priori

intuition corresponding to the concept), then, to meet the requirements of

synthetic unity in general, namely (1) a condition, (2) a conditioned, (3) the

concept arising from the union of the conditioned with its condition, the

division must of necessity be trichotomous.

      List of Mental FacultiesCognitive Faculties

Cognitive facultiesUnderstanding

Feeling of pleasure and displeasureJudgement

Faculty of desireReason

        A priori PrinciplesApplication

Conformity to lawNature

FinalityArt

Final EndFreedom

 FIRST PART. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGEMENT

 

         SECTION I: ANALYTIC OF AESTHETIC JUDGEMENT.

 

 

                      BOOK I – Analytic of the Beautiful.

 

 
                                                            6
FIRST MOMENT – Of the Judgement of Taste: Moment of Quality.

 

 
        6
              The definition of taste here relied upon is that it is the faculty of

estimating the beautiful. But the discovery of what is required for calling an

object beautiful must be reserved for the analysis of judgements of taste. In

my search for the moments to which attention is paid by this judgement in its

reflection, I have followed the guidance of the logical functions of judging

(for a judgement of taste always involves a reference to understanding). I

have brought the moment of quality first under review, because this is what

the aesthetic judgement on the beautiful looks to in the first instance.                    § 1. The judgement of taste is aesthetic.

 

 

              If we wish to discern whether anything is beautiful or not, we do not

refer the representation of it to the object by means of understanding with a

view to cognition, but by means of the imagination (acting perhaps in

conjunction with understanding) we refer the representation to the subject

and its feeling of pleasure or displeasure. The judgement of taste, therefore, is

not a cognitive judgement, and so not logical, but is aesthetic-which means

that it is one whose determining ground cannot be other than subjective.

Every reference of representations is capable of being objective, even that of

sensations (in which case it signifies the real in an empirical representation).

The one exception to this is the feeling of pleasure or displeasure. This

denotes nothing in the object, but is a feeling which the subject has of itself

and of the manner in which it is affected by the representation.

              To apprehend a regular and appropriate building with one’s

cognitive faculties, be the mode of representation clear or confused, is quite a

different thing from being conscious of this representation with an

accompanying sensation of delight. Here the representation is referred wholly

to the subject, and what is more to its feeling of life-under the name of the

feeling of pleasure or displeasure-and this forms the basis of a quite separate

faculty of discriminating and estimating, that contributes nothing to

knowledge. All it does is to compare the given representation in the subject

with the entire faculty of representations of which the mind is conscious in

the feeling of its state. Given representations in a judgement may be

empirical, and so aesthetic; but the judgement which is pronounced by their

means is logical, provided it refers them to the object. Conversely, be the

given representations even rational, but referred in a judgement solely to the

subject (to its feeling), they are always to that extent aesthetic.§ 2. The delight which determines the judgement of taste is independent

                                    of all interest.

 

 

              The delight which we connect with the representation of the real

existence of an object is called interest. Such a delight, therefore, always

involves a reference to the faculty of desire, either as its determining ground,

or else as necessarily implicated with its determining ground. Now, where the

question is whether something is beautiful, we do not want to know, whether

we, or any one else, are, or even could be, concerned in the real existence of

the thing, but rather what estimate we form of it on mere contemplation

(intuition or reflection). If any one asks me whether I consider that the palace

I see before me is beautiful, I may, perhaps, reply that I do not care for things

of that sort that are merely made to be gaped at. Or I may reply in the same

strain as that Iroquois sachem who said that nothing in Paris pleased him

better than the eating-houses. I may even go a step further and inveigh with

the vigour of a Rousseau against the vigour of a great against the vanity of

the of the people on such superfluous things. Or, in fine, I may quite easily

persuade myself that if I found myself on an uninhabited island, without hope

of ever again coming among men, and could conjure such a palace into

existence by a mere wish, I should still not trouble to do so, so long as I had a

hut there that was comfortable enough for me. All this may be admitted and

approved; only it is not the point now at issue. All one wants to know is

whether the mere representation of the object is to my liking, no matter how

indifferent I may be to the real existence of the object of this representation.

It is quite plain that in order to say that the object is beautiful, and to show

that I have taste, everything turns on the meaning which I can give to this

representation, and not on any factor which makes me dependent on the real

existence of the object. Every one must allow that a judgement on the

beautiful which is tinged with the slightest interest, is very partial and not a

pure judgement of taste. One must not be in the least prepossessed in favour

of the real existence of the thing, but must preserve complete indifference in

this respect, in order to play the part of judge in matters of taste.

              This proposition, which is of the utmost importance, cannot be better
                                                            7
explained than by contrasting the pure disinterested delight which appears inthe judgement of taste with that allied to an interest-especially if we can also

assure ourselves that there are no other kinds of interest beyond those

presently to be mentioned.

        7
              A judgement upon an object of our delight may be wholly

disinterested but withal very interesting, i.e., it relies on no interest, but it

produces one. Of this kind are all pure moral judgements. But, of themselves

judgements of taste do not even set up any interest whatsoever. Only in

society is it interesting to have taste-a point which will be explained in the

sequel.            § 3. Delight in the agreeable is coupled with interest.

 

 

              That is agreeable which the senses find pleasing in sensation. This at

once affords a convenient opportunity for condemning and directing

particular attention to a prevalent confusion of the double meaning of which

the word sensation is capable. All delight (as is said or thought) is itself

sensation (of a pleasure). Consequently everything that pleases, and for the

very reason that it pleases, is agreeable-and according to its different degrees,

or its relations to other agreeable sensations, is attractive, charming,

delicious, enjoyable, etc. But if this is conceded, then impressions of sense,

which determine inclination, or principles of reason, which determine the

will, or mere contemplated forms of intuition, which determine judgement,

are all on a par in everything relevant to their effect upon the feeling of

pleasure, for this would be agreeableness in the sensation of one’s state; and

since, in the last resort, all the elaborate work of our faculties must issue in

and unite in the practical as its goal, we could credit our faculties with no

other appreciation of things and the worth of things, than that consisting in

the gratification which they promise. How this is attained is in the end

immaterial; and, as the choice of the means is here the only thing that can

make a difference, men might indeed blame one another for folly or

imprudence, but never for baseness or wickedness; for they are all, each

according to his own way of looking at things, pursuing one goal, which for

each is the gratification in question.

              When a modification of the feeling of pleasure or displeasure is

termed sensation, this expression is given quite a different meaning to that

which it bears when I call the representation of a thing (through sense as a

receptivity pertaining to the faculty of knowledge) sensation. For in the latter

case the representation is referred to the object, but in the former it is referred

solely to the subject and is not available for any cognition, not even for that

by which the subject cognizes itself.

              Now in the above definition the word sensation is used to denote an

objective representation of sense; and, to avoid continually running the risk

of misinterpretation, we shall call that which must always remain purelysubjective, and is absolutely incapable of forming a representation of an

object, by the familiar name of feeling. The green colour of the meadows

belongs to objective sensation, as the perception of an object of sense; but its

agreeableness to subjective sensation, by which no object is represented; i.e.,

to feeling, through which the object is regarded as an object of delight (which

involves no cognition of the object).

              Now, that a judgement on an object by which its agreeableness is

affirmed, expresses an interest in it, is evident from the fact that through

sensation it provokes a desire for similar objects, consequently the delight

presupposes, not the simple judgement about it, but the bearing its real

existence has upon my state so far as affected by such an object. Hence we do

not merely say of the agreeable that it pleases, but that it gratifies. I do not

accord it a simple approval, but inclination is aroused by it, and where

agreeableness is of the liveliest type a judgement on the character of the

object is so entirely out of place that those who are always intent only on

enjoyment (for that is the word used to denote intensity of gratification)

would fain dispense with all judgement.              § 4. Delight in the good is coupled with interest.

 

 

              That is good which by means of reason commends itself by its mere

concept. We call that good for something which only pleases as a means; but

that which pleases on its own account we call good in itself. In both cases the

concept of an end is implied, and consequently the relation of reason to (at

least possible) willing, and thus a delight in the existence of an object or

action, i.e., some interest or other.

              To deem something good, I must always know what sort of a thing

the object is intended to be, i. e., I must have a concept of it. That is not

necessary to enable me to see beauty in a thing. Flowers, free patterns, lines

aimlessly intertwining-technically termed foliage-have no signification,

depend upon no definite concept, and yet please. Delight in the beautiful

must depend upon the reflection on an object precursory to some (not

definitely determined) concept. It is thus also differentiated from the

agreeable, which rests entirely upon sensation.

              In many cases, no doubt, the agreeable and the good seem

convertible terms. Thus it is commonly said that all (especially lasting)

gratification is of itself good; which is almost equivalent to saying that to be

permanently agreeable and to be good are identical. But it is readily apparent

that this is merely a vicious confusion of words, for the concepts appropriate

to these expressions are far from interchangeable. The agreeable, which, as

such, represents the object solely in relation to sense, must in the first

instance be brought under principles of reason through the concept of an end,

to be, as an object of will, called good. But that the reference to delight is

wholly different where what gratifies is at the same time called good, is

evident from the fact that with the good the question always is whether it is

mediately or immediately good, i. e., useful or good in itself; whereas with

the agreeable this point can never arise, since the word always means what

pleases immediately-and it is just the same with what I call beautiful.

              Even in everyday parlance, a distinction is drawn between the

agreeable and the good. We do not scruple to say of a dish that stimulates the

palate with spices and other condiments that it is agreeable owning all thewhile that it is not good: because, while it immediately satisfies the senses, it

is mediately displeasing, i. e., in the eye of reason that looks ahead to the

consequences. Even in our estimate of health, this same distinction may be

traced. To all that possess it, it is immediately agreeable-at least negatively, i.

e., as remoteness of all bodily pains. But, if we are to say that it is good, we

must further apply to reason to direct it to ends, that is, we must regard it as a

state that puts us in a congenial mood for all we have to do. Finally, in

respect of happiness every one believes that the greatest aggregate of the

pleasures of life, taking duration as well as number into account, merits the

name of a true, nay even of the highest, good. But reason sets its face against

this too. Agreeableness is enjoyment. But if this is all that we are bent on, it

would be foolish to be scrupulous about the means that procure it for us-

whether it be obtained passively by the bounty of nature or actively and by

the work of our own hands. But that there is any intrinsic worth in the real

existence of a man who merely lives for enjoyment, however busy he may be

in this respect, even when in so doing he serves others-all equally with

himself intent only on enjoyment-as an excellent means to that one end, and

does so, moreover, because through sympathy he shares all their

gratifications-this is a view to which reason will never let itself be brought

round. Only by what a man does heedless of enjoyment, in complete

freedom, and independently of what he can procure passively from the hand

of nature, does be give to his existence, as the real existence of a person, an

absolute worth. Happiness, with all its plethora of pleasures, is far from being
                          8
an unconditioned good.

        8
              An obligation to enjoyment is a patent absurdity. And the same,

then, must also be said of a supposed obligation to actions that have merely

enjoyment for their aim, no matter how spiritually this enjoyment may be

refined in thought (or embellished), and even if it be a mystical, so-called

heavenly, enjoyment.

              But, despite all this difference between the agreeable and the good,

they both agree in being invariably coupled with an interest in their object.

This is true, not alone of the agreeable, § 3, and of the mediately good, i, e.,

the useful, which pleases as a means to some pleasure, but also of that which

is good absolutely and from every point of view, namely the moral good

which carries with it the highest interest. For the good is the object of will, i.

e., of a rationally determined faculty of desire). But to will something, and totake a delight in its existence, i.e., to take an interest in it, are identical.  § 5. Comparison of the three specifically different kinds of delight.

 

 

              Both the agreeable and the good involve a reference to the faculty of

desire, and are thus attended, the former with a delight pathologically

conditioned (by stimuli), the latter with a pure practical delight. Such delight

is determined not merely by the representation of the object, but also by the

represented bond of connection between the subject and the real existence of

the object. It is not merely the object, but also its real existence, that pleases.

On the other hand, the judgement of taste is simply contemplative, i. e., it is a

judgement which is indifferent as to the existence of an object, and only

decides how its character stands with the feeling of pleasure and displeasure.

But not even is this contemplation itself directed to concepts; for the

judgement of taste is not a cognitive judgement (neither a theoretical one nor

a practical), and hence, also, is not grounded on concepts, nor yet

intentionally directed to them.

              The agreeable, the beautiful, and the good thus denote three different

relations of representations to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure, as a

feeling in respect of which we distinguish different objects or modes of

representation. Also, the corresponding expressions which indicate our

satisfaction in them are different The agreeable is what GRATIFIES a man;

the beautiful what simply PLEASES him; the good what is ESTEEMED

(approved), i.e., that on which he sets an objective worth. Agreeableness is a

significant factor even with irrational animals; beauty has purport and

significance only for human beings, i.e., for beings at once animal and

rational (but not merely for them as rational-intelligent beings-but only for

them as at once animal and rational); whereas the good is good for every

rational being in general-a proposition which can only receive its complete

justification and explanation in the sequel. Of all these three kinds of delight,

that of taste in the beautiful may be said to be the one and only disinterested

and free delight; for, with it, no interest, whether of sense or reason, extorts

approval. And so we may say that delight, in the three cases mentioned, is

related to inclination, to favour, or to respect. For FAVOUR is the only free

liking. An object of inclination, and one which a law of reason imposes upon

our desire, leaves us no freedom to turn anything into an object of pleasure.All interest presupposes a want, or calls one forth; and, being a ground

determining approval, deprives the judgement on the object of its freedom.

              So far as the interest of inclination in the case of the agreeable goes,

every one says “Hunger is the best sauce; and people with a healthy appetite

relish everything, so long as it is something they can eat.” Such delight,

consequently, gives no indication of taste having anything to say to the

choice. Only when men have got all they want can we tell who among the

crowd has taste or not. Similarly there may be correct habits (conduct)

without virtue, politeness without good-will, propriety without honour, etc.

For where the moral law dictates, there is, objectively, no room left for free

choice as to what one has to do; and to show taste in the way one carries out

these dictates, or in estimating the way others do so, is a totally different

matter from displaying the moral frame of one’s mind. For the latter involves

a command and produces a need of something, whereas moral taste only

plays with the objects of delight without devoting itself sincerely to any.

        Definition of the Beautiful derived from the First Moment.

 

 

              Taste is the faculty of estimating an object or a mode of

representation by means of a delight or aversion apart from any interest. The

object of such a delight is called beautiful.

 SECOND MOMENT – Of the Judgement of Taste: Moment of Quantity.

 

 

§ 6. The beautiful is that which, apart from concepts, is represented as

                        the Object of a universal delight.

 

 

              This definition of the beautiful is deducible from the foregoing

definition of it as an object of delight apart from any interest. For where any

one is conscious that his delight in an object is with him independent of

interest, it is inevitable that he should look on the object as one containing a

ground of delight for all men. For, since the delight is not based on any

inclination of the subject (or on any other deliberate interest), but the subject

feels himself completely free in respect of the liking which he accords to the

object, he can find as reason for his delight no personal conditions to which

his own subjective self might alone be party. Hence he must regard it as

resting on what he may also presuppose in every other person; and therefore

he must believe that he has reason for demanding a similar delight from every

one. Accordingly he will speak of the beautiful as if beauty were a quality of

the object and the judgement logical (forming a cognition of the object by

concepts of it); although it is only aesthetic, and contains merely a reference

of the representation of the object to the subject; because it still bears this

resemblance to the logical judgement, that it may be presupposed to be valid

for all men. But this universality cannot spring from concepts. For from

concepts there is no transition to the feeling of pleasure or displeasure (save

in the case of pure practical laws, which, however, carry an interest with

them; and such an interest does not attach to the pure judgement of taste).

The result is that the judgement of taste, with its attendant consciousness of

detachment from all interest, must involve a claim to validity for all men, and

must do so apart from universality attached to objects, i.e., there must be

coupled with it a claim to subjective universality.  § 7. Comparison of the beautiful with the agreeable and the good by

                        means of the above characteristic.

 

 

              As regards the agreeable, every one concedes that his judgement,

which he bases on a private feeling, and in which he declares that an object

pleases him, is restricted merely to himself personally. Thus he does not take

it amiss if, when he says that Canary-wine is agreeable, another corrects the

expression and reminds him that he ought to say: “It is agreeable to me.” This

applies not only to the taste of the tongue, the palate, and the throat, but to

what may with any one be agreeable to eye or ear. A violet colour is to one

soft and lovely: to another dull and faded. One man likes the tone of wind

instruments, another prefers that of string instruments. To quarrel over such

points with the idea of condemning another’s judgement as incorrect when it

differs from our own, as if the opposition between the two judgements were

logical, would be folly. With the agreeable, therefore, the axiom holds good:

Every one has his own taste (that of sense).

              The beautiful stands on quite a different footing. It would, on the

contrary, be ridiculous if any one who plumed himself on his taste were to

think of justifying himself by saying: “This object (the building we see, the

dress that person has on, the concert we hear, the poem submitted to our

criticism) is beautiful for me.” For if it merely pleases him, be must not call it

beautiful. Many things may for him possess charm and agreeableness-no one

cares about that; but when he puts a thing on a pedestal and calls it beautiful,

he demands the same delight from others. He judges not merely for himself,

but for all men, and then speaks of beauty as if it were a property of things.

Thus he says the thing is beautiful; and it is not as if he counted on others

agreeing in his judgement of liking owing to his having found them in such

agreement on a number of occasions, but he demands this agreement of them.

He blames them if they judge differently, and denies them taste, which he

still requires of them as something they ought to have; and to this extent it is

not open to men to say: “Every one has his own taste.” This would be

equivalent to saying that there is no such thing at all as taste, i. e., no

aesthetic judgement capable of making a rightful claim upon the assent of all

men.              Yet even in the case of the agreeable, we find that the estimates men

form do betray a prevalent agreement among them, which leads to our

crediting some with taste and denying it to others, and that, too, not as an

organic sense but as a critical faculty in respect of the agreeable generally. So

of one who knows how to entertain his guests with pleasures (of enjoyment

through all the senses) in such a way that one and all are pleased, we say that

he has taste. But the universality here is only understood in a comparative

sense; and the rules that apply are, like all empirical rules, general only, not

universal, the latter being what the judgement of taste upon the beautiful

deals or claims to deal in. It is a judgement in respect of sociability so far as

resting on empirical rules. In respect of the good, it is true that judgements

also rightly assert a claim to validity for every one; but the good is only

represented as an object of universal delight by means of a concept, which is

the case neither with the agreeable nor the beautiful.§ 8. In a judgement of taste the universality of delight is only represented

                                    as subjective.

 

 

              This particular form of the universality of an aesthetic judgement,

which is to be met in a judgement of taste, is a significant feature, not for the

logician certainly, but for the transcendental philosopher. It calls for no small

effort on his part to discover its origin, but in return it brings to light a

property of our cognitive faculty which, without this analysis, would have

remained unknown.

              First, one must get firmly into one’s mind that by the judgement of

taste (upon the beautiful) the delight in an object is imputed to every one, yet

without being founded on a concept (for then it would be the good), and that

this claim to universality is such an essential factor of a judgement by which

we describe anything as beautiful, that were it not for its being present to the

mind it would never enter into any one’s head to use this expression, but

everything that pleased without a concept would be ranked as agreeable. For

in respect of the agreeable, every one is allowed to have his own opinion, and

no one insists upon others agreeing with his judgement of taste, which is

what is invariably done in the judgement of taste about beauty. The first of

these I may call the taste of sense, the second, the taste of reflection: the first

laying down judgements merely private, the second, on the other hand,

judgements ostensibly of general validity (public), but both alike being

aesthetic (not practical) judgements about an object merely in respect of the

bearings of its representation on the feeling of pleasure or displeasure. Now it

does seem strange that while with the taste of sense it is not alone experience

that shows that its judgement (of pleasure or displeasure in something) is not

universally valid, but every one willingly refrains from imputing this

agreement to others (despite the frequent actual prevalence of a considerable

consensus of general opinion even in these judgements), the taste of

reflection, which, as experience teaches, has often enough to put up with a

rude dismissal of its claims to universal validity of its judgement (upon the

beautiful), can (as it actually does) find it possible for all that to formulate

judgements capable of demanding this agreement in its universality. Such

agreement it does in fact require from every one for each of its judgements oftaste the persons who pass these judgements not quarreling over the

possibility of such a claim, but only failing in particular cases to come to

terms as to the correct application of this faculty.

              First of all we have here to note that a universality which does not

rest upon concepts of the object (even though these are only empirical) is in

no way logical, but aesthetic, i. e., does not involve any objective quantity of

the judgement, but only one that is subjective. For this universality I use the

expression general validity, which denotes the validity of the reference of a

representation, not to the cognitive faculties, but to the feeling of pleasure or

displeasure for every subject. (The same expression, however, may also be

employed for the logical quantity of the judgement, provided we add

objective universal validity, to distinguish it from the merely subjective

validity which is always aesthetic.)

              Now a judgement that has objective universal validity has always

got the subjective also, i.e., if the judgement is valid for everything which is

contained under a given concept, it is valid also for all who represent an

object by means of this concept. But from a subjective universal validity, i.

e., the aesthetic, that does not rest on any concept, no conclusion can be

drawn to the logical; because judgements of that kind have no bearing upon

the object. But for this very reason the aesthetic universality attributed to a

judgement must also be of a special kind, seeing that it does not join the

predicate of beauty to the concept of the object taken in its entire logical

sphere, and yet does extend this predicate over the whole sphere of judging

subjects.

              In their logical quantity, all judgements of taste are singular

judgements. For, since I must present the object immediately to my feeling of

pleasure or displeasure, and that, too, without the aid of concepts, such

judgements cannot have the quantity of judgements with objective general

validity. Yet by taking the singular representation of the object of the

judgement of taste, and by comparison converting it into a concept according

to the conditions determining that judgement, we can arrive at a logically

universal judgement. For instance, by a judgement of the taste I describe the

rose at which I am looking as beautiful. The judgement, on the other hand,

resulting from the comparison of a number of singular representations:

“Roses in general are beautiful,” is no longer pronounced as a purely

aesthetic judgement, but as a logical judgement founded on one that isaesthetic. Now the judgement, “The rose is agreeable” (to smell) is also, no

doubt, an aesthetic and singular judgement, but then it is not one of taste but

of sense. For it has this point of difference from a judgement of taste, that the

latter imports an aesthetic quantity of universality, i.e., of validity for

everyone which is not to be met with in a judgement upon the agreeable. It is

only judgements upon the good which, while also determining the delight in

an object, possess logical and not mere aesthetic universality; for it is as

involving a cognition of the object that “they are valid of it, and on that

account valid for everyone.

              In forming an estimate of objects merely from concepts, all

representation of beauty goes by the board. There can, therefore, be no rule

according to which any one is to be compelled to recognize anything as

beautiful. Whether a dress, a house, or a flower is beautiful is a matter upon

which one declines to allow one’s judgement to be swayed by any reasons or

principles. We want to get a look at the object with our own eyes, just as if

our delight depended on sensation. And yet, if upon so doing, we call the

object beautiful, we believe ourselves to be speaking with a universal voice,

and lay claim to the concurrence of everyone, whereas no private sensation

would be decisive except for the observer alone and his liking.

              Here, now, we may perceive that nothing is postulated in the

judgement of taste but such a universal voice in respect of delight that it is

not mediated by concepts; consequently, only the possibility of an aesthetic

judgement capable of being at the same time deemed valid for everyone. The

judgement of taste itself does not postulate the agreement of everyone (for it

is only competent for a logically universal judgement to do this, in that it is

able to bring forward reasons); it only imputes this agreement to everyone, as

an instance of the rule in respect of which it looks for confirmation, not from

concepts, but from the concurrence of others. The universal voice is,

therefore, only an idea — resting upon grounds the investigation of which is

here postponed. It may be a matter of uncertainty whether a person who

thinks he is laying down a judgement of taste is, in fact, judging in

conformity with that idea; but that this idea is what is contemplated in his

judgement, and that, consequently, it is meant to be a judgement of taste, is

proclaimed by his use of the expression “beauty.” For himself he can be

certain on the point from his mere consciousness of the separation of

everything belonging to the agreeable and the good from the delightremaining to him; and this is all for which be promises himself the agreement

of everyone-a claim which, under these conditions, he would also be

warranted in making, were it not that he frequently sinned against them, and

thus passed an erroneous judgement of taste.§ 9. Investigation of the question of the relative priority in a judgement

  of taste of the feeling of pleasure and the estimating of the object.

 

 

              The solution of this problem is the key to the Critique of taste, and

so is worthy of all attention.

              Were the pleasure in a given object to be the antecedent, and were

the universal communicability of this pleasure to be all that the judgement of

taste is meant to allow to the representation of the object, such a sequence

would be self-contradictory. For a pleasure of that kind would be nothing but

the feeling of mere agreeableness to the senses, and so, from its very nature,

would possess no more than private validity, seeing that it would be

immediately dependent on the representation through which the object is

given.

              Hence it is the universal capacity for being communicated incident

to the mental state in the given representation which, as the subjective

condition of the judgement of taste, must be, fundamental, with the pleasure

in the object as its consequent. Nothing, however, is capable of being

universally communicated but cognition and representation so far as

appurtenant to cognition. For it is only as thus appurtenant that the

representation is objective, and it is this alone that gives it a universal point of

reference with which the power of representation of every one is obliged to

harmonize. If, then, the determining ground of the judgement as to this

universal communicability of the representation is to be merely subjective,

that is to say, to be conceived independently of any concept of the object, it

can be nothing else than the mental state that presents itself in the mutual

relation of the powers of representation so far as they refer a given

representation to cognition in general.

              The cognitive powers brought into play by this representation are

here engaged in a free play, since no definite concept restricts them to a

particular rule of cognition. Hence the mental state in this representation must

be one of a feeling of the free play of the powers of representation in a given

representation for a cognition in general. Now a representation, whereby an

object is given, involves, in order that it may become a source of cognition atall, imagination for bringing together the manifold of intuition, and

understanding for the unity of the concept uniting the representations. This

state of free play of the cognitive faculties attending a representation by

which an object is given must admit of universal communication: because

cognition, as a definition of the object with which given representations (in

any subject whatever) are to accord, is the one and only representation which

is valid for everyone.

              As the subjective universal communicability of the mode of

representation in a judgement of taste is to subsist apart from the

presupposition of any definite concept, it can be nothing else than the mental

state present in the free play of imagination and understanding (so far as these

are in mutual accord, as is requisite for cognition in general); for we are

conscious that this subjective relation suitable for a cognition in general must

be just as valid for every one, and consequently as universally communicable,

as is any indeterminate cognition, which always rests upon that relation as its

subjective condition.

              Now this purely subjective (aesthetic) estimating of the object, or of

the representation through which it is given, is antecedent to the pleasure in

it, and is the basis of this pleasure in the harmony of the cognitive faculties.

Again, the above-described universality of the subjective conditions of

estimating objects forms the sole foundation of this universal subjective

validity of the delight which we connect with the representation of the object

that we call beautiful.

              That an ability to communicate one’s mental state, even though it be

only in respect of our cognitive faculties, is attended with a pleasure, is a fact

which might easily be demonstrated from the natural propensity of mankind

to social life, i.e., empirically and psychologically. But what we have here in

view calls for something more than this. In a judgement of taste, the pleasure

felt by us is exacted from every one else as necessary, just as if, when we call

something beautiful, beauty was to be regarded as a quality of the object

forming part of its inherent determination according to concepts; although

beauty is for itself, apart from any reference to the feeling of the subject,

nothing. But the discussion of this question must be reserved until we have

answered the further one of whether, and how, aesthetic judgements are

possible a priori.              At present we are exercised with the lesser question of the way in

which we become conscious, in a judgement of taste, of a reciprocal

subjective common accord of the powers of cognition. Is it aesthetically by

sensation and our mere internal sense? Or is it intellectually by consciousness

of our intentional activity in bringing these powers into play?

              Now if the given representation occasioning the judgement of taste

were a concept which united understanding and imagination in the estimate

of the object so as to give a cognition of the object, the consciousness of this

relation would be intellectual (as in the objective schematism of judgement

dealt with in the Critique). But, then, in that case the judgement would not be

laid down with respect to pleasure and displeasure, and so would not be a

judgement of taste. But, now, the judgement of taste determines the object,

independently of concepts, in respect of delight and of the predicate of

beauty. There is, therefore, no other way for the subjective unity of the

relation in question to make itself known than by sensation. The quickening

of both faculties (imagination and understanding) to an indefinite, but yet,

thanks to the given representation, harmonious activity, such as belongs to

cognition generally, is the sensation whose universal communicability is

postulated by the judgement of taste. An objective relation can, of course,

only be thought, yet in so far as, in respect of its conditions, it is subjective, it

may be felt in its effect upon the mind, and, in the case of a relation (like that

of the powers of representation to a faculty of cognition generally) which

does not rest on any concept, no other consciousness of it is possible beyond

that through sensation of its effect upon the mind — an effect consisting in

the more facile play of both mental powers (imagination and understanding)

as quickened by their mutual accord. A representation which is singular and

independent of comparison with other representations, and, being such, yet

accords with the conditions of the universality that is the general concern of

understanding, is one that brings the cognitive faculties into that

proportionate accord which we require for all cognition and which we

therefore deem valid for every one who is so constituted as to judge by means

of understanding and sense conjointly (i.e., for every man).

      Definition of the Beautiful drawn from the Second Moment.

 

 

              The beautiful is that which, apart from a concept, pleasesuniversally.THIRD MOMENT – Of Judgements of Taste: Moment of the relation of

          the Ends brought under Review in such Judgements.

 

 

                            § 10. Finality in general.

 

 

              Let us define the meaning of “an end” in transcendental terms (i.e.,

without presupposing anything empirical, such as the feeling of pleasure). An

end is the object of a concept so far as this concept is regarded as the cause of

the object (the real ground of its possibility); and the causality of a concept in

respect of its object is finality (forma finalis). Where, then, not the cognition

of an object merely, but the object itself (its form or real existence) as an

effect, is thought to be possible only through a concept of it, there we

imagine an end. The representation of the effect is here the determining

ground of its cause and takes the lead of it. The consciousness of the causality

of a representation in respect of the state of the subject as one tending to

preserve a continuance of that state, may here be said to denote in a general

way what is called pleasure; whereas displeasure is that representation which

contains the ground for converting the state of the representations into their

opposite (for hindering or removing them).

              The faculty of desire, so far as determinable only through concepts,

i.e., so as to act in conformity with the representation of an end, would be the

Will. But an object, or state of mind, or even an action may, although its

possibility does not necessarily presuppose the representation of an end, be

called final simply on account of its possibility being only explicable and

intelligible for us by virtue of an assumption on our part of fundamental

causality according to ends, i.e., a will that would have so ordained it

according to a certain represented rule. Finality, therefore, may exist apart

from an end, in so far as we do not locate the causes of this form in a will, but

yet are able to render the explanation of its possibility intelligible to ourselves

only by deriving it from a will. Now we are not always obliged to look with

the eye of reason into what we observe (i.e., to consider it in its possibility).

So we may at least observe a finality of form, and trace it in objects-thoughby reflection only-without resting it on an end (as the material of the nexus

finalis).

 § 11. The sole foundation of the judgement of taste is the form of finality

                  of an object (or mode of representing it).

 

 

              Whenever an end is regarded as a source of delight, it always

imports an interest as determining ground of the judgement on the object of

pleasure. Hence the judgement of taste cannot rest on any subjective end as

its ground. But neither can any representation of an objective end, i.e., of the

possibility of the object itself on principles of final connection, determine the

judgement of taste, and, consequently, neither can any concept of the good.

For the judgement of taste is an aesthetic and not a cognitive judgement, and

so does not deal with any concept of the nature or of the internal or external

possibility, by this or that cause, of the object, but simply with the relative

bearing of the representative powers so far as determined by a representation.

              Now this relation, present when an object is characterized as

beautiful, is coupled with the feeling of pleasure. This pleasure is by the

judgement of taste pronounced valid for every one; hence an agreeableness

attending the representation is just as incapable of containing the determining

ground of the judgement as the representation of the perfection of the object

or the concept of the good. We are thus left with the subjective finality in the

representation of an object, exclusive of any end (objective or subjective)-

consequently the bare form of finality in the representation whereby an object

is given to us, so far as we are conscious of it as that which is alone capable

of constituting the delight which, apart from any concept, we estimate as

universally communicable, and so of forming the determining ground of the

judgement of taste.        § 12. The judgement of taste rests upon a priori grounds.

 

 

              To determine a priori the connection of the feeling of pleasure or

displeasure as an effect, with some representation or other (sensation or

concept) as its cause, is utterly impossible; for that would be a causal relation

which (with objects of experience) is always one that can only be cognized a

posteriori and with the help of experience. True, in the Critique of Practical

Reason we did actually derive a priori from universal moral concepts the

feeling of respect (as a particular and peculiar modification of this feeling

which does not strictly answer either to the pleasure or displeasure which we

receive from empirical objects). But there we were further able to cross the

border of experience and call in aid a causality resting on a supersensible

attribute of the subject, namely that of freedom. But even there it was not this

feeling exactly that we deduced from the idea of the moral as cause, but from

this was derived simply the determination of the will. But the mental state

present in the determination of the will by any means is at once in itself a

feeling of pleasure and identical with it, and so does not issue from it as an

effect. Such an effect must only be assumed where the concept of the moral

as a good precedes the determination of the will by the law; for in that case it

would be futile to derive the pleasure combined with the concept from this

concept as a mere cognition.

              Now the pleasure in aesthetic judgements stands on a similar

footing: only that here it is merely contemplative and does not bring about an

interest in the object; whereas in the moral judgement it is practical, The

consciousness of mere formal finality in the play of the cognitive faculties of

the subject attending a representation whereby an object is given, is the

pleasure itself, because it involves a determining ground of the subject’s

activity in respect of the quickening of its cognitive powers, and thus an

internal causality (which is final) in respect of cognition generally, but

without being limited to a definite cognition, and consequently a mere form

of the subjective finality of a representation in an aesthetic judgement. This

pleasure is also in no way practical, neither resembling that form the

pathological ground of agreeableness nor that from the intellectual ground of

the represented good. But still it involves an inherent causality, that, namely,of preserving a continuance of the state of the representation itself and the

active engagement of the cognitive powers without ulterior aim. We dwell on

the contemplation of the beautiful because this contemplation strengthens and

reproduces itself. The case is analogous (but analogous only) to the way we

linger on a charm in the representation of an object which keeps arresting the

attention, the mind all the while remaining passive.§ 13. The pure judgement of taste is independent of charm and emotion.

 

 

              Every interest vitiates the judgement of taste and robs it of its

impartiality. This is especially so where, instead of, like the interest of reason,

making finality take the lead of the lead of the feeling of pleasure, it grounds

it upon this feeling-which is what always happens in aesthetic judgements

upon anything so far as it gratifies or pains. Hence judgements so influenced

can either lay no claim at all to a universally valid delight, or else must abate

their claim in proportion as sensations of the kind in question enter into the

determining grounds of taste. Taste that requires an added element of charm

and emotion for its delight, not to speak of adopting this as the measure of its

approval, has not yet emerged from barbarism.

              And yet charms are frequently not alone ranked with beauty (which

ought properly to be a question merely of the form) as supplementary to the

aesthetic universal delight, but they have been accredited as intrinsic beauties,

and consequently the matter of delight passed off for the form. This is a

misconception which, like many others that have still an underlying element

of truth, may be removed by a careful definition of these concepts.

              A judgement of taste which is uninfluenced by charm or emotion

(though these may be associated with the delight in the beautiful), and whose

determining ground, therefore, is simply finality of form, is a pure judgement

of taste.                              § 14. Exemplification.

 

 

              Aesthetic, just like theoretical (logical) judgements, are divisible into

empirical and pure. The first are those by which agreeableness or

disagreeableness, the second those by which beauty is predicated of an object

or its mode of representation. The former are judgements of sense (material

aesthetic judgements), the latter (as formal) alone judgements of taste proper.

              A judgement of taste, therefore, is only pure so far as its determining

ground is tainted with no merely empirical delight. But such a taint is always

present where charm or emotion have a share in the judgement by which

something is to be described as beautiful.

              Here now there is a recrudescence of a number of specious pleas that

go the length of putting forward the case that charm is not merely a necessary

ingredient of beauty, but is even of itself sufficient to merit the name of

beautiful. A mere colour, such as the green of a plot of grass, or a mere tone

(as distinguished from sound or noise), like that of a violin, is described by

most people as in itself beautiful, notwithstanding the fact that both seem to

depend merely on the matter of the representations in other words, simply on

sensation-which only entitles them to be called agreeable. But it will at the

same time be observed that sensations of colour as well as of tone are only

entitled to be immediately regarded as beautiful where, in either case, they

are pure. This is a determination which at once goes to their form, and it is

the only one which these representations possess that admits with certainty of

being universally communicated. For it is not to be assumed that even the

quality of the sensations agrees in all subjects, and we can hardly take it for

granted that the agreeableness of a colour, or of the tone of a musical

instrument, which we judge to be preferable to that of another, is given a like

preference in the estimate of every one.

              Assuming vibrations vibration sound, and, what is most important,

that the mind not alone perceives by sense their effect in stimulating the

organs, but also, by reflection, the regular play of the impressions (and

consequently the form in which different representations are united)-which I,

still, in no way doubt-then colour and tone would not be mere sensations.They would be nothing short of formal determinations of the unity of a

manifold of sensations, and in that case could even be ranked as intrinsic

beauties.

              But the purity of a simple mode of sensation means that its

uniformity is not disturbed or broken by any foreign sensation. It belongs

merely to the form; for abstraction may there be made from the quality of the

mode of such sensation (what colour or tone, if any, it represents). For this

reason, all simple colours are regarded as beautiful so far as pure. Composite

colours have not this advantage, because, not being simple, there is no

standard for estimating whether they should be called pure or impure.

              But as for the beauty ascribed to the object on account of its form,

and the supposition that it is capable of being enhanced by charm, this is a

common error and one very prejudicial to genuine, uncorrupted, sincere taste.

Nevertheless charms may be added to beauty to lend to the mind, beyond a

bare delight, an adventitious interest in the representation of the object, and

thus to advocate taste and its cultivation. This applies especially where taste

is as yet crude and untrained. But they are positively subversive of the

judgement of taste, if allowed to obtrude themselves as grounds of estimating

beauty. For so far are they from contributing to beauty that it is only where

taste is still weak and untrained that, like aliens, they are admitted as a

favour, and only on terms that they do not violate that beautiful form.

              In painting, sculpture, and in fact in all the formative arts, in

architecture and horticulture, so far as fine arts, the design is what is essential.

Here it is not what gratifies in sensation but merely what pleases by its form,

that is the fundamental prerequisite for taste. The colours which give

brilliancy to the sketch are part of the charm. They may no doubt, in their

own way, enliven the object for sensation, but make it really worth looking at

and beautiful they cannot. Indeed, more often than not the requirements of

the beautiful form restrict them to a very narrow compass, and, even where

charm is admitted, it is only this form that gives them a place of honour.

              All form of objects of sense (both of external and also, mediately, of

internal sense) is either figure or play. In the latter case it is either play of

figures (in space: mimic and dance), or mere play of sensations (in time). The

charm of colours, or of the agreeable tones of instruments, may be added: but

the design in the former and the composition in the latter constitute the properobject of the pure judgement of taste. To say that the purity alike of colours

and of tones, or their variety and contrast, seem to contribute to beauty, is by

no means to imply that, because in themselves agreeable, they therefore yield

an addition to the delight in the form and one on a par with it. The real

meaning rather is that they make this form more clearly, definitely, and

completely intuitable, and besides stimulate the representation by their

charm, as they excite and sustain the attention directed to the object itself.

              Even what is called ornamentation (parerga), i.e., what is only an

adjunct and not an intrinsic constituent in the complete representation of the

object, in augmenting the delight of taste does so only by means of its form.

Thus it is with the frames of pictures or the drapery on statues, or the

colonnades of palaces. But if the ornamentation does not itself enter into the

composition of the beautiful form-if it is introduced like a gold frame merely

to win approval for the picture by means of its charm-it is then called finery

and takes away from the genuine beauty.

              Emotion-a sensation where an agreeable feeling is produced merely

by means of a momentary check followed by a more powerful outpouring of

the vital force-is quite foreign to beauty. Sublimity (with which the feeling of

emotion is connected) requires, however, a different standard of estimation

from that relied upon by taste. A pure judgement of taste has, then, for its

determining ground neither charm nor emotion, in a word, no sensation as

matter of the aesthetic judgement.§ 15. The judgement of taste is entirely independent of the concept of

                                      perfection.

 

 

              Objective finality can only be cognized by means of a reference of

the manifold to a definite end, and hence only through a concept. This alone

makes it clear that the beautiful, which is estimated on the ground of a mere

formal finality, i.e., a finality apart from an end, is wholly independent of the

representation of the good. For the latter presupposes an objective finality,

i.e., the reference of the object to a definite end.

              Objective finality is either external, i.e., the utility, or internal, i. e.,

the perfection, of the object. That the delight in an object on account of which

we call it beautiful is incapable of resting on the representation of its utility,

is abundantly evident from the two preceding articles; for in that case, it

would not be an immediate delight in the object, which latter is the essential

condition of the judgement upon beauty. But in an objective, internal finality,

i.e., perfection, we have what is more akin to the predicate of beauty, and so

this has been held even by philosophers of reputation to be convertible with

beauty, though subject to the qualification: where it is thought in a confused

way. In a critique of taste it is of the utmost importance to decide whether

beauty is really reducible to the concept of perfection.

              For estimating objective finality we always require the concept of an

end, and, where such finality has to be, not an external one (utility), but an

internal one, the concept of an internal end containing the ground of the

internal possibility of the object. Now an end is in general that, the concept of

which may be regarded as the ground of the possibility of the object itself. So

in order to represent an objective finality in a thing we must first have a

concept of what sort of a thing it is to be. The agreement of the manifold in a

thing with this concept (which supplies the rule of its synthesis) is the

qualitative perfection of the thing. Quantitative perfection is entirely distinct

from this. It consists in the completeness of anything after its kind, and is a

mere concept of quantity (of totality). In its case the question of what the

thing is to be is regarded as definitely disposed of, and we only ask whether it

is possessed of all the requisites that go to make it such. What is formal in therepresentation of a thing, i.e., the agreement of its manifold with a unity (i.e.,

irrespective of what it is to be), does not, of itself, afford us any cognition

whatsoever of objective finality. For since abstraction is made from this unity

as end (what the thing is to be), nothing is left but the subjective finality of

the representations in the mind of the subject intuiting. This gives a certain

finality of the representative state of the subject, in which the subject feels

itself quite at home in its effort to grasp a given form in the imagination, but

no perfection of any object, the latter not being here thought through any

concept. For instance, if in a forest I light upon a plot of grass, round which

trees stand in a circle, and if I do not then form any representation of an end,

as that it is meant to be used, say, for country dances, then not the least hint

of a concept of perfection is given by the mere form. To suppose a formal

objective finality that is yet devoid of an end, i.e., the mere form of a

perfection (apart from any matter or concept of that to which the agreement

relates, even though there was the mere general idea of a conformity to law)

is a veritable contradiction.

              Now the judgement of taste is an aesthetic judgement, one resting on

subjective grounds. No concept can be its determining ground, and hence not

one of a definite end. Beauty, therefore, as a formal subjective finality,

involves no thought whatsoever of a perfection of the object, as a would-be

formal finality which yet, for all that, is objective: and the distinction between

the concepts of the beautiful and the good, which represents both as differing

only in their logical form, the first being merely a confused, the second a

clearly defined, concept of perfection, while otherwise alike in content and

origin, all goes for nothing: for then there would be no specific difference

between them, but the judgement of taste would be just as much a cognitive

judgement as one by which something is described as good-just as the man in

the street, when be says that deceit is wrong, bases his judgement on

confused, but the philosopher on clear grounds, while both appeal in reality

to identical principles of reason. But I have already stated that an aesthetic

judgement is quite unique, and affords absolutely no (not even a confused)

knowledge of the object. It is only through a logical judgement that we get

knowledge. The aesthetic judgement, on the other hand, refers the

representation, by which an object is given, solely to the subject, and brings

to our notice no quality of the object, but only the final form in the

determination of the powers of representation engaged upon it. The

judgement is called aesthetic for the very reason that its determining groundcannot be a concept, but is rather the feeling (of the internal sense) of the

concert in the play of the mental powers as a thing only capable of being felt.

If, on the other band, confused concepts, and the objective judgement based

on them, are going to be called aesthetic, we shall find ourselves with an

understanding judging by sense, or a sense representing its objects by

concepts-a mere choice of contradictions. The faculty of concepts, be they

confused or be they clear, is understanding; and although understanding has

(as in all judgements) its role in the judgement of taste, as an aesthetic

judgement, its role there is not that of a faculty for cognizing an object, but of

a faculty for determining that judgement and its representation (without a

concept) according to its relation to the subject and its internal feeling, and

for doing so in so far as that judgement is possible according to a universal

rule.§ 16. A judgement of taste by which an object is described as beautiful,

            under the condition of a definite concept, is not pure.

 

 

              There are two kinds of beauty: free beauty (pulchritudo vaga), or

beauty which is merely dependent (pulchritudo adhaerens). The first

presupposes no concept of what the object should be; the second does

presuppose such a concept and, with it, an answering perfection of the object.

Those of the first kind are said to be (self-subsisting) beauties of this thing or

that thing; the other kind of beauty, being attached to a concept (conditioned

beauty), is ascribed to objects which come under the concept of a particular

end.

              Flowers are free beauties of nature. Hardly anyone but a botanist

knows the true nature of a flower, and even he, while recognizing in the

flower the reproductive organ of the plant, pays no attention to this natural

end when using his taste to judge of its beauty. Hence no perfection of any

kind-no internal finality, as something to which the arrangement of the

manifold is related-underlies this judgement. Many birds (the parrot, the

humming-bird, the bird of paradise), and a number of crustacea, are self-

subsisting beauties which are not appurtenant to any object defined with

respect to its end, but please freely and on their own account. So designs a la

grecque, foliage for framework or on wall-papers, etc., have no intrinsic

meaning; they represent nothing-no object under a definite concept-and are

free beauties. We may also rank in the same class what in music are called

fantasias (without a theme), and, indeed, all music that is not set to words.

              In the estimate of a free beauty (according to mere form) we have

the pure judgement of taste. No concept is here presupposed of any end for

which the manifold should serve the given object, and which the latter,

therefore, should represent-an incumbrance which would only restrict the

freedom of the imagination that, as it were, is at play in the contemplation of

the outward form.

              But the beauty of man (including under this head that of a man,

woman, or child), the beauty of a horse, or of a building (such as a church,

palace, arsenal, or summer-house), presupposes a concept of the end thatdefines what the thing has to be, and consequently a concept of its perfection;

and is therefore merely appendant beauty. Now, just as it is a clog on the

purity of the purity of the judgement of taste to have the agreeable (of

sensation) joined with beauty to which properly only the form is relevant, so

to combine the good with beauty (the good, namely, of the manifold to the

thing itself according to its end) mars its purity.

              Much might be added to a building that would immediately please

the eye, were it not intended for a church. A figure might be beautified with

all manner of flourishes and light but regular lines, as is done by the New

Zealanders with their tattooing, were we dealing with anything but the figure

of a human being. And here is one whose rugged features might be softened

and given a more pleasing aspect, only he has got to be a man, or is, perhaps,

a warrior that has to have a warlike appearance.

              Now the delight in the manifold of a thing, in reference to the

internal end that determines its possibility, is a delight based on a concept,

whereas delight in the beautiful is such as does not presuppose any concept,

but is immediately coupled with the representation through which the object

is given (not through which it is thought). If, now, the judgement of taste in

respect of the latter delight is made dependent upon the end involved in the

former delight as a judgement of reason, and is thus placed under a

restriction, then it is no longer a free and pure judgement of taste.

              Taste, it is true, stands to gain by this combination of intellectual

delight with the aesthetic. For it becomes fixed, and, while not universal, it

enables rules to be prescribed for it in respect of certain definite final objects.

But these rules are then not rules of taste, but merely rules for establishing a

union of taste with reason, i.e., of the beautiful with the good-rules by which

the former becomes available as an intentional instrument in respect of the

latter, for the purpose of bringing that temper of the mind which is self-

sustaining and of subjective universal validity to the support and maintenance

of that mode of thought which, while possessing objective universal validity,

can only be preserved by a resolute effort. But, strictly speaking, perfection

neither gains by beauty, nor beauty by perfection. The truth is rather this,

when we compare the representation through which an object is given to us

with the object (in respect of what it is meant to be) by means of a concept,

we cannot help reviewing it also in respect of the sensation in the subject.

Hence there results a gain to the entire faculty of our representative powerwhen harmony prevails between both states of mind.

              In respect of an object with a definite internal end, a judgement of

taste would only be pure where the person judging either has no concept of

this end, or else makes abstraction from it in his judgement. But in cases like

this, although such a person should lay down a correct judgement of taste,

since he would be estimating the object as a free beauty, he would still be

found fault with by another who saw nothing in its beauty but a dependent

quality (i.e., who looked to the end of the object) and would be accused by

him of false taste, though both would, in their own way, be judging correctly:

the one according to what he had present to his senses, the other according to

what was present in his thoughts. This distinction enables us to settle many

disputes about beauty on the part of critics; for we may show them how one

side is dealing with free beauty, and the other with that which is dependent:

the former passing a pure judgement of taste, the latter one that is applied

intentionally.                                § 17. Ideal of beauty.

 

 

              There can be no objective rule of taste by which what is beautiful

may be defined by means of concepts. For every judgement from that source

is aesthetic, i.e., its determining ground is the feeling of the subject, and not

any concept of an object. It is only throwing away labour to look for a

principle of taste that affords a universal criterion of the beautiful by definite

concepts; because what is sought is a thing impossible and inherently

contradictory. But in the universal communicability of the sensation (of

delight or aversion)-a communicability, too, that exists apart from any

concept-in the accord, so far as possible, of all ages and nations as to this

feeling in the representation of certain objects, we have the empirical

criterion, weak indeed and scarce sufficient to raise a presumption, of the

derivation of a taste, thus confirmed by examples, from grounds deep seated

and shared alike by all men, underlying their agreement in estimating the

forms under which objects are given to them.

              For this reason some products of taste are looked on as exemplary-

not meaning thereby that by imitating others taste may be acquired. For taste

must be an original faculty; whereas one who imitates a model, while

showing skill commensurate with his success, only displays taste as himself a
                      9
critic of this model. Hence it follows that the highest model, the archetype of

taste, is a mere idea, which each person must beget in his own consciousness,

and according to which he must form his estimate of everything that is an

object of taste, or that is an example of critical taste, and even of universal

taste itself. Properly speaking, an idea signifies a concept of reason, and an

ideal the representation of an individual existence as adequate to an idea.

Hence this archetype of taste-which rests, indeed, upon reason’s

indeterminate idea of a maximum, but is not, however, capable of being

represented by means of concepts, but only in an individual presentation-may

more appropriately be called the ideal of the beautiful. While not having this

ideal in our possession, we still strive to beget it within us. But it is bound to

be merely an ideal of the imagination, seeing that it rests, not upon concepts,

but upon the presentation-the faculty of presentation being the imagination.

Now, how do we arrive at such an ideal of beauty? Is it a priori orempirically? Further, what species of the beautiful admits of an ideal?

        9
              Models of taste with respect to the arts of speech must be composed

in a dead and learned language; the first, to prevent their having to suffer the

changes that inevitably overtake living ones, making dignified expressions

become degraded, common ones antiquated, and ones newly coined after a

short currency obsolete: the second to ensure its having a grammar that is not

subject to the caprices of fashion, but has fixed rules of its own.

              First of all, we do well to observe that the beauty for which an ideal

has to be sought cannot be a beauty that is free and at large, but must be one

fixed by a concept of objective finality. Hence it cannot belong to the object

of an altogether pure judgement of taste, but must attach to one that is partly

intellectual. In other words, where an ideal is to have place among the

grounds upon which any estimate is formed, then beneath grounds of that

kind there must lie some idea of reason according to determinate concepts, by

which the end underlying the internal possibility of the object is determined a

priori. An ideal of beautiful flowers, of a beautiful suite of furniture, or of a

beautiful view, is unthinkable. But, it may also be impossible to represent an

ideal of a beauty dependent on definite ends, e.g., a beautiful residence, a

beautiful tree, a beautiful garden, etc., presumably because their ends are not

sufficiently defined and fixed by their concept, with the result that their

finality is nearly as free as with beauty that is quite at large. Only what has in

itself the end of its real existence-only man that is able himself to determine

his ends by reason, or, where he has to derive them from external perception,

can still compare them with essential and universal ends, and then further

pronounce aesthetically upon their accord with such ends, only he, among all

objects in the world, admits, therefore, of an ideal of beauty, just as humanity

in his person, as intelligence, alone admits of the ideal of perfection.

              Two factors are here involved. First, there is the aesthetic normal

idea, which is an individual intuition (of the imagination). This represents the

norm by which we judge of a man as a member of a particular animal

species. Secondly, there is the rational idea. This deals with the ends of

humanity so far as capable of sensuous representation, and converts them into

a principle for estimating his outward form, through which these ends are

revealed in their phenomenal effect. The normal idea must draw from

experience the constituents which it requires for the form of an animal of a

particular kind. But the greatest finality in the construction of this form-thatwhich would serve as a universal norm for forming an estimate of each

individual of the species in question-the image that, as it were, forms an

intentional basis underlying the technic of nature, to which no separate

individual, but only the race as a whole, is adequate, has its seat merely in the

idea of the judging subject. Yet it is, with all its proportions, an aesthetic

idea, and, as such, capable of being fully presented in concreto in a model

image. Now, how is this effected? In order to render the process to some

extent intelligible (for who can wrest nature’s whole secret from her?), let us

attempt a psychological explanation.

              It is of note that the imagination, in a manner quite incomprehensible

to us, is able on occasion, even after a long lapse of time, not alone to recall

the signs for concepts, but also to reproduce the image and shape of an object

out of a countless number of others of a different, or even of the very same,

kind. And, further, if the mind is engaged upon comparisons, we may well

suppose that it can in actual fact, though the process is unconscious,

superimpose as it were one image upon another, and from the coincidence of

a number of the same kind arrive at a mean contour which serves as a

common standard for all. Say, for instance, a person has seen a thousand full-

grown men. Now if he wishes to judge normal size determined upon a

comparative estimate, then imagination (to my mind) allows a great number

of these images (perhaps the whole thousand) to fall one upon the other, and,

if I may be allowed to extend to the case the analogy of optical presentation,

in the space where they come most together, and within the contour where

the place is illuminated by the greatest concentration of colour, one gets a

perception of the average size, which alike in height and breadth is equally

removed from the extreme limits of the greatest and smallest statures; and

this is the stature of a beautiful man. (The same result could be obtained in a

mechanical way, by taking the measures of all the thousand, and adding

together their heights, and their breadths [and thicknesses], and dividing the

sum in each case by a thousand.) But the power of imagination does all this

by means of a dynamical effect upon the organ of internal sense, arising from

the frequent apprehension of such forms. If, again, for our average man we

seek on similar lines for the average head, and for this the average nose, and

so on, then we get the figure that underlies the normal idea of a beautiful man

in the country where the comparison is instituted. For this reason a Negro

must necessarily (under these empirical conditions) have a different normal

idea of the beauty of forms from what a white man has, and the Chinamanone different from the European. And the. process would be just the same

with the model of a beautiful horse or dog (of a particular breed). This normal

idea is not derived from proportions taken from experience as definite rules:

rather is it according to this idea that rules forming estimates first become

possible. It is an intermediate between all singular intuitions of individuals,

with their manifold variations-a floating image for the whole genus, which

nature has set as an archetype underlying those of her products that belong to

the same species, but which in no single case she seems to have completely

attained. But the normal idea is far from giving the complete archetype of

beauty in the genus. It only gives the form that constitutes the indispensable

condition of all beauty, and, consequently, only correctness in the

presentation of the genus. It is, as the famous “Doryphorus” of Polycletus

was called, the rule (and Myron’s “Cow” might be similarly employed for its

kind). It cannot, for that very reason, contain anything specifically

characteristic; for otherwise it would not be the normal idea for the genus.

Further, it is not by beauty that its presentation pleases, but merely because it

does not contradict any of the conditions under which alone a thing belonging

to this genus can be beautiful. The presentation is merely academically
      10
correct.

        10
              It will be found that a perfectly regular face one that a painter

might fix his eye on for a model-ordinarily conveys nothing. This is because

it is devoid of anything characteristic, and so the idea of the race is expressed

in it rather than the specific qualities of a person. The exaggeration of what is

characteristic in this way, i.e., exaggeration violating the normal idea (the

finality of the race), is called caricature. Also experience shows that these

quite regular faces indicate as a rule internally only a mediocre type of man;

presumably-if one may assume that nature in its external form expresses the

proportions of the internal — because, where none of the mental qualities

exceed the proportion requisite to constitute a man free from faults, nothing

can be expected in the way of what is called genius, in which nature seems to

make a departure from its wonted relations of the mental powers in favour of

some special one.

              But the ideal of the beautiful is still something different from its

normal idea. For reasons already stated it is only to be sought in the human

figure. Here the ideal consists in the expression of the moral, apart from

which the object would not please at once universally and positively (notmerely negatively in a presentation academically correct). The visible

expression of moral ideas that govern men inwardly can, of course, only be

drawn from experience; but their combination with all that our reason

connects with the morally good in the idea of the highest finality-

benevolence, purity, strength, or equanimity, etc.-may be made, as it were,

visible in bodily manifestation (as effect of what is internal), and this

embodiment involves a union of pure ideas of reason and great imaginative

power, in one who would even form an estimate of it, not to speak of being

the author of its presentation. The correctness of such an ideal of beauty is

evidenced by its not permitting any sensuous charm to mingle with the

delight in its object, in which it still allows us to take a great interest. This

fact in turn shows that an estimate formed according to such a standard can

never be purely aesthetic, and that one formed according to an ideal of beauty

cannot be a simple judgement of taste.

      Definition of the Beautiful Derived from this Third Moment.

 

 

              Beauty is the form of finality in an object, so far as perceived in it
                                              11
apart from the representation of an end.

        11
              As telling against this explanation, the instance may be adduced

that there are things in which we see a form suggesting adaptation to an end,

without any end being cognized in them-as, for example, the stone

implements frequently obtained from sepulchral tumuli and supplied with a

hole, as if for [inserting] a handle; and although these by their shape

manifestly indicate a finality, the end of which is unknown, they are not on

that account described as beautiful. But the very fact of their being regarded

as art-products involves an immediate recognition that their shape is

attributed to some purpose or other and to a definite end. For this reason there

is no immediate delight whatever in their contemplation. A flower, on the

other hand, such as a tulip, is regarded as beautiful, because we meet with a

certain finality in its perception, which, in our estimate of it, is not referred to

any end whatever.  FOURTH MOMENT – Of the Judgement of Taste: Moment of the

                      Modality of the Delight in the Object.

 

 

            § 18. Nature of the modality in a judgement of taste.

 

 

              I may assert in the case of every representation that the synthesis of a

pleasure with the representation (as a cognition) is at least possible. Of what I

call agreeable I assert that it actually causes pleasure in me. But what we

have in mind in the case of the beautiful is a necessary reference on its part to

delight. However, this necessity is of a special kind. It is not a theoretical

objective necessity-such as would let us cognize a priori that every one will

feel this delight in the object that is called beautiful by me. Nor yet is it a

practical necessity, in which case, thanks to concepts of a pure rational will in

which free agents are supplied with a rule, this delight is the necessary

consequence of an objective law, and simply means that one ought absolutely

(without ulterior object) to act in a certain way. Rather, being such a

necessity as is thought in an aesthetic judgement, it can only be termed

exemplary. In other words it is a necessity of the assent of all to a judgement

regarded as exemplifying a universal rule incapable of formulation. Since an

aesthetic judgement is not an objective or cognitive judgement, this necessity

is not derivable from definite concepts, and so is not apodeictic. Much less is

it inferable from universality of experience (of a thoroughgoing agreement of

judgements about the beauty of a certain object). For, apart from the fact that

experience would hardly furnish evidences sufficiently numerous for this

purpose, empirical judgements do not afford any foundation for a concept of

the necessity of these judgements.  § 19. The subjective necessity attributed to a judgement of taste is

                                      conditioned.

 

 

              The judgement of taste exacts agreement from every one; and a

person who describes something as beautiful insists that every one ought to

give the object in question his approval and follow suit in describing it as

beautiful. The ought in aesthetic judgements, therefore, despite an accordance

with all the requisite data for passing judgement, is still only pronounced

conditionally. We are suitors for agreement from every one else, because we

are fortified with a ground common to all. Further, we would be able to count

on this agreement, provided we were always assured of the correct

subsumption of the case under that ground as the rule of approval.§ 20. The condition of the necessity advanced by a judgement of taste is

                          the idea of a common sense.

 

 

              Were judgements of taste (like cognitive judgements) in possession

of a definite objective principle, then one who in his judgement followed

such a principle would claim unconditioned necessity for it. Again, were they

devoid of any principle, as are those of the mere taste of sense, then no

thought of any necessity on their part would enter one’s head. Therefore they

must have a subjective principle, and one which determines what pleases or

displeases, by means of feeling only and not through concepts, but yet with

universal validity. Such a principle, however, could only be regarded as a

common sense. This differs essentially from common understanding, which

is also sometimes called common sense (sensus communis): for the

judgement of the latter is not one by feeling, but always one by concepts,

though usually only in the shape of obscurely represented principles.

              The judgement of taste, therefore, depends on our presupposing the

existence of a common sense. (But this is not to be taken to mean some

external sense, but the effect arising from the free play of our powers of

cognition.) Only under the presupposition, I repeat, of such a common sense,

are we able to lay down a judgement of taste.        § 21. Have we reason for presupposing a common sense?

 

 

              Cognitions and judgements must, together with their attendant

conviction, admit of being universally communicated; for otherwise a

correspondence with the object would not be due to them. They would be a

conglomerate constituting a mere subjective play of the powers of

representation, just as scepticism would have it. But if cognitions are to admit

of communication, then our mental state, i.e., the way the cognitive powers

are attuned for cognition generally, and, in fact, the relative proportion

suitable for a representation (by which an object is given to us) from which

cognition is to result, must also admit of being universally communicated, as,

without this, which is the subjective condition of the act of knowing,

knowledge, as an effect, would not arise. And this is always what actually

happens where a given object, through the intervention of sense, sets the

imagination at work in arranging the manifold, and the imagination, in turn,

the understanding in giving to this arrangement the unity of concepts. But this

disposition of the cognitive powers has a relative proportion differing with

the diversity of the objects that are given. However, there must be one in

which this internal ratio suitable for quickening (one faculty by the other) is

best adapted for both mental powers in respect of cognition (of given objects)

generally; and this disposition can only be determined through feeling (and

not by concepts). Since, now this disposition itself must admit of being

universally communicated, and hence also the feeling of it (in the case of a

given representation), while again, the universal communicability of a feeling

presupposes a common sense: it follows that our assumption of it is well

founded. And here, too, we do not have to take our stand on psychological

observations, but we assume a common sense as the necessary condition of

the universal communicability of our knowledge, which is presupposed in

every logic and every principle of knowledge that is not one of scepticism.§ 22. The necessity of the universal assent that is thought in a judgement

of taste, is a subjective necessity which, under the presupposition of a

                  common sense, is represented as objective.

 

 

              In all judgements by which we describe anything as beautiful, we

tolerate no one else being of a different opinion, and in taking up this position

we do not rest our judgement upon concepts, but only on our feeling.

Accordingly we introduce this fundamental feeling not as a private feeling,

but as a public sense. Now, for this purpose, experience cannot be made the

ground of this common sense, for the latter is invoked to justify judgements

containing an “ought.” The assertion is not that every one will fall in with our

judgement, but rather that every one ought to agree with it. Here I put

forward my judgement of taste as an example of the judgement of common

sense, and attribute to it on that account exemplary validity. Hence common

sense is a mere ideal norm. With this as presupposition, a judgement that

accords with it, as well as the delight in an object expressed in that

judgement, is rightly converted into a rule for everyone. For the principle,

while it is only subjective, being yet assumed as subjectively universal (a

necessary idea for everyone), could, in what concerns the consensus of

different judging subjects, demand universal assent like an objective

principle, provided we were assured of our subsumption under it being

correct.

              This indeterminate norm of a common sense is, as a matter of fact,

presupposed by us; as is shown by our presuming to lay down judgements of

taste. But does such a common sense in fact exist as a constitutive principle

of the possibility of experience, or is it formed for us as a regulative principle

by a still higher principle of reason, that for higher ends first seeks to beget in

us a common sense? Is taste, in other words, a natural and original faculty, or

is it only the idea of one that is artificial and to be acquired by us, so that a

judgement of taste, with its demand for universal assent, is but a requirement

of reason for generating such a consensus, and does the “ought,” i. e., the

objective necessity of the coincidence of the feeling of all with the particular

feeling of each, only betoken the possibility of arriving at some sort of

unanimity in these matters, and the judgement of taste only adduce anexample of the application of this principle? These are questions which as yet

we are neither willing nor in a position to investigate. For the present we have

only to resolve the faculty of taste into its elements, and to unite these

ultimately in the idea of a common sense.

      Definition of the Beautiful drawn from the Fourth Moment.

 

 

              The beautiful is that which, apart from a concept, is cognized as

object of a necessary delight.            General Remark on the First Section of the Analytic.

 

 

              The result to be extracted from the foregoing analysis is in effect

this: That everything runs up into the concept of taste as a critical faculty by

which an object is estimated in reference to the free conformity to law of the

imagination. If, now, imagination must in the judgement of taste be regarded

in its freedom, then, to begin with, it is not taken as reproductive, as in its

subjection to the laws of association, but as productive and exerting an

activity of its own (as originator of arbitrary forms of possible intuitions).

And although in the apprehension of a given object of sense it is tied down to

a definite form of this object and, to that extent, does not enjoy free play (as it

does in poetry), still it is easy to conceive that the object may supply ready-

made to the imagination just such a form of the arrangement of the manifold

as the imagination, if it were left to itself, would freely protect in harmony

with the general conformity to law of the understanding. But that the

imagination should be both free and of itself conformable to law, i. e., carry

autonomy with it, is a contradiction. The understanding alone gives the law.

Where, however, the imagination is compelled to follow a course laid down

by a definite law, then what the form of the product is to be is determined by

concepts; but, in that case, as already shown, the delight is not delight in the

beautiful, but in the good (in perfection, though it be no more than formal

perfection), and the judgement is not one due to taste. Hence it is only a

conformity to law without a law, and a subjective harmonizing of the

imagination and the understanding without an objective one-which latter

would mean that the representation was referred to a definite concept of the

object-that can consist with the free conformity to law of the understanding

(which has also been called finality apart from an end) and with the specific

character of a judgement of taste.

              Now geometrically regular figures, a circle, a square, a cube, and the

like, are commonly brought forward by critics of taste as the most simple and

unquestionable examples of beauty. And yet the very reason why they are

called regular, is because the only way of representing them is by looking on

them as mere presentations of a determinate concept by which the figure has

its rule (according to which alone it is possible) prescribed for it. One or otherof these two views must, therefore, be wrong: either the verdict of the critics

that attributes beauty to such figures, or else our own, which makes finality

apart from any concept necessary for beauty.

              One would scarce think it necessary for a man to have taste to take

more delight in a circle than in a scrawled outline, in an equilateral and

equiangular quadrilateral than in one that is all lop-sided, and, as it were,

deformed. The requirements of common understanding ensure such a

preference without the least demand upon taste. Where some purpose is

perceived, as, for instance, that of forming an estimate of the area of a plot of

land, or rendering intelligible the relation of divided parts to one another and

to the whole, then regular figures, and those of the simplest kind, are needed;

and the delight does not rest immediately upon the way the figure strikes the

eye, but upon its serviceability for all manner of possible purposes. A room

with the walls making oblique angles, a plot laid out in a garden in a similar

way, even any violation of symmetry, as well in the figure of animals (e.g.,

being one-eyed) as in that of buildings, or of flower-beds, is displeasing

because of its perversity of form, not alone in a practical way in respect of

some definite use to which the thing may be put, but for an estimate that

looks to all manner of possible purposes. With the judgement of taste the case

is different. For, when it is pure, it combines delight or aversion immediately

with the bare contemplation of the object irrespective of its use or of any end.

              The regularity that conduces to the concept of an object is, in fact,

the indispensable condition (conditio sine qua non) of grasping the object as a

single representation and giving to the manifold its determinate form. This

determination is an end in respect of knowledge; and in this connection it is

invariably coupled with delight (such as attends the accomplishment of any,

even problematical, purpose). Here, however, we have merely the value set

upon the solution that satisfies the problem, and not a free and

indeterminately final entertainment of the mental powers with what is called

beautiful. In the latter case, understanding is at the service of imagination, in

the former, this relation is reversed.

              With a thing that owes its possibility to a purpose, a building, or

even an animal, its regularity, which consists in symmetry, must express the

unity of the intuition accompanying the concept of its end, and belongs with

it to cognition. But where all that is intended is the maintenance of a free play

of the powers of representation (subject, however, to the condition that thereis to be nothing for understanding to take exception to), in ornamental

gardens, in the decoration of rooms, in all kinds of furniture that shows good

taste, etc., regularity in the shape of constraint is to be avoided as far as

possible. Thus English taste in gardens, and fantastic taste in furniture, push

the freedom of imagination to the verge of what is grotesque the idea being

that in this divorce from all constraint of rules the precise instance is being

afforded where taste can exhibit its perfection in projects of the imagination

to the fullest extent.

              All stiff regularity (such as borders on mathematical regularity) is

inherently repugnant to taste, in that the contemplation of it affords us no

lasting entertainment. Indeed, where it has neither cognition nor some

definite practical end expressly in view, we get heartily tired of it. On the

other hand, anything that gives the imagination scope for unstudied and final

play is always fresh to us. We do not grow to hate the very sight of it.

Marsden, in his description of Sumatra, observes that the free beauties of

nature so surround the beholder on all sides that they cease to have much

attraction for him. On the other band he found a pepper garden full of charm,

on coming across it in mid-forest with its rows of parallel stakes on which the

plant twines itself. From all this he infers that wild, and in its appearance

quite irregular beauty, is only pleasing as a change to one whose eyes have

become surfeited with regular beauty. But he need only have made the

experiment of passing one day in his pepper garden to realize that once the

regularity has enabled the understanding to put itself in accord with the order

that is the constant requirement, instead of the object diverting him any

longer, it imposes an irksome constraint upon the imagination: whereas

nature subject to no constraint of artificial rules, and lavish, as it there is, in

its luxuriant variety can supply constant food for his taste. Even a bird’s song,

which we can reduce to no musical rule, seems to have more freedom in it,

and thus to be richer for taste, than the human voice singing in accordance

with all the rules that the art of music prescribes; for we grow tired much

sooner of frequent and lengthy repetitions of the latter. Yet here most likely

our sympathy with the mirth of a dear little creature is confused with the

beauty of its song, for if exactly imitated by man (as has been sometimes

done with the notes of the nightingale) it would strike our ear as wholly

destitute of taste.

              Further, beautiful objects have to be distinguished from beautifulviews of objects (where the distance often prevents a clear perception). In the

latter case, taste appears to fasten, not so much on what the imagination

grasps in this field, as on the incentive it receives to indulge in poetic fiction,

i. e., in the peculiar fancies with which the mind entertains itself as it is being

continually stirred by the variety that strikes the eye. It is just as when we

watch the changing shapes of the fire or of a rippling brook: neither of which

are things of beauty, but they convey a charm to the imagination, because

they sustain its free play.

 

                       BOOK II – Analytic of the Sublime.

 

 

§ 23. Transition from the faculty of estimating the beautiful to that of

                              estimating the sublime.

 

 

              The beautiful and the sublime agree on the point of pleasing on their

own account. Further they agree in not presupposing either a judgement of

sense or one logically determinant, but one of reflection. Hence it follows that

the delight does not depend upon a sensation, as with the agreeable, nor upon

a definite concept, as does the delight in the good, although it has, for all that,

an indeterminate reference to concepts. Consequently the delight is connected

with the mere presentation or faculty of presentation, and is thus taken to

express the accord, in a given intuition, of the faculty of presentation, or the

imagination, with the faculty of concepts that belongs to understanding or

reason, in the sense of the former assisting the latter. Hence both kinds of

judgements are singular, and yet such as profess to be universally valid in

respect of every subject, despite the fact that their claims are directed merely

to the feeling of pleasure and not to any knowledge of the object.

              There are, however, also important and striking differences between

the two. The beautiful in nature is a question of the form of object, and this

consists in limitation, whereas the sublime is to be found in an object even

devoid of form, so far as it immediately involves, or else by its presence

provokes a representation of limitlessness, yet with a superadded thought of

its totality. Accordingly, the beautiful seems to be regarded as a presentation

of an indeterminate concept of understanding, the sublime as a presentation

of an indeterminate concept of reason. Hence the delight is in the former case

coupled with the representation of quality, but in this case with that of

quantity. Moreover, the former delight is very different from the latter in

kind. For the beautiful is directly attended with a feeling of the furtherance of

life, and is thus compatible with charms and a playful imagination. On the

other hand, the feeling of the sublime is a pleasure that only arises indirectly,

being brought about by the feeling of a momentary check to the vital forcesfollowed at once by a discharge all the more powerful, and so it is an emotion

that seems to be no sport, but dead earnest in the affairs of the imagination.

Hence charms are repugnant to it; and, since the mind is not simply attracted

by the object, but is also alternately repelled thereby, the delight in the

sublime does not so much involve positive pleasure as admiration or respect,

i. e., merits the name of a negative pleasure.

              But the most important and vital distinction between the sublime and

the beautiful is certainly this: that if, as is allowable, we here confine our

attention in the first instance to the sublime in objects of nature (that of art

being always restricted by the conditions of an agreement with nature), we

observe that whereas natural beauty (such as is self-subsisting) conveys a

finality in its form making the object appear, as it were, preadapted to our

power of judgement, so that it thus forms of itself an object of our delight,

that which, without our indulging in any refinements of thought, but, simply

in our apprehension of it, excites the feeling of the sublime, may appear,

indeed, in point of form to contravene the ends of our power of judgement, to

be ill-adapted to our faculty of presentation, and to be, as it were, an outrage

on the imagination, and yet it is judged all the more sublime on that account.

              From this it may be seen at once that we express ourselves on the

whole inaccurately if we term any object of nature sublime, although we may

with perfect propriety call many such objects beautiful. For how can that

which is apprehended as inherently contra-final be noted with an expression

of approval? All that we can say is that the object lends itself to the

presentation of a sublimity discoverable in the mind.

              For the sublime, in the strict sense of the word, cannot be contained

in any sensuous form, but rather concerns ideas of reason, which, although no

adequate presentation of them is possible, may be excited and called into the

mind by that very inadequacy itself which does admit of sensuous

presentation. Thus the broad ocean agitated by storms cannot be called

sublime. Its aspect is horrible, and one must have stored one’s mind in

advance with a rich stock of ideas, if such an intuition is to raise it to the

pitch of a feeling which is itself sublime-sublime because the mind has been

incited to abandon sensibility and employ itself upon ideas involving higher

finality.

              Self-subsisting natural beauty reveals to us a technic of nature whichshows it in the light of a system ordered in accordance with laws the principle

of which is not to be found within the range of our entire faculty of

understanding. This principle is that of a finality relative to the employment

of judgement in respect of phenomena which have thus to be assigned, not

merely to nature regarded as aimless mechanism, but also to nature regarded

after the analogy of art. Hence it gives a veritable extension, not, of course, to

our knowledge of objects of nature, but to our conception of nature itself-

nature as mere mechanism being enlarged to the conception of nature as art-

an extension inviting profound inquiries as to the possibility of such a form.

But in what we are wont to call sublime in nature there is such an absence of

anything leading to particular objective principles and corresponding forms

of nature that it is rather in its chaos, or in its wildest and most irregular

disorder and desolation, provided it gives signs of magnitude and power, that

nature chiefly excites the ideas of the sublime. Hence we see that the concept

of the sublime in nature is far less important and rich in consequences than

that of its beauty. It gives on the whole no indication of anything final in

nature itself, but only in the possible employment of our intuitions of it in

inducing a feeling in our own selves of a finality quite independent of nature.

For the beautiful in nature we must seek a ground external to ourselves, but

for the sublime one merely in ourselves and the attitude of mind that

introduces sublimity into the representation of nature. This is a very needful

preliminary remark. It entirely separates the ideas of the sublime from that of

a finality of nature, and makes the theory of the sublime a mere appendage to

the aesthetic estimate of the finality of nature, because it does not give a

representation of any particular form in nature, but involves no more than the

development of a final employment by the imagination of its own

representation.    § 24. Subdivision of an investigation of the feeling of the sublime.

 

 

              In the division of the moments of an aesthetic estimate of objects in

respect of the feeling of the sublime, the course of the Analytic will be able to

follow the same principle as in the analysis of judgements of taste. For, the

judgement being one of the aesthetic reflective judgement, the delight in the

sublime, just like that in the beautiful, must in its quantity be shown to be

universally valid, in its quality independent of interest, in its relation

subjective finality, and the latter, in its modality, necessary. Hence the

method here will not depart from the lines followed in the preceding section:

unless something is made of the point that there, where the aesthetic

judgement bore on the form of the object, we began with the investigation of

its quality, whereas here, considering the formlessness that may belong to

what we call sublime, we begin with that of its quantity, as first moment of

the aesthetic judgement on the sublime-a divergence of method the reason for

which is evident from SS 23.

              But the analysis of the sublime obliges a division not required by

that of the beautiful, namely one into the mathematically and the dynamically

sublime.

              For the feeling of sublime involves as its characteristic feature a

mental movement combined with the estimate of the object, whereas taste in

respect of the beautiful presupposes that the mind is in restful contemplation,

and preserves it in this state. But this movement has to be estimated as

subjectively final (since the sublime pleases). Hence it is referred through the

imagination either to the faculty of cognition or to that of desire; but to

whichever faculty the reference is made, the finality of the given

representation is estimated only in respect of these faculties (apart from end

or interest). Accordingly the first is attributed to the object as a mathematical,

the second as a dynamical, affection of the imagination. Hence we get the

above double mode of representing an object as sublime.                A. THE MATHEMATICALLY SUBLIME.

 

 

                    § 25. Definition of the term “sublime”.

 

 

              Sublime is the name given to what is absolutely great. But to be

great and to be a magnitude are entirely different concepts (magnitudo and

quantitas). In the same way, to assert without qualification (simpliciter) that

something is great is quite a different thing from saying that it is absolutely

great (absolute, non comparative magnum). The latter is what is beyond all

comparison great. What, then, is the meaning of the assertion that anything is

great, or small, or of medium size? What is indicated is not a pure concept of

understanding, still less an intuition of sense; and just as little is it a concept

of reason, for it does not import any principle of cognition. It must, therefore,

be a concept of judgement, or have its source in one, and must introduce as

basis of the judgement a subjective finality of the representation with

reference to the power of judgement. Given a multiplicity of the

homogeneous together constituting one thing, and we may at once cognize

from the thing itself that it is a magnitude (quantum). No comparison with

other things is required. But to determine how great it is always requires

something else, which itself has magnitude, for its measure. Now, since in the

estimate of magnitude we have to take into account not merely the

multiplicity (number of units) but also the magnitude of the unit (the

measure), and since the magnitude of this unit in turn always requires

something else as its measure and as the standard of its comparison, and so

on, we see that the computation of the magnitude of phenomena is, in all

cases, utterly incapable of affording us any absolute concept of a magnitude,

and can, instead, only afford one that is always based on comparison.

              If, now, I assert without qualification that anything is great, it would

seem that I have nothing in the way of a comparison present to my mind, or

at least nothing involving an objective measure, for no attempt is thus made

to determine how great the object is. But, despite the standard of comparison

being merely subjective, the claim of the judgement is none the less one touniversal agreement; the judgements: “that man is beautiful” and “He is tall”,

do not purport to speak only for the judging subject, but, like theoretical

judgements, they demand the assent of everyone.

              Now in a judgement that without qualification describes anything as

great, it is not merely meant that the object has a magnitude, but greatness is

ascribed to it pre-eminently among many other objects of a like kind, yet

without the extent of this pre-eminence being determined. Hence a standard is

certainly laid at the basis of the judgement, which standard is presupposed to

be one that can be taken as the same for every one, but which is available

only for an aesthetic estimate of the greatness, and not for one that is logical

(mathematically determined), for the standard is a merely subjective one

underlying the reflective judgement upon the greatness. Furthermore, this

standard may be empirical, as, let us say, the average size of the men known

to us, of animals of a certain kind, of trees, of houses, of mountains, and so

forth. Or it may be a standard given a priori, which by reason of the

imperfections of the judging subject is restricted to subjective conditions of

presentation in concreto; as, in the practical sphere, the greatness of a

particular virtue, or of public liberty and justice in a country; or, in the

theoretical sphere, the greatness of the accuracy or inaccuracy of an

experiment or measurement, etc.

              Here, now, it is of note that, although we have no interest whatever

in the object, i.e., its real existence may be a matter of no concern to us, still

its mere greatness, regarded even as devoid of form, is able to convey a

universally communicable delight and so involve the consciousness of a

subjective finality in the employment of our cognitive faculties, but not, be it

remembered, a delight in the object, for the latter may be formless, but, in

contradistinction to what is the case with the beautiful, where the reflective

judgement finds itself set to a key that is final in respect of cognition

generally, a delight in an extension affecting the imagination itself.

              If (subject as above) we say of an object, without qualification, that

it is great, this is not a mathematically determinant, but a mere reflective

judgement upon its representation, which is subjectively final for a particular

employment of our cognitive faculties in the estimation of magnitude, and we

then always couple with the representation a kind of respect, just as we do a

kind of contempt with what we call absolutely small. Moreover, the estimate

of things as great or small extends to everything, even to all their qualities.Thus we call even their beauty great or small. The reason of this is to be

found in the fact that we have only got to present a thing in intuition, as the

precept of judgement directs (consequently to represent it aesthetically), for it

to be in its entirety a phenomenon, and hence a quantum.

              If, however, we call anything not alone great, but, without

qualification, absolutely, and in every respect (beyond all comparison) great,

that is to say, sublime, we soon perceive that for this it is not permissible to

seek an appropriate standard outside itself, but merely in itself. It is a

greatness comparable to itself alone. Hence it comes that the sublime is not to

be looked for in the things of nature, but only in our own ideas. But it must be

left to the deduction to show in which of them it resides.

              The above definition may also be expressed in this way: that is

sublime in comparison with which all else is small. Here we readily see that

nothing can be given in nature, no matter how great we may judge it to be,

which, regarded in some other relation, may not be degraded to the level of

the infinitely little, and nothing so small which in comparison with some still

smaller standard may not for our imagination be enlarged to the greatness of

a world. Telescopes have put within our reach an abundance of material to go

upon in making the first observation, and microscopes the same in making

the second. Nothing, therefore, which can be an object of the senses is to be

termed sublime when treated on this footing. But precisely because there is a

striving in our imagination towards progress ad infinitum, while reason

demands absolute totality, as a real idea, that same inability on the part of our

faculty for the estimation of the magnitude of things of the world of sense to

attain to this idea, is the awakening of a feeling of a supersensible faculty

within us; and it is the use to which judgement naturally puts particular

objects on behalf of this latter feeling, and not the object of sense, that is

absolutely great, and every other contrasted employment small. Consequently

it is the disposition of soul evoked by a particular representation engaging the

attention of the reflective judgement, and not the object, that is to be called

sublime.

              The foregoing formulae defining the sublime may, therefore, be

supplemented by yet another: The sublime is that, the mere capacity of

thinking which evidences a faculty of mind transcending every standard of

sense.§ 26. The estimation of the magnitude of natural things requisite for the

                                idea of the sublime.

 

 

              The estimation of magnitude by means of concepts of number (or

their signs in algebra) is mathematical, but that in mere intuition (by the eye)

is aesthetic. Now we can only get definite concepts of how great anything is

by having recourse to numbers (or, at any rate, by getting approximate

measurements by means of numerical series progressing ad infinitum), the

unit being the measure; and to this extent all logical estimation of magnitude

is mathematical. But, as the magnitude of the measure has to be assumed as a

known quantity, if, to form an estimate of this, we must again have recourse

to numbers involving another standard for their unit, and consequently must

again proceed mathematically, we can never arrive at a first or fundamental

measure, and so cannot get any definite concept of a given magnitude. The

estimation of the magnitude of the fundamental measure must, therefore,

consist merely in the immediate grasp which we can get of it in intuition, and

the use to which our imagination can put this in presenting the numerical

concepts: i.e., all estimation of the magnitude of objects of nature is in the

last resort aesthetic (i.e., subjectively and not objectively determined).

              Now for the mathematical estimation of magnitude there is, of

course, no greatest possible (for the power of numbers extends to infinity),

but for the aesthetic estimation there certainly is and of it I say that where it is

considered an absolute measure beyond which no greater is possible

subjectively (i.e., for the judging subject), it then conveys the idea of the

sublime and calls forth that emotion which no mathematical estimation of

magnitudes by numbers can evoke (unless in so far as the fundamental

aesthetic measure is kept vividly present to the imagination): because the

latter presents only the relative magnitude due to comparison with others of a

like kind, whereas the former presents magnitude absolutely, so far as the

mind can grasp it in an intuition.

              To take in a quantum intuitively in the imagination so as to be able

to use it as a measure, or unit for estimating magnitude by numbers, involves

two operations of this faculty: apprehension (apprehensio) andcomprehension (comprehension aesthetica). Apprehension presents no

difficulty: for this process can be carried on ad infinitum; but with the

advance of apprehension comprehension becomes more difficult at every step

and soon attains its maximum, and this is the aesthetically greatest

fundamental measure for the estimation of magnitude. For if the

apprehension has reached a point beyond which the representations of

sensuous intuition in the case of the parts first apprehended begin to

disappear from the imagination as this advances to the apprehension of yet

others, as much, then, is lost at one end as is gained at the other, and for

comprehension we get a maximum which the imagination cannot exceed.

              This explains Savary’s observations in his account of Egypt, that in

order to get the full emotional effect of the size of the Pyramids we must

avoid coming too near just as much as remaining too far away. For in the

latter case the representation of the apprehended parts (the tiers of stones) is

but obscure, and produces no effect upon the aesthetic judgement of the

Subject. In the former, however, it takes the eye some time to complete the

apprehension from the base to the summit; but in this interval the first tiers

always in part disappear before the imagination has taken in the last, and so

the comprehension is never complete. The same explanation may also

sufficiently account for the bewilderment, or sort of perplexity, which, as is

said, seizes the visitor on first entering St. Peter’s in Rome. For here a feeling

comes home to him of the inadequacy of his imagination for presenting the

idea of a whole within which that imagination attains its maximum, and, in its

fruitless efforts to extend this limit, recoils upon itself, but in so doing

succumbs to an emotional delight.

              At present I am not disposed to deal with the ground of this delight,

connected, as it is, with a representation in which we would least of all look

for it-a representation, namely, that lets us see its own inadequacy, and

consequently its subjective want of finality for our judgement in the

estimation of magnitude-but confine myself to the remark that if the aesthetic

judgement is to be pure (unmixed with any teleological judgement which, as

such, belongs to reason), and if we are to give a suitable example of it for the

Critique of aesthetic judgement, we must not point to the sublime in works of

art, e.g., buildings, statues and the like, where a human end determines the

form as well as the magnitude, nor yet in things of nature, that in their very

concept import a definite end, e.g., animals of a recognized natural order, butin rude nature merely as involving magnitude (and only in this so far as it

does not convey any charm or any emotion arising from actual danger). For,

in a representation of this kind, nature contains nothing monstrous (nor what

is either magnificent or horrible)-the magnitude apprehended may be

increased to any extent provided imagination is able to grasp it all in one

whole. An object is monstrous where by its size it defeats the end that forms

its concept. The colossal is the mere presentation of a concept which is

almost too great for presentation, i.e., borders on the relatively monstrous; for

the end to be attained by the presentation of a concept is made harder to

realize by the intuition of the object being almost too great for our faculty of

apprehension. A pure judgement upon the sublime must, however, have no

end belonging to the object as its determining ground, if it is to be aesthetic

and not to be tainted with any judgement of understanding or reason.

              Since whatever is to be a source of pleasure, apart from interest, to

the merely reflective judgement must involve in its representation subjective,

and, as such, universally valid finality-though here, however, no finality of

the form of the object underlies our estimate of it (as it does in the case of the

beautiful)-the question arises: What is the subjective finality, and what

enables it to be prescribed as a norm so as to yield a ground for universally

valid delight in the mere estimation of magnitude, and that, too, in a case

where it is pushed to the point at which faculty of imagination breaks down

in presenting the concept of a magnitude, and proves unequal to its task?

              In the successive aggregation of units requisite for the representation

of magnitudes, the imagination of itself advances ad infinitum without let or

  hindrance-understanding, however, conducting it by means of concepts of

number for which the former must supply the schema. This procedure

belongs to the logical estimation of magnitude, and, as such, is doubtless

something objectively final according to the concept of an end (as all

measurement is), but it is hot anything which for the aesthetic judgement is

final or pleasing. Further, in this intentional finality there is nothing

compelling us to tax the utmost powers of the imagination, and drive it as far

as ever it can reach in its presentations, so as to enlarge the size of the

measure, and thus make the single intuition holding the many in one (the

comprehension) as great as possible. For, in the estimation of magnitude by

the understanding (arithmetic), we get just as far, whether the comprehension

of the units is pushed to the number 10 (as in the decimal scale) or only to 4(as in the quaternary); the further production of magnitude being carried out

by the successive aggregation of units, or, if the quantum is given in intuition,

by apprehension, merely progressively (not comprehensively), according to

an adopted principle of progression. In this mathematical estimation of

magnitude, understanding is as well served and as satisfied whether

imagination selects for the unit a magnitude which one can take in at a

glance, e.g., a foot, or a perch, or else a German mile, or even the earth’s

diameter, the apprehension of which is indeed possible, but not its

comprehension in, sit intuition of the imagination (i.e., it is not possible by

means of a comprehension aesthetica, thought quite so by means of a

comprehension logica in a numerical concept). In each case the logical

estimation of magnitude advances ad infinitum with nothing to stop it.

              The mind, however, hearkens now to the voice of reason, which for

all given magnitudes-even for those which can never be completely

apprehended, though (in sensuous representation) estimated as completely

given-requires totality, and consequently comprehension in one intuition, and

which calls for a presentation answering to all the above members of a

progressively increasing numerical series, and does not exempt even the

infinite (space and time past) from this requirement, but rather renders it

inevitable for us to regard this infinite (in the judgement of common reason)

as completely given (i.e., given in its totality).

              But the infinite is absolutely (not merely comparatively) great. In

comparison with this all else (in the way of magnitudes of the same order) is

small. But the point of capital importance is that the mere ability even to

think it as a whole indicates a faculty of mind transcending every standard of

sense. For the latter would entail a comprehension yielding as unit a standard

bearing to the infinite ratio expressible in numbers, which is impossible. Still

the mere ability even to think the given infinite without contradiction, is

something that requires the presence in the human mind of a faculty that is

itself supersensible. For it is only through this faculty and its idea of a

noumenon, which latter, while not itself admitting of any intuition, is yet

introduced as substrate underlying the intuition of the world as mere

phenomenon, that the infinite of the world of sense, in the pure intellectual

estimation of magnitude, is completely comprehended under a concept,

although in the mathematical estimation by means of numerical concepts it

can never be completely thought. Even a faculty enabling the infinite ofsupersensible intuition to be regarded as given (in its intelligible substrate),

transcends every standard of sensibility and is great beyond all comparison

even with the faculty of mathematical estimation: not, of course, from a

theoretical point of view that looks to the interests of our faculty of

knowledge, but as a broadening of the mind that from another (the practical)

point of view feels itself empowered to pass beyond the narrow confines of

sensibility.

              Nature, therefore, is sublime in such of its phenomena as in their

intuition convey the idea of their infinity. But this can only occur through the

inadequacy of even the greatest effort of our imagination in the estimation of

the magnitude of an object. But, now, in the case of the mathematical

estimation of magnitude, imagination is quite competent to supply a measure

equal to the requirements of any object. For the numerical concepts of the

understanding can by progressive synthesis make any measure adequate to

any given magnitude. Hence it must be the aesthetic estimation of magnitude

in which we get at once a feeling of the effort towards a comprehension that

exceeds the faculty of imagination for mentally grasping the progressive

apprehension in a whole of intuition, and, with it, a perception of the

inadequacy of this faculty, which has no bounds to its progress, for taking in

and using for the estimation of magnitude a fundamental measure that

understanding could turn to account without the least trouble. Now the proper

unchangeable fundamental measure of nature is its absolute whole, which,

with it, regarded as a phenomenon, means infinity comprehended. But, since

this fundamental measure is a self-contradictory concept (owing to the

impossibility of the absolute totality of an endless progression), it follows

that where the size of a natural object is such that the imagination spends its

whole faculty of comprehension upon it in vain, it must carry our concept of

nature, to a supersensible substrate (underlying both nature and our faculty of

thought). which is, great beyond every standard of sense. Thus, instead of the

object, it is rather the cast of the mind in appreciating it that we have to

estimate as sublime.

              Therefore, just as the aesthetic judgement in its estimate of the

beautiful refers the imagination in its free play to the understanding, to bring

out its agreement with the concepts of the latter in general (apart from their

determination): so in its estimate of a thing as sublime it refers that faculty to

reason to bring out its subjective accord with ideas of reason (indeterminatelyindicated), i.e., to induce a temper of mind conformable-to that which the

influence of definite (practical) ideas would produce upon feeling, and in

common accord with it.

              This makes it evident that true sublimity must be sought only in the

mind of the judging subject, and not in the object of nature that occasions this

attitude by the estimate formed of it. Who would apply the term “sublime”

even to shapeless mountain masses towering one above the other in wild

disorder, with their pyramids of ice, or to the dark tempestuous ocean, or

such like things? But in the contemplation of them, without any regard to

their form, the mind abandons itself to the imagination and to a reason

placed, though quite apart from any definite end, in conjunction therewith,

and merely broadening its view, and it feels itself elevated in its own estimate

of itself on finding all the might of imagination still unequal to its ideas.

              We get examples of the mathematically sublime of nature in mere

intuition in all those instances where our imagination is afforded, not so much

a greater numerical concept as a large unit as measure (for shortening the

numerical series). A tree judged by the height of man gives, at all events, a

standard for a mountain; and, supposing this is, say, a mile high, it can serve

as unit for the number expressing the earth’s diameter, so as to make it

intuitable; similarly the earth’s diameter for the known planetary system; this

again for the system of the Milky Way; and the immeasurable host of such

systems, which go by the name of nebulae, and most likely in turn themselves

form such a system, holds out no prospect of a limit. Now in the aesthetic

estimate of such an immeasurable whole, the sublime does not lie so much in

the greatness of the number, as in the fact that in our onward advance we

always arrive at proportionately greater units. The systematic division of the

cosmos conduces to this result. For it represents all that is great in nature as

in turn becoming little; or, to be more exact, it represents our imagination in

all its boundlessness, and with it nature, as sinking into insignificance before

the ideas of reason, once their adequate presentation is attempted.        § 27. Quality of the delight in our estimate of the sublime.

 

 

              The feeling of our incapacity to attain to an idea that is a law for us,

is respect. Now the idea of the comprehension of any phenomenon whatever,

that may be given us, in a whole of intuition, is an idea imposed upon us by a

law of reason, which recognizes no definite, universally valid and

unchangeable measure except the absolute whole. But our imagination, even

when taxing itself to the uttermost on the score of this required

comprehension of a given object in a whole of intuition (and so with a view

to the presentation of the idea of reason), betrays its limits and its inadequacy,

but still, at the same time, its proper vocation of making itself adequate to the

same as law. Therefore the feeling of the sublime in nature is respect for our

own vocation, which we attribute to an object of nature by a certain

subreption (substitution of a respect for the object in place of one for the idea

of humanity in our own self-the subject); and this feeling renders, as it were,

intuitable the supremacy of our cognitive faculties on the rational side over

the greatest faculty of sensibility.

              The feeling of the sublime is, therefore, at once a feeling of

displeasure, arising from the inadequacy of imagination in the aesthetic

estimation of magnitude to attain to its estimation by reason, and a

simultaneously awakened pleasure, arising from this very judgement of the

inadequacy of the greatest faculty of sense being in accord with ideas of

reason, so far as the effort to attain to these is for us a law. It is, in other

words, for us a law (of reason), which goes to make us what we are, that we

should esteem as small in comparison with ideas of reason everything which

for us is great in nature as an object of sense; and that which makes us alive

to the feeling of this supersensible side of our being harmonizes with that

law. Now the greatest effort of the imagination in the presentation of the unit

for the estimation of magnitude involves in itself a reference to something

absolutely great, consequently a reference also to the law of reason that this

alone is to be adopted as the supreme measure of what is great. Therefore the

inner perception of the inadequacy of every standard of sense to serve for the

rational estimation of magnitude is a coming into accord with reason’s laws,

and a displeasure that makes us alive to the feeling of the supersensible sideof our being, according to which it is final, and consequently a pleasure, to

find every standard of sensibility falling short of the ideas of reason.

              The mind feels itself set in motion in the representation of the

sublime in nature; whereas in the aesthetic judgement upon what is beautiful

therein it is in restful contemplation. This movement, especially in its

inception, may be compared with vibration, i.e., with a rapidly alternating

repulsion and attraction produced by one and the same object. The point of

excess for the imagination (towards which it is driven in the apprehension of

the intuition) is like an abyss in which it fears to lose itself, yet again for the

rational idea of the supersensible it is not excessive, but conformable to law,

and directed to drawing out such an effort on the part of the imagination: and

so in turn as much a source of attraction as it was repellent to mere

sensibility. But the judgement itself all the while steadfastly preserves its

aesthetic character, because it represents, without being grounded on any

definite concept of the object, merely the subjective play of the mental

powers (imagination and reason) as harmonious by virtue of their very

contrast. For just as in the estimate of the beautiful imagination and

understanding by their concert generate subjective finality of the mental

faculties, so imagination and reason do so here by their conflict-that is to say

they induce a feeling of our possessing a pure and self-sufficient reason, or a

faculty for the estimation of magnitude, whose preeminence can only be

made intuitively evident by the inadequacy of that faculty which in the

presentation of magnitudes (of objects of sense) is itself unbounded.

              Measurement of a space (as apprehension) is at the same time a

description of it, and so an objective movement in the imagination and a

progression. On the other hand, the comprehension of the manifold in the

unity, not of thought, but of intuition, and consequently the comprehension of

the successively apprehended parts at one glance, is a retrogression that

removes the time-condition in the progression of the imagination, and renders

coexistence intuitable. Therefore, since the time-series is a condition of the

internal sense and of an intuition, it is a subjective movement of the

imagination by which it does violence to the internal sense-a violence which

must be proportionately more striking the greater the quantum which the

imagination comprehends in one intuition. The effort, therefore, to receive in

a single intuition a measure for magnitudes which it takes an appreciable time

to apprehend, is a mode of representation which, subjectively considered, iscontra-final, but objectively, is requisite for the estimation of magnitude, and

is consequently final. Here the very same violence that is wrought on the

subject through the imagination is estimated as final for the whole province

of the mind.

              The quality of the feeling of the sublime consists in being, in respect

of the faculty of forming aesthetic estimates, a feeling of displeasure at an

object, which yet, at the same time, is represented as being final-a

representation which derives its possibility from the fact that the subject’s

very incapacity betrays the consciousness of an unlimited faculty of the same

subject, and that the mind can only form an aesthetic estimate of the latter

faculty by means of that incapacity.

              In the case of the logical estimation of magnitude, the impossibility

of ever arriving at absolute totality by the progressive measurement of things

of the sensible world in time and space was cognized as an objective

impossibility, i.e., one of thinking the infinite as given, and not as simply

subjective, i.e., an incapacity for grasping it; for nothing turns there on the

amount of the comprehension in one intuition, as measure, but everything

depends on a numerical concept. But in an aesthetic estimation of magnitude

the numerical concept must drop out of count or undergo a change. The only

thing that is final for such estimation is the comprehension on the part of

imagination in respect of the unit of measure (the concept of a law of the

successive production of the concept of magnitude being consequently

avoided). If, now, a magnitude begins to tax the utmost stretch of our faculty

of comprehension in an intuition, and still numerical magnitudes-in respect of

which we are conscious of the boundlessness of our faculty-call upon the

imagination for aesthetic comprehension in a greater unit, the mind then gets

a feeling of being aesthetically confined within bounds. Nevertheless, with a

view to the extension of imagination necessary for adequacy with what is

unbounded in our faculty of reason, namely the idea of the absolute whole,

the attendant displeasure, and, consequently, the want of finality in our

faculty of imagination, is still represented as final for ideas of reason and

their animation. But in this very way the aesthetic judgement itself is

subjectively final for reason as source of ideas, i.e., of such an intellectual

comprehension as makes all aesthetic comprehension small, and the object is

received as sublime with a pleasure that is only possible through the

mediation of a displeasure.            B. THE DYNAMICALLY SUBLIME IN NATURE.

 

 

                              § 28. Nature as Might.

 

 

              Might is a power which is superior to great hindrances. It is termed

dominion if it is also superior to the resistance of that which itself possesses

might. Nature, considered in an aesthetic judgement as might that has no

dominion over us, is dynamically sublime.

              If we are to estimate nature as dynamically sublime, it must be

represented as a source of fear (though the converse, that every object that is

a source of fear, in our aesthetic judgement, sublime, does not hold). For in

forming an aesthetic estimate (no concept being present) the superiority to

hindrances can only be estimated according to the greatness of the resistance.

Now that which we strive to resist is an evil, and, if we do not find our

powers commensurate to the task, an object of fear. Hence the aesthetic

judgement can only deem nature a might, and so dynamically sublime, in so

far as it is looked upon as an object of fear.

              But we may look upon an object as fearful, and yet not be afraid of

it, if, that is, our estimate takes the form of our simply picturing to ourselves

the case of our wishing to offer some resistance to it and recognizing that all

such resistance would be quite futile. So the righteous man fears God without

being afraid of Him, because he regards the case of his wishing to resist God

and His commandments as one which need cause him no anxiety. But in

every such case, regarded by him as not intrinsically impossible, he cognizes

Him as One to be feared.

              One who is in a state of fear can no more play the part of a judge of

the sublime of nature than one captivated by inclination and appetite can of

the beautiful. He flees from the sight of an object filling him with dread; and

it is impossible to take delight in terror that is seriously entertained. Hence

the agreeableness arising from the cessation of an uneasiness is a state of joy.

But this, depending upon deliverance from a danger, is a rejoicingaccompanied with a resolve never again to put oneself in the way of the

danger: in fact we do not like bringing back to mind how we felt on that

occasion not to speak of going in search of an opportunity for experiencing it

again.

              Bold, overhanging, and, as it were, threatening rocks, thunderclouds

piled up the vault of heaven, borne along with flashes and peals, volcanos in

all their violence of destruction, hurricanes leaving desolation in their track,

the boundless ocean rising with rebellious force, the high waterfall of some

mighty river, and the like, make our power of resistance of trifling moment in

comparison with their might. But, provided our own position is secure, their

aspect is all the more attractive for its fearfulness; and we readily call these

objects sublime, because they raise the forces of the soul above the height of

vulgar commonplace, and discover within us a power of resistance of quite

another kind, which gives us courage to be able to measure ourselves against

the seeming omnipotence of nature.

              In the immeasurableness of nature and the incompetence of our

faculty for adopting a standard proportionate to the aesthetic estimation of the

magnitude of its realm, we found our own limitation. But with this we also

found in our rational faculty another non-sensuous standard, one which has

that infinity itself under it as a unit, and in comparison with which everything

in nature is small, and so found in our minds a pre-eminence over nature even

in it immeasurability. Now in just the same way the irresistibility of the might

of nature forces upon us the recognition of our physical helplessness as

beings of nature, but at the same time reveals a faculty of estimating

ourselves as independent of nature, and discovers a pre-eminence above

nature that is the foundation of a self-preservation of quite another kind from

that which may be assailed and brought into danger by external nature. This

saves humanity in our own person from humiliation, even though as mortal

men we have to submit to external violence. In this way, external nature is

not estimated in our aesthetic judgement as sublime so far as exciting fear,

but rather because it challenges our power (one not of nature) to regard as

small those things of which we are wont to be solicitous (worldly goods,

health, and life), and hence to regard its might (to which in these matters we

are no doubt subject) as exercising over us and our personality no such rude

dominion that we should bow down before it, once the question becomes one

of our highest principles and of our asserting or forsaking them. Thereforenature is here called sublime merely because it raises the imagination to a

presentation of those cases in which the mind can make itself sensible of the

appropriate sublimity of the sphere of its own being, even above nature.

              This estimation of ourselves loses nothing by the fact that we must

see ourselves safe in order to feel this soul-stirring delight-a fact from which

it might be plausibly argued that, as there is no seriousness in the danger, so

there is just as little seriousness in the sublimity of our faculty of soul. For

here the delight only concerns the province of our faculty disclosed in such a

case, so far as this faculty has its root in our nature; notwithstanding that its

development and exercise is left to ourselves and remains an obligation. Here

indeed there is truth-no matter how conscious a man, when he stretches his

reflection so far abroad, may be of his actual present helplessness.

              This principle has, doubtless, the appearance of being too far-fetched

and subtle, and so of lying beyond the reach of an aesthetic judgement. But

observation of men proves the reverse, and that it may be the foundation of

the commonest judgements, although one is not always conscious of its

presence. For what is it that, even to the savage, is the object of the greatest

admiration? It is a man who is undaunted, who knows no fear, and who,

therefore, does not give way to danger, but sets manfully to work with full

deliberation. Even where civilization has reached a high pitch, there remains

this special reverence for the soldier; only that there is then further required

of him that he should also exhibit all the virtues of peace-gentleness,

sympathy, and even becoming thought for his own person; and for the reason

that in this we recognize that his mind is above the threats of danger. And so,

comparing the statesman and the general, men may argue as they please as to

the pre-eminent respect which is due to either above the other; but the verdict

of the aesthetic judgement is for the latter. War itself, provided it is

conducted with order and a sacred respect for the rights of civilians, has

something sublime about it, and gives nations that carry it on in such a

manner a stamp of mind only the more sublime the more numerous the

dangers to which they are exposed, and which they are able to meet with

fortitude. On the other hand, a prolonged peace favours the predominance of

a mere commercial spirit, and with it a debasing self-interest, cowardice, and

effeminacy, and tends to degrade the character of the nation.

              So far as sublimity is predicated of might, this solution of the

concept of it appears at variance with the fact that we are wont to representGod in the tempest, the storm, the earthquake, and the like, as presenting

Himself in His wrath, but at the same time also in His sublimity, and yet here

it would be alike folly and presumption to imagine a pre-eminence of our

minds over the operations and, as it appears, even over the direction of such

might. Here, instead of a feeling of the sublimity of our own nature,

submission, prostration, Aristotle’s remarks on Courage, in the utter

helplessness seem more to constitute the attitude of mind befitting the

manifestation of such an object, and to be that also more customarily

associated with the idea of it on the occasion of a natural phenomenon of this

kind. In religion, as a rule, prostration, adoration with bowed head, coupled

with contrite, timorous posture and voice, seems to be the only becoming

demeanour in presence of the Godhead, and accordingly most nations have

assumed and still observe it. Yet this cast of mind is far from being

intrinsically and necessarily involved in the idea of the sublimily of a religion

and of its object. The man that is actually in a state of fear, finding in himself

good reason to be so, because he is conscious of offending with his evil

disposition against a might directed by a will at once irresistible and just, is

far from being in the frame of mind for admiring divine greatness, for which

a temper of calm reflection and a quite free judgement are required. Only

when he becomes conscious of having a disposition that is upright and

acceptable to God, do those operations of might serve, to stir within him the

idea of the sublimity of this Being, so far as he recognizes the existence in

himself of a sublimity of disposition consonant with His will, and is thus

raised above the dread of such operations of nature, in which he no longer

sees God pouring forth the vials of the wrath. Even humility, taking the form

of an uncompromising judgement upon his shortcomings, which, with

consciousness of good intentions, might readily be glossed over on the

ground of the frailty of human nature, is a sublime temper of the mind

voluntarily to undergo the pain of remorse as a means of more and more

effectually eradicating its cause. In this way religion is intrinsically

distinguished from superstition, which latter rears in the mind, not reverence

for the sublime, but dread and apprehension of the all-powerful Being to

whose will terror-stricken man sees himself subjected, yet without according

Him due honour. From this nothing can arise but grace-begging and vain

adulation, instead of a religion consisting in a good life.

              Sublimity, therefore, does not reside in any of the things of nature,

but only in our own mind, in so far as we may become conscious of oursuperiority over nature within, and thus also over nature without us (as

exerting influence upon us). Everything that provokes this feeling in us,

including the might of nature which challenges our strength, is then, though

improperly, called sublime, and it is only under presupposition of this idea

within us, and in relation to it, that we are capable of attaining to the idea of

the sublimity of that Being Which inspires deep respect in us, not by the mere

display of its might in nature, but more by the faculty which is planted in us

of estimating that might without fear, and of regarding our estate as exalted

above it.        § 29. Modality of the judgement on the sublime in nature.

 

 

              Beautiful nature contains countless things as to which we at once

take every one as in their judgement concurring with our own, and as to

which we may further expect this concurrence without facts finding us far

astray. But in respect of our judgement upon the sublime in nature, we cannot

so easily vouch for ready acceptance by others. For a far higher degree of

culture, not merely of the aesthetic judgement, but also of the faculties of

cognition which lie at its basis, seems to be requisite to enable us to lay down

a judgement upon this high distinction of natural objects.

              The proper mental mood for a feeling of the sublime postulates the

mind’s susceptibility for ideas, since it is precisely in the failure of nature to

attain to these — and consequently only under presupposition of this

susceptibility and of the straining of the imagination to use nature as a

schema for ideas — that there is something forbidding to sensibility, but

which, for all that, has an attraction for us, arising from the fact of its being a

dominion which reason exercises over sensibility with a view to extending it

to the requirements of its own realm (the practical) and letting it look out

beyond itself into the infinite, which for it is an abyss. In fact, without the

development of moral ideas, that which, thanks to preparatory culture, we call

sublime, merely strikes the untutored man as terrifying. He will see in the

evidences which the ravages of nature give of her dominion, and in the vast

scale of her might, compared with which his own is diminished to

insignificance, only the misery, peril, and distress that would compass the

man who was thrown to its mercy. So the simpleminded, and, for the most

part, intelligent, Savoyard peasant, (as Herr von Sassure relates),

unhesitatingly called all lovers of snow mountains fools. And who can tell

whether he would have been so wide of the mark, if that student of nature had

taken the risk of the dangers to which he exposed himself merely, as most

travellers do, for a fad, or so as some day to be able to give a thrilling account

of his adventures? But the mind of Sassure was bent on the instruction of

mankind, and soul-stirring sensations that excellent man indeed had, and the

reader of his travels got them thrown into the bargain.              But the fact that culture is requisite for the judgement upon the

sublime in nature (more than for that upon the beautiful) does not involve its

being an original product of culture and something introduced in a more or

less conventional way into society. Rather is it in human nature that its

foundations are laid, and, in fact, in that which, at once with common

understanding, we may expect every one to possess and may require of him,

namely, a native capacity for the feeling for (practical) ideas, i.e., for moral

feeling.

              This, now, is the foundation of the necessity of that agreement

between other men’s judgements upon the sublime and our own, which we

make our own imply. For just as we taunt a man who is quite inappreciative

when forming an estimate of an object of nature in which we see beauty, with

want of taste, so we say of a man who remains unaffected in the presence of

what we consider sublime, that he has no feeling. But we demand both taste

and feeling of every man, and, granted some degree of culture, we give him

credit for both. Still, we do so with this difference: that, in the, case of the

former, since judgement there refers the imagination merely to the

understanding, as a the faculty of concepts, we make the requirement as a

matter of course, whereas in the case of the latter, since here the judgement

refers the imagination to reason, as a faculty of ideas, we do so only under a

subjective presupposition (which, however, we believe we are warranted in

making), namely, that of the moral feeling in man. And, on this assumption,

we attribute necessity to the latter aesthetic judgement also.

              In this modality of aesthetic judgements, namely, their assumed

necessity, lies what is for the Critique of judgement a moment of capital

importance. For this is exactly what makes an a priori principle apparent in

their case, and lifts them out of the sphere of empirical psychology, in which

otherwise they would remain buried amid the feelings of gratification and

pain (only with the senseless epithet of finer feeling), so as to place them,

and, thanks to them, to place the faculty of judgement itself, in the class of

judgements of which the basis of an a priori principle is the distinguishing

feature, and, thus distinguished, to introduce them into transcendental

philosophy.      General Remark upon the Exposition of Aesthetic Reflective

                                      Judgements.

 

 

              In relation to the feeling of pleasure an object is to be counted either

as agreeable, or beautiful, or sublime, or good (absolutely), (incundum,

pulchrum, sublime, honestum).

              As the motive of desires the agreeable is invariably of one and the

same kind, no matter what its source or how specifically different the

representation (of sense and sensation objectively considered). Hence in

estimating its influence upon the mind, the multitude of its charms

(simultaneous or successive) is alone revelant, and so only, as it were, the

mass of the agreeable sensation, and it is only by the quantity, therefore, that

this can be made intelligible. Further it in no way conduces to our culture, but

belongs only to mere enjoyment. The beautiful, on the other hand, requires

the representation of a certain quality of the object, that pern-fits also of being

understood and reduced to concepts (although in the aesthetic judgement it is

not reduced), and it cultivates, as it instructs us to attend to, finality in the

feeling of pleasure. The sublime consists merely in the relation exhibited by

the estimate of the serviceability of the sensible in the representation of

nature for a possible supersensible employment. The absolutely good,

estimated subjectively according to the feeling it inspires (the object of the

moral feeling), as the determinability of the powers of the subject by means

of the representation of an absolutely necessitating law, is principally

distinguished, by the modality of a necessity resting upon concepts a priori,

and involving not a mere claim, but a command upon every one to assent,

and belongs intrinsically not to the aesthetic, but to the pure intellectual

judgement. Further, it is not ascribed to nature but to freedom, and that in a

determinant and not a merely reflective judgement. But the determinability of

the subject by means of this idea, and, what is more, that of a subject which

can be sensible, in the way of a modification of its state, to hindrances on the

part of sensibility, while, at the same time, it can by surmounting them feel

superiority over them-a determinability, in other words, as moral feeling-is

still so allied to aesthetic judgement and its formal conditions as to be capable

of being pressed into the service of the aesthetic representation of theconformity to law of action from duty, i.e., of the representation of this as

sublime, or even as beautiful, without forfeiting its purity-an impossible

result were one to make it naturally bound up with the feeling of the

agreeable.

              The net result to be extracted from the exposition so far given of

both kinds of aesthetic judgements may be summed up in the following brief

definitions:

              The beautiful is what pleases in the mere estimate formed of it

(consequently not by intervention of any feeling of sense in accordance with

a concept of the understanding). From this it follows at once that it must

please apart from all interest.

              The sublime is what pleases immediately by reason of its opposition

to the interest of sense.

              Both, as definitions of aesthetic universally valid estimates, have

reference to subjective grounds. In the one case the reference is to grounds of

sensibility, in so far as these are final on behalf of the contemplative

understanding, in the other case in so far as, in their opposition to sensibility,

they are, on the contrary, final in reference to the ends of practical reason.

Both, however, as united in the same subject, are final in reference to the

moral feeling. The beautiful prepares us to love something, even nature, apart

from any interest: the sublime to esteem something highly even in opposition

to our (sensible) interest object,

              The sublime may be described in this way: It is an object (of nature)

the representation of which determines the mind to regard the elevation of

nature beyond our reach as equivalent to a presentation of ideas.

              In a literal sense and according to their logical import, ideas cannot

be presented. But if we enlarge our empirical faculty of representation

(mathematical or dynamical) with a view to the intuition of nature, reason

inevitably steps forward, as the faculty concerned with the independence of

the absolute totality, and calls forth the effort of the mind, unavailing though

it be, to make representation of sense adequate to this totality. This effort, and

the feeling of the unattainability of the idea by means of imagination, is itself

a presentation of the subjective finality of our mind in the employment of the

imagination in the interests of the mind’s supersensible province, andcompels us subjectively to think nature itself in its totality as a presentation of

something supersensible, without our being able to effectuate this

presentation objectively.

              For we readily see that nature in space and time falls entirely short of

the unconditioned, consequently also of the absolutely great, which still the

commonest reason demands. And by this we are also reminded that we have

only to do with nature as phenomenon, and that this itself must be regarded as

the mere presentation of a nature-in-itself (which exists in the idea of reason).

But this idea of the supersensible, which no doubt we cannot further

determine so that we cannot cognize nature as its presentation, but only think

it as such-is awakened in us by an object the aesthetic estimating of which

strains the imagination to its utmost, whether in respect of its extension

(mathematical), or of its might over the mind (dynamical). For it is founded

upon the feeling of a sphere of the mind which altogether exceeds the realm

of nature (i.e., upon the moral feeling), with regard to which the

representation of the object is estimated as subjectively final.

              As a matter of fact, a feeling for the sublime in nature is hardly

thinkable unless in association with an attitude of mind resembling the moral.

And though, like that feeling, the immediate pleasure in the beautiful in

nature presupposes and cultivates a certain liberality of thought, i.e., makes

our delight independent of any mere enjoyment of sense, still it represents

freedom rather as in play than as exercising a law-ordained function, which is

the genuine characteristic of human morality, where reason has to impose its

dominion upon sensibility. There is, however, this qualification, that in the

aesthetic judgement upon the sublime this dominion is represented as

exercised through the imagination itself as an instrument of reason.

              Thus, too, delight in the sublime in nature is only negative (whereas

that in the beautiful is positive): that is to say, it is a feeling of imagination by

its own act depriving itself of its freedom by receiving a final determination

in accordance with a law other than that of its empirical employment. In this

way it gains an extension and a might greater than that which it sacrifices.

But the ground of this is concealed from it, and in its place it feels the

sacrifice or deprivation, as well as its cause, to which it is subjected. The

astonishment amounting almost to terror, the awe and thrill of devout feeling,

that takes hold of one when gazing upon the prospect of mountains ascending

to heaven, deep ravines and torrents raging there, deep shadowed solitudesthat invite to brooding melancholy, and the like-all this, when we are assured

of our own safety, is not actual fear. Rather is it an attempt to gain access to it

through imagination, for the purpose of feeling the might of this faculty in

combining the movement of the mind thereby aroused with its serenity, and

of thus being superior to internal and, therefore, to external, nature, so far as

the latter can have any bearing upon our feeling of well-being. For the

imagination, in accordance with laws of association, makes our state of

contentment dependent upon physical conditions. But acting in accordance

with principles of the schematism of judgement (consequently so far as it is

subordinated to freedom), it is at the same time an instrument of reason and

its ideas. But in this capacity it is a might enabling us to assert our

independence as against the influences of nature, to degrade what is great in

respect of the latter to the level of what is little, and thus to locate the

absolutely great only in the proper estate of the subject. This reflection of

aesthetic judgement by which it raises itself to the point of adequacy with

reason, though without any determinate concept of reason, is still a

representation of the object as subjectively final, by virtue even of the

objective inadequacy of the imagination in its greatest extension for meeting

the demands of reason (as the faculty of ideas).

              Here we have to attend generally to what has been already adverted

to, that in the transcendental aesthetic of judgement there must be no question

of anything but pure aesthetic judgements. Consequently examples are not to

be selected from such beautiful, or sublime objects as presuppose the concept

of an end. For then the finality would be either teleological, or based upon

mere sensations of an object: (gratification or pain) and so, in the first case,

not aesthetic, and, in the second, not merely formal. So, if we call the sight of

the starry heaven sublime, we must not found our estimate of it upon any

concepts of worlds inhabited by rational beings, with the bright spots, which

we see filling the space above us, as their suns moving in orbits prescribed

for them with the wisest regard to ends. But we must take it, just as it strikes

the eye, as a broad and all-embracing canopy: and it is merely under such a

representation that we may posit the sublimity which the pure aesthetic

judgement attributes to this object. Similarly, as to the prospect of the ocean,

we are not to regard it as we, with our minds stored with knowledge on a

variety of matters (which, however, is not contained in the immediate

intuition), are wont to represent it in thought, as, let us say, a spacious realm

of aquatic creatures, or as the mighty reservoirs from which are drawn thevapours that fill the air with clouds of moisture for the good of the land, or

yet as an element which no doubt divides continent from continent, but at the

same time affords the means of the greatest commercial intercourse between

them-for in this way we get nothing beyond teleological judgements. Instead

of this we must be able to see sublimity in the ocean, regarding it, as the

poets do, according to what the impression upon the eye reveals, as, let us

say, in its calm a clear mirror of water bounded only by the heavens, or, be it

disturbed, as threatening to overwhelm and engulf everything. The same is to

be said of the sublime and beautiful in the human form. Here, for determining

grounds of the judgement, we must not have recourse to concepts of ends

subserved by all: all its and members, or allow their accordance with these

ends to influence our aesthetic judgement (in such case no longer pure),

although it is certainly also a also a necessary condition of aesthetic delight

that they should not conflict. With these ends. Aesthetic finality is the

conformity to law of judgement in its freedom. The delight in the object

depends on the reference which we seek to give to the imagination, subject to

the proviso that it is to entertain the mind in a free activity. If, on the other

hand, something else-be it sensation or concept of the understanding-

determines the judgement, it is then conformable to law, no doubt, but not an

act of free judgement.

              Hence to speak of intellectual beauty or sublimity is to use

expressions which, in the first place, are not quite correct. For these are

aesthetic modes of representation which would be entirely foreign to us were

we merely pure intelligences (or if we even put ourselves in thought in the

position of such). Secondly, although both, as objects of an intellectual

(moral) delight, are compatible with aesthetic delight to the extent of not

resting upon any interest, still, on the: Other hand, there is a difficulty in the

way of their alliance with such delight, since their function is to produce an

interest, and, on the assumption that the presentation has to accord with

delight in the aesthetic estimate, this interest could only be effected by means

of an interest of sense combined with it in the presentation. But in this way

the intellectual finality would be violated and rendered impure.

              The object of a pure and unconditioned intellectual delight is the

moral law in the might which it exerts in us over all antecedent motives of the

mind. Now, since it is only through sacrifices that this might makes itself

known to us aesthetically (and this involves a deprivation of something —though in the interest of inner freedom-whilst in turn it reveals in us an

unfathomable depth of this supersensible faculty, the consequences of which

extend beyond reach of the eye of sense), it follows that the delight, looked at

from the aesthetic side (in reference to sensibility) is negative, i.e., opposed to

this interest, but from the intellectual side, positive and bound up with an

interest. Hence it follows that the intellectual and intrinsically final (moral)

good, estimated aesthetically, instead of being represented as beautiful, must

rather be represented as sublime, with the result that it arouses more a feeling

of respect (which disdains charm) than of love or of the heart being drawn

towards it-for human nature does not of its own proper motion accord with

the good, but only by virtue of the dominion which reason exercises over

sensibility. Conversely, that, too, which we call sublime in external nature, or

even internal nature (e.g., certain affections) is only represented as a might of

the mind enabling it to overcome this or that hindrance of sensibility by

means of moral principles, and it is from this that it derives its interest.

              I must dwell while on the latter point. The idea of the good to which

affection is superadded is enthusiasm. This state of mind appears to be

sublime: so much so that there is a common saying that nothing great can be
                                                    12
achieved without it. But now every affection is blind either as to the choice

of its end, or, supposing this has been furnished by reason, in the way it is

effected for it is that mental movement whereby the exercise of free

deliberation upon fundamental principles, with a view to determining oneself

accordingly, is rendered impossible. On this account it cannot merit any

delight on the part of reason. Yet, from an aesthetic point of view, enthusiasm

is sublime, because it is an effort of one’s powers called forth by ideas which

give to the mind an impetus of far stronger and more enduring efficacy than

the stimulus afforded by sensible representations. But (as seems strange) even

freedom from affection (apatheia, phlegma in significatu bono) in a mind that

strenuously follows its unswerving principles is sublime, and that, too, in a

manner vastly superior, because it has at the same time the delight of pure

reason on its side. Such a stamp of mind is alone called noble. This

expression, however, comes in time to be applied to things-such as buildings,

a garment, literary style, the carriage of one’s person, and the like-provided

they do not so much excite astonishment (the affection attending the

representation of novelty exceeding expectation) as admiration (an

astonishment which does not cease when the novelty wears off)-and this

obtains where ideas undesignedly and artlessly accord in their presentationwith aesthetic delight.

        12
              There is a specific distinction between affections and Passions.

Affections are related merely to feeling; passions belong to the faculty of

desire, and are inclinations that hinder or render impossible all

determinability of the elective will by principles. Affections are impetuous

and irresponsible; passions are abiding and deliberate. Thus resentment, in

the form of anger, is an affection: but in the form of hatred (vindictiveness) it

is a passion. Under no circumstances can the latter be called sublime; for,

while the freedom of the mind is, no doubt, impeded in the case of affection,

in passion it is abrogated.

              Every affection of the STRENUOUS TYPE (such, that is, as excites

the consciousness of our power of overcoming every resistance [animus

strenuus]) is aesthetically sublime, e.g., anger, even desperation (the rage of

forlorn hope but not faint-hearted despair). On the other hand, affection of the

LANGUID TYPE (which converts the very effort of resistance into an object

of displeasure [animus languidus] has nothing noble about it, though it may

take its rank as possessing beauty of the sensuous order. Hence the emotions

capable of attaining the strength of an affection are very diverse. We have

spirited, and we have tender emotions. When the strength of the latter reaches

that of an affection they can be turned to no account. The propensity to

indulge in them is sentimentality. A sympathetic grief that refuses to be

consoled, or one that has to do with imaginary misfortune to which we

deliberately give way so far as to allow our fancy to delude us into thinking it

actual fact, indicates and goes to make a tender, but at the same time weak,

soul, which shows a beautiful side, and may no doubt be called fanciful, but

never enthusiastic. Romances, maudlin dramas, shallow homilies, which

trifle with so-called (though falsely so) noble sentiments, but in fact make the

heart enervated, insensitive to the stem precepts of duty, and incapable of

respect for the worth of humanity in our own person and the rights of men

(which is something quite other than their happiness), and in general

incapable of all firm principles; even a religious discourse which

recommends a cringing and abject grace-begging and favour-seeking,

abandoning all reliance on our own ability to resist the evil within us, in place

of the vigorous resolution to try to get the better of our inclinations by means

of those powers which, miserable sinners though we be, are still left to us;

that false humility by which self-abasement, whining hypocritical repentanceand a merely passive frame of mind are set down as the method by which

alone we can become acceptable to the Supreme Being-these have neither lot

nor fellowship with what may be reckoned to belong to beauty, not to speak

of sublimity, of mental temperament.

              But even impetuous movements of the mind be they allied under the

name of edification with ideas of religion, or, as pertaining merely to culture,

with ideas involving a social interest no matter what tension of the

imagination they may produce, can in no way lay claim to the honour of a

sublime presentation, if they do not leave behind them a temper of mind

which, though it be only indirectly, has an influence upon the consciousness

of the mind’s strength and resoluteness in respect of that which carries with it

pure intellectual finality (the supersensible). For, in the absence of this, all

these emotions belong only to motion, which we welcome in the interests of

good health. The agreeable lassitude that follows upon being stirred up in that

way by the play of the affections, is a fruition of the state of well-being

arising from the restoration of the equilibrium of the various vital forces

within us. This, in the last resort, comes to no more than what the Eastern

voluptuaries find so soothing when they get their bodies massaged, and all

their muscles and joints softly pressed and bent; only that in the first case the

principle that occasions the movement is chiefly internal, whereas here it is

entirely external. Thus, many a man believes himself edified by a sermon in

which there is no establishment of anything (no system of good maxims); or

thinks himself improved by a tragedy, when he is merely glad at having got

well rid of the feeling of being bored. Thus the sublime must in every case

have reference to our way of thinking, i.e., to maxims directed to giving the

intellectual side of our nature and the ideas of reason supremacy over

sensibility.

              We have no reason to fear that the feeling of the sublime will suffer

from an abstract mode of presentation like this, which is altogether negative

as to what is sensuous. For though the imagination, no doubt, finds nothing

beyond the sensible world to which it can lay hold, still this thrusting aside of

the sensible barriers gives it a feeling of being unbounded; and that removal

is thus a presentation of the infinite. As such it can never be anything more

than a negative presentation-but still it expands the soul. Perhaps there is no

more sublime passage in the Jewish Law than the commandment: “Thou shalt

not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is inheaven or on earth, or under the earth, etc.” This commandment can alone

explain the enthusiasm which the Jewish people, in their moral period, felt

for their religion when comparing themselves with others, or the pride

inspired by Mohammedanism. The very same holds good of our

representation of the moral law and of our native capacity for morality. The

fear that, if we divest this representation of everything that can commend it to

the senses, it will thereupon be attended only with a cold and lifeless

approbation and not with any moving force or emotion, is wholly

unwarranted. The very reverse is the truth. For when nothing any longer

meets the eye of sense, and the unmistakable and ineffaceable idea of

morality is left in possession of the field, there would be need rather of

tempering the ardour of an unbounded imagination to prevent it rising to

enthusiasm, than of seeking to lend these ideas the aid of images and childish

devices for fear of their being wanting in potency. For this reason,

governments have gladly let religion be fully equipped with these

accessories, seeking in this way to relieve their subjects of the exertion, but to

deprive them, at the same time, of the ability, required for expanding their

spiritual powers beyond the limits arbitrarily laid down for them, and which

facilitate their being treated as though they were merely passive.

              This pure, elevating, merely negative presentation of morality

involves, on the other hand, no fear of fanaticism, which is a delusion that

would will some VISION beyond all the bounds of sensibility; i.e., would

dream according to principles (rational raving). The safeguard is the purely

negative character of the presentation. For the inscrutability of the idea of

freedom precludes all positive presentation. The moral law, however, is a

sufficient and original source of determination within us: so it does not for a

moment permit us to cast about for a ground of determination external to

itself. If enthusiasm is comparable to delirium, fanaticism may be compared

to mania. Of these, the latter is least of all compatible with the sublime, for it

is profoundly ridiculous. In enthusiasm, as an affection, the imagination is

unbridled; in fanaticism, as a deep-seated, brooding passion, it is anomalous.

The first is a transitory accident to which the healthiest understanding is

liable to become at times the victim; the second is an undermining disease.

              Simplicity (artless finality) is, as it were, the style adopted by nature

in the sublime. It is also that of morality. The latter is a second

(supersensible) nature, whose laws alone we know, without being able toattain to an intuition of the supersensible faculty within us-that which

contains the ground of this legislation.

              One further remark. The delight in the sublime, no less than in the

beautiful, by reason of its universal communicability not alone is plainly

distinguished from other aesthetic judgements, but also from this same

property acquires an interest in society (in which it admits of such

communication). Yet, despite this, we have to note the fact that isolation from

all society is looked upon as something sublime, provided it rests upon ideas

which disregard all sensible interest. To be self-sufficing, and so not to stand

in need of society, yet without being unsociable, i.e., without shunning it, is

something approaching the sublime-a remark applicable to all superiority to

wants. On the other hand, to shun our fellow men from misanthropy, because

of enmity towards them, or from anthropophobia, because we imagine the

hand of every man is against us, is partly odious, partly contemptible. There

is, however, a misanthropy (most improperly so called), the tendency towards

which is to be found with advancing years in many right minded men, that, as

far as good will goes, is no doubt, philanthropic enough, but as the result of

long and sad experience, is widely removed from delight in mankind. We see

evidences of this in the propensity to recluseness, in the fanciful desire for a

retired country seat, or else (with the young) in the dream of the happiness of

being able to spend one’s life with a little family on an island unknown to the

rest of the world-material of which novelists or writers of Robinsonades

know how to make such good use. Falsehood, ingratitude, injustice, the

puerility of the ends which we ourselves look upon as great and momentous,

and to compass which man inflicts upon his brother man all imaginable evils-

these all so contradict the idea of what men might be if they only would, and

are so at variance with our active wish to see them better, that, to avoid hating

where we cannot love, it seems but a slight sacrifice to forego all the joys of

fellowship with our kind. This sadness, which is not directed to the evils

which fate brings down upon others (a sadness which springs from

sympathy), but to those which they inflict upon themselves (one which is

based on antipathy in questions of principle), is sublime because it is founded

on ideas, whereas that springing from sympathy can only be accounted

beautiful. Sassure, who was no less ingenious than profound, in the

description of his Alpine travels remarks of Bonhomme, one of the Savoy

mountains: “There reigns there a certain insipid sadness.” He recognized,

therefore, that, besides this, there is an interesting sadness, such as is inspiredby the sight of some desolate place into which men might fain withdraw

themselves so as to hear no more of the world without, and be no longer

versed in its affairs, a place, however, which must yet not be so altogether

inhospitable as only to afford a most miserable retreat for a human being. I

only make this observation as a reminder that even melancholy, (but not

dispirited sadness), may take its place among the vigorous affections,

provided it has its root in moral ideas. If, however, it is grounded upon

sympathy, and, as such, is lovable, it belongs only to the languid affections.

And this serves to call attention to the mental temperament which in the first

case alone is sublime are

              The transcendental exposition of aesthetic judgements now brought

to a close may be compared with the physiological, as worked out by Burke

and many acute men among us, so that we may see where a merely empirical

exposition of the sublime and beautiful would bring us. Burke, who deserves

to be called the foremost author in this method of treatment, deduces, on

these lines, “that the feeling of the sublime is grounded on the impulse

towards self-preservation and on fear, i.e., on a pain, which, since it does not

go the length of disordering the bodily parts, calls forth movements which, as

they clear the vessels, whether fine or gross, of a dangerous and troublesome

encumbrance, are capable of producing delight; not pleasure but a sort of

delightful horror, a sort of tranquility tinged With terror.” The beautiful,

which he grounds on love (from which, still, he would have desire kept

separate), he reduces to “the relaxing, slackening, and enervating of the fibres

of the body, and consequently a softening, a dissolving, a languor, and a

fainting, dying, and melting away for pleasure.” And this explanation he

supports, not alone by instances in which the feeling of the beautiful as well

as of the sublime is capable of being excited in us by the imagination in

conjunction with the understanding, but even by instances when it is in

conjunction with sensations. As psychological observations, these analyses of

our mental phenomena are extremely fine, and supply a wealth of material for

the favourite investigations of empirical anthropology. But, besides that,

there is no denying the fact that all representations within us, no matter

whether they are objectively merely sensible or wholly intellectual, are still

subjectively associable with gratification or pain, however imperceptible

either of these may be. (For these representations one and all have an

influence on the feeling of life, and none of them, so far as it is a

modification of the subject, can be indifferent.) We must even admit that, asEpicurus maintained, gratification and pain though proceeding from the

imagination or even from representations of the understanding, are always in

the last resort corporeal, since apart from any feeling of the bodily organ life

would be merely a consciousness of one’s existence, and could not include

any feeling of well-being or the reverse, i.e., of the furtherance or hindrance

of the vital forces. For, of itself alone, the mind is all life (the life-principle

itself), and hindrance or furtherance has to be sought outside it, and yet in the

man himself consequently in the connection with his body and melting

              But if we attribute the delight in the object wholly and entirely to the

gratification which it affords through charm or emotion, then we must not

exact from any one else agreement with the aesthetic judgement passed by us.

For, in such matters each person rightly consults his own personal feeling

alone. But in that case there is an end of all censorship of taste-unless the

afforded by others as the result of a contingent coincidence of their

judgements is to be held over us as commanding our assent. But this principle

we would presumably resent, and appeal to our natural right of submitting a

judgement to our own sense, where it rests upon the immediate feeling of

personal well-being, instead of submitting it to that of others.

              Hence if the import of the judgement of taste, where we appraise it

as a judgement entitled to require the concurrence of every one, cannot be

egoistic, but must necessarily, from its inner nature, be allowed a pluralistic

validity, i.e., on account of what taste itself is, and not on account of the

examples which others give of their taste, then it must found upon some a

priori principle (be it subjective or objective), and no amount of prying into

the empirical laws of the changes that go on within the mind can succeed in

establishing such a principle. For these laws only yield a knowledge of how

we do judge, but they do not give us a command as to how we ought to judge,

and, what is more, such a command as is unconditioned-and commands of

this kind are presupposed by judgements of taste, inasmuch as they require

delight to be taken as immediately connected with a representation.

Accordingly, though the empirical exposition of aesthetic judgements may be

a first step towards accumulating the material for a higher investigation, yet a

transcendental examination of this faculty is possible, and forms an essential

part of the Critique of Taste. For, were not taste in possession of a priori

principles, it could not possibly sit in judgement upon the judgements of

others and pass sentence of commendation or condemnation upon them, witheven the least semblance of authority.                    Deduction of Pure Aesthetic Judgements

 

 

              NOTE: §§ 30-54, Deduction of Pure Aesthetic Judgements, is

omitted.      SECTION II: DIALECTIC OF AESTHETIC JUDGEMENT.

 

 

                                          § 55.

 

 

              For a power of judgement to be dialectical it must first of all be
                                                                                      24
rationalizing; that is to say, its judgements must lay claim to universality,

and do so a priori, for it is in the antithesis of such judgements that dialectic

consists. Hence there is nothing dialectical in the irreconcilability of aesthetic

judgements of sense (upon the agreeable and disagreeable). And in so far as

each person appeals merely to his own private taste, even the conflict of

judgements of taste does not form a dialectic of taste-for no one is proposing

to make his own judgement into a universal rule. Hence the only concept left

to us of a dialectic affecting taste is one of a dialectic of the critique of taste

(not of taste itself) in respect of its principles: for, on the question of the

ground of the possibility of judgements of taste in general, mutually

conflicting concepts naturally and unavoidably make their appearance. The

transcendental critique of taste will, therefore, only include a part capable of

bearing the name of a dialectic of the aesthetic judgement if we find an

antinomy of the principles of this faculty which throws doubt upon its

conformity to law, and hence also upon its inner possibility.

        24
              Any judgement which sets up to be universal may be termed a

rationalizing judgement (indicium ratiocinans); for so far as universal it may

serve as the major premiss of a syllogism. On the other hand, only a

judgement which is thought as the conclusion of a syllogism, and, therefore,

as having an a priori foundation, can be called rational (indicium

ratiocinatum).                § 56. Representation of the antinomy of taste.

 

 

              The first commonplace of taste is contained in the proposition under

cover of which every one devoid of taste thinks to shelter himself from

reproach: every one has his own taste. This is only another way of saying that

the determining ground of this judgement is merely subjective (gratification

or pain), and that the judgement has no right to the necessary agreement of

others.

              Its second commonplace, to which even those resort who concede

the right of the judgement of taste to pronounce with validity for every one,

is: there is no disputing about taste. This amounts to saying that, even though

the determining ground of a judgement of taste be objective, it is not

reducible to definite concepts, so that in respect of the judgement itself no

decision can be reached by proofs, although it is quite open to us to contend

upon the matter, and to contend with right. For though contention and dispute

have this point in common, that they aim at bringing judgements into

accordance out of and by means of their mutual opposition; yet they differ in

the latter hoping to effect this from definite concepts, as grounds of proof,

and, consequently, adopting objective concepts as grounds of the judgement.

But where this is considered impracticable, dispute is regarded as alike out of

the question.

              Between these two commonplaces an intermediate proposition is

readily seen to be missing. It is one which has certainly not become

proverbial, but yet it is at the back of every one’s mind. It is that there may be

contention about taste (although not a dispute). This proposition, however,

involves the contrary of the first one. For in a manner in which contention is

to be allowed, there must be a: hope of coming to terms. Hence one must be

able to reckon on grounds of judgement that possess more than private

Validity and are thus not merely subjective. And yet the above principle

(Every one has his own taste) is directly opposed to this.

              The principle of taste, therefore, exhibits the following antinomy:

              1. Thesis. The judgement of taste is not based upon concepts; for, ifit were, it would be open to dispute (decision by means of proofs).

              2. Antithesis. The judgement of taste is based on concepts; for

otherwise, despite diversity of judgement, there could be no room even for

contention in the matter (a claim to the necessary agreement of others with

this judgement).                    § 57. Solution of the antinomy of taste.

 

 

              There is no possibility of removing the conflict of the above

principles, which underlie every judgement of taste (and which are only the

two peculiarities of the judgement of taste previously set out in the Analytic)

except by showing that the concept to which the object is to refer in a

judgement of this kind is not taken in the same sense in both maxims of the

aesthetic judgement; that this double sense, or point of view, in our estimate,

is necessary for our power of transcendental judgement; and that nevertheless

the false appearance arising from the confusion of one with the other is a

natural illusion, and so unavoidable.

              The judgement of taste must have reference to some concept or

other, as otherwise it would be absolutely impossible for it to lay claim to

necessary validity for every one. Yet it need not on that account be provable

from a concept. For a concept may be either determinable, or else at once

intrinsically undetermined and indeterminable. A concept of the

understanding, which is determinable by means of predicates borrowed from

sensible intuition and capable of corresponding to it, is of the first kind. But

of the second kind is the transcendental rational concept of the supersensible,

which lies at the basis of all that sensible intuition and is, therefore, incapable

of being further determined theoretically.

              Now the judgement of taste applies to objects of sense, but not so as

to determine a concept of them for the understanding; for it is not a cognitive

judgement. Hence it is a singular representation of intuition referable to the

feeling of pleasure, and, as such, only a private judgement. And to that extent

it would be limited in its validity to the individual judging: the object is for

me an object of delight, for others it may be otherwise; every one to his taste.

              For all that, the judgement of taste contains beyond doubt an

enlarged reference on the part of the representation of the object (and at the

same time on the part of the subject also), which lays the foundation of an

extension of judgements of this kind to necessity for every one. This must of

necessity be founded upon some concept or other, but such a concept as does

not admit of being determined by intuition, and affords no knowledge ofanything. Hence, too, it is a concept which does not afford proof of the

judgement of taste. But the mere pure rational concept of the supersensible

lying at the basis of the object (and of the judging subject for that matter) as

object of sense, and thus as phenomenon, is just such a concept. For unless

such a point of view were adopted there would be no means of saving the

claim of the judgement of taste to universal validity. And if the concept

forming the required basis were a concept of understanding, though a mere

confused one, as, let us say, of perfection, answering to which the sensible

intuition of the beautiful might be adduced, then it would be at least

intrinsically possible to found the judgement of taste upon proofs, which

contradicts the thesis.

              All contradiction disappears, however, if I say: The judgement of

taste does depend upon a concept (of a general ground of the subjective

finality of nature for the power of judgement), but one from which nothing

can be cognized in respect of the object, and nothing proved, because it is in

itself indeterminable and useless for knowledge. Yet, by means of this very

concept, it acquires at the same time validity for every one (but with each

individual, no doubt, as a singular judgement immediately accompanying his

intuition): because its determining ground lies, perhaps, in the concept of

what may be regarded as the supersensible substrate of humanity.

              The solution of an antinomy turns solely on the possibility of two

apparently conflicting propositions not being in fact contradictory, but rather

being capable of consisting together, although the explanation of the

possibility of their concept transcends our faculties of cognition. That this

illusion is also natural and for human reason unavoidable, as well as why it is

so, and remains so, although upon the solution of the apparent contradiction it

no longer misleads us, may be made intelligible from the above

considerations.

              For the concept, which the universal validity of a judgement must

have for its basis, is taken in the same sense in both the conflicting

judgements, yet two opposite predicates are asserted of it. The thesis should

therefore read: The judgement of taste is not based on determinate concepts;

but the antithesis: The judgement of taste does rest upon a concept, although

an indeterminate one (that, namely, of the supersensible substrate of

phenomena); and then there would be no conflict between them.              Beyond removing this conflict between the claims and counter-

claims of taste we can do nothing. To supply a determinate objective

principle of taste in accordance with which its judgements might be derived,

tested, and proved, is an absolute impossibility, for then it would not be a

judgement of taste. The subjective principle-that is to say, the indeterminate

idea of the supersensible within us — can only be indicated as the unique key

to the riddle of this faculty, itself concealed from us in its sources; and there

is no means of making it any more intelligible.

              The antinomy here exhibited and resolved rests upon the proper

concept of taste as a merely reflective aesthetic judgement, and the two

seemingly conflicting principles are reconciled on the ground that they may

both be true, and this is sufficient. If, on the other hand, owing to the fact that

the representation lying at the basis of the judgement of taste is singular, the

determining ground of taste is taken, as by some it is, to be agreeableness, or,

as others, looking to its universal validity, would have it, the principle of

perfection, and if the definition of taste is framed accordingly, the result is an

antinomy which is absolutely irresolvable unless we show the falsity of both

propositions as contraries (not as simple contradictories). This would force

the conclusion that the concept upon which each is founded is self-

contradictory. Thus it is evident that the removal of the antinomy of the

aesthetic judgement pursues a course similar to that followed by the Critique

in the solution of the antinomies of pure theoretical reason; and that the

antinomies, both here and in the Critique of Practical Reason, compel us,

whether we like it or not, to look beyond the horizon of the sensible, and to

seek in the supersensible the point of union of all our faculties a priori: for we

are left with no other expedient to bring reason into harmony with itself.

                                      REMARK 1.

 

 

              We find such frequent occasion in transcendental philosophy for

distinguishing ideas from concepts of the understanding that it may be of use

to introduce technical terms answering to the distinction between them. I

think that no objection will be raised to my proposing some. Ideas, in the

most comprehensive sense of the word, are representations referred to an

object according to a certain principle (subjective or objective), in so far as

they can still never become a cognition of it. They are either referred to anintuition, in accordance with a merely subjective principle of the harmony of

the cognitive faculties (imagination and understanding), and are then called

aesthetic; or else they are referred to a concept according to an objective

principle and yet are incapable of ever furnishing a cognition of the object,

and are called rational ideas. In the latter case, the concept is a transcendent

concept, and, as such, differs from a concept of understanding, for which an

adequately answering experience may always be supplied, and which, on that

account, is called immanent.

              An aesthetic idea cannot become a cognition, because it is an

intuition (of the imagination) for which an adequate concept can never be

found. A rational idea can never become a cognition, because it involves a

concept (of the supersensible), for which a commensurate intuition can never

be given.

              Now the aesthetic idea might, I think, be called an inexponible

representation of the imagination, the rational idea, on the other hand, an

indemonstrable concept of reason. The production of both is presupposed to

be not altogether groundless, but rather (following the above explanation of

an idea in general) to take place in obedience to certain principles of the

cognitive faculties to which they belong (subjective principles in the case of

the former and objective in that of the latter).

              Concepts of the understanding must, as such, always be

demonstrable (if, as in anatomy, demonstration is understood in the sense

merely of presentation). In other words, the object answering to such

concepts must always be capable of being given an intuition (pure or

empirical); for only in this way can they become cognitions. The concept of

magnitude may be given a priori in the intuition of space, e.g., of the right

line, etc.; the concept of cause in impenetrability, in the impact of bodies, etc.

Consequently both may be verified by means of an empirical intuition, i.e.,

the thought of them may be indicated (demonstrated, exhibited) in an

example; and this it must be possible to do: for otherwise there would be no

certainty of the thought not being empty, i.e., having no object.

              In logic the expressions demonstrable or indemonstrable are

ordinarily employed only in respect of propositions. A better designation

would be to call the former propositions only mediately, and the latter,

propositions immediately, certain. For pure philosophy, too, has propositionsof both these kinds-meaning thereby true propositions which are in the one

case capable, and in the other incapable, of proof. But, in its character of

philosophy, while it can, no doubt, prove on a priori grounds, it cannot

demonstrate-unless we wish to give the complete go-by to the meaning of the

word which makes demonstrate (ostendere, exhibere) equivalent to giving an

accompanying presentation of the concept in intuition (be it in a proof or in a

definition). Where the intuition is a priori this is called its construction, but

when even the intuition is empirical, we have still got the illustration of the

object, by which means objective reality is assured to the concept. Thus an

anatomist is said to demonstrate the human eye when he renders the concept,

of which he has previously given a discursive exposition, intuitable by means

of the dissection of that organ.

              It follows from the above that the rational concept of the

supersensible substrate of all phenomena generally, or even of that which

must be laid at the basis of our elective will in respect of moral laws, i.e., the

rational concept of transcendental freedom, is at once specifically an

indemonstrable-concept, and a rational idea, whereas virtue is so in a

measure. For nothing can be given which in itself qualitatively answers in

experience to the rational concept of the former, while in the case of virtue no

empirical product of the above causality attains the degree that the rational

idea prescribes as the rule.

              Just as the imagination, in the case of a rational idea, fails with its

intuitions to attain to the given concept, so understanding, in the case of an

aesthetic idea, fails with its concepts ever to attain to the completeness of the

internal intuition which imagination conjoins with a given representation.

Now since the reduction of a representation of the imagination to concepts is

equivalent to giving its exponents, the aesthetic idea may be called on

inexponible representation of the imagination (in its free play). I shall have an

opportunity hereafter of dealing more fully with ideas of this kind. At present

I confine myself to the remark, that both kinds of ideas, aesthetic ideas as

well as rational, are bound to have their principles, and that the seat of these

principles must in both cases be reason-the latter depending upon the

objective, the former upon the subjective, principles of its employment.

              Consonantly with this, GENIUS may also be defined as the faculty

of aesthetic ideas. This serves at the same time to point out the reason why it

is nature (the nature of the individual) and not a set purpose, that in productsof genius gives the rule to art (as the production of the beautiful). For the

beautiful must not be estimated according to concepts, but by the final mode

in which the imagination is attuned so as to accord with the faculty of

concepts generally; and so rule and precept are incapable of serving as the

requisite subjective standard for that aesthetic and unconditioned finality in

fine art which has to make a warranted claim to being bound to please every

one. Rather must such a standard be sought in the element of mere nature in

the subject, which cannot be comprehended under rules or concepts, that is to

say, the supersensible substrate of all the subject’s faculties (unattainable by

any concept of understanding), and consequently in that which forms the

point of reference for the harmonious accord of all our faculties of cognition-

the production of which accord is the ultimate end set by the intelligible basis

of our nature. Thus alone is it possible for a subjective and yet universally

valid principle a priori to lie at the basis of that finality for which no objective

principle can be prescribed.

                                      REMARK 2.

 

 

              The following important observation here naturally presents itself:

There are three kinds of antinomies of pure reason, which, however, all agree

in forcing reason to abandon the otherwise very natural assumption which

takes the objects of sense for things-in-themselves, and to regard them,

instead, merely as phenomena, and to lay at their basis an intelligible

substrate (something supersensible, the concept of which is only an idea and

affords no proper knowledge). Apart from some such antinomy, reason could

never bring itself to take such a step as-to adopt a principle so severely

restricting the field of its speculation, and to submit to sacrifices involving

the complete dissipation of so many otherwise brilliant hopes. For even now

that it is recompensed for this loss by the prospect of a proportionately wider

scope of action from a practical point of view, it is not without a pang of

regret that it appears to part company with those hopes, and to break away

from the old ties.

              The reason for there being three kinds of antinomies is to be found in

the fact that there are three faculties of cognition, understanding, judgement,

and reason, each of which, being a higher faculty of cognition, must have its

a priori principles. For, so far as reason passes judgement upon theseprinciples themselves and their employment, it inexorably requires the

unconditioned for the given conditioned in respect of them all. This can never

be found unless the sensible, instead of being regarded as inherently

appurtenant to things-in-themselves, is treated as a mere phenomenon, and, as

such, being made to rest upon something supersensible (the intelligible

substrate of external and internal nature) as the thing-in-itself. There is then

(1) for the cognitive faculty an antinomy of reason in respect of the

theoretical employment of understanding carried to the point of the

unconditioned; (2) for the feeling of pleasure and displeasure an antinomy of

reason in respect of the aesthetic employment of judgement; (3) for the

faculty Of desire an antinomy in respect of the practical employment of self-

legislative reason. For all these faculties have their fundamental a priori

principles, and, following an imperative demand of reason, must be able to

judge and to determine their object unconditionally in accordance with these

principles.

              As to two of the antinomies of these higher cognitive faculties,

those, namely, of their theoretical and of their practical employment, we have

already shown elsewhere both that they are inevitable, if no cognisance is

taken in such judgements of a supersensible substrate of the given objects as

phenomena, and, on the other hand, that they can be solved the moment this

is done. Now, as to the antinomy incident to the employment of judgement in

conformity with the demand of reason, and the solution of it here given, we

may say that to avoid facing it there are but the following alternatives. It is

open to us to deny that any a priori principle lies at the basis of the aesthetic

judgement of taste, with the result that all claim to the necessity of a universal

consensus of opinion is an idle and empty delusion, and that a judgement of

taste only deserves to be considered to this extent correct, that it so happens

that a number share the same opinion, and even this, not, in truth, because an

a priori principle is presumed to lie at the back of this agreement, but rather

(as with the taste of the palate) because of the contingently resembling

organization of the individuals. Or else, in the alternative, we should have to

suppose that the judgement of taste is in fact a disguised judgement of reason

on the perfection discovered in a thing and the reference of the manifold in it

to an end, and that it is consequently only called aesthetic on account of the

confusion that here besets our reflection, although fundamentally it is

teleological. In this latter case the solution of the antinomy with the

assistance of transcendental ideas might be declared otiose and nugatory, andthe above laws of taste thus reconciled with the objects of sense, not as mere

phenomena, but even as things-in-themselves. How unsatisfactory both of

those alternatives alike are as a means of escape has been shown in several

places in our exposition of judgements of taste.

              If, however, our deduction is at least credited with having been

worked out on correct lines, even though it may not have been sufficiently

clear in all its details, three ideas then stand out in evidence. Firstly, there is

the supersensible in general, without further determination, as substrate of

nature; secondly, this same supersensible as principle of the subjective

finality of nature for our cognitive faculties; thirdly, the same supersensible

again, as principle of the ends of freedom, and principle of the common

accord of these ends with freedom in the moral sphere.§ 58. The idealism of the finality alike of nature and of art, as the unique

                      principle of the aesthetic judgement.

 

 

              The principle of taste may, to begin with, be placed on either of two

footings. For taste may be said invariably to judge on empirical grounds of

determination and such, therefore, as are only given a posteriori through

sense, or else it may be allowed to judge on an a priori ground. The former

would be the empiricism of the critique of taste, the latter its rationalism. The

first would obliterate the distinction that marks off the object of our delight

from the agreeable; the second, supposing the judgement rested upon

determinate concepts, would obliterate its distinction from the good. In this

way beauty would have its locus standi in the world completely denied, and

nothing but the dignity of a separate name, betokening, maybe, a certain

blend of both the above-named kinds of delight, would be left in its stead.

But we have shown the existence of grounds of delight which are a priori,

and which therefore, can consist with the principle of rationalism, and which

are yet incapable of being grasped by definite concepts.

              As against the above, we may say that the rationalism of the

principle of taste may take the form either of the realism of finality or of its

idealism. Now, as a judgement of taste is not a cognitive judgement, and as

beauty is not a property of the object considered in its own account, the

rationalism of the principle of taste can never be placed in the fact that the

finality in this judgement is regarded in thought as objective. In other words,

the judgement is not directed theoretically, nor, therefore, logically, either (no

matter if only in a confused estimate), to the perfection of the object, but only

aesthetically to the harmonizing of its representation in the imagination with

the essential principles of judgement generally in the subject. For this reason

the judgement of taste, and the distinction between its realism and its

idealism, can only, even on the principle of rationalism, depend upon its

subjective finality interpreted in one or other of two ways. Either such

subjective finality is, in the first case, a harmony with our judgement pursued

as an actual (intentional) end of nature (or of art), or else, in the second case,

it is only a supervening final harmony with the needs of our faculty of

judgement in its relation to nature and the forms which nature produces inaccordance with particular laws, and one that is independent of an end,

spontaneous and contingent.

              The beautiful forms displayed in the organic world all plead

eloquently on the side of the realism of the aesthetic finality of nature in

support of the plausible assumption that beneath the production of the

beautiful there must lie a preconceived idea in the producing cause-that is to

say an end acting in the interest of our imagination. Flowers, blossoms, even

the shapes of plants as a whole, the elegance of animal formations of all

kinds, unnecessary for the discharge of any function on their part, but chosen

as it were with an eye to our taste; and, beyond all else, the variety and

harmony in the array of colours (in the pheasant, in crustacea, in insects,

down even to the meanest flowers), so pleasing and charming to the eyes, but

which, inasmuch as they touch the bare surf ace, and do not even here in any

way all act the structure, of these creatures-a matter which might have a

necessary bearing on their internal ends-seem to be planned entirely with a

view to outward appearance: all these lend great weight to the mode of

explanation which assumes actual ends of nature in favour of our aesthetic

judgement.

              On the other hand, not alone does reason, with its maxims enjoining

upon us in all cases to avoid, as far as possible, any unnecessary

multiplication of principles, set itself against this assumption, but we have

nature in its free formations displaying on all sides extensive mechanical

proclivity to producing forms seemingly made, as it were, for the aesthetic

employment of our judgement, without affording the least support to the

supposition of a need for anything over and above its mechanism, as mere

nature, to enable them to be final for our judgement apart from their being

grounded upon any idea. The above expression, “free formations” of nature,

is, however, here used to denote such as are originally set up in a fluid at rest

where the volatilization or separation of some constituent (sometimes merely

of caloric) leaves the residue on solidification to assume a definite shape or

structure (figure or texture) which differs with specific differences of the

matter, but for the same matter is invariable. Here, however, it is taken for

granted that, as the true meaning of a fluid requires, the matter in the fluid is

completely dissolved and not a mere admixture of solid particles simply held

there in suspension.

              The formation, then, takes place by a concursion, i.e., by a suddensolidification — not by a gradual transition from the fluid to the solid state,

but, as it were, by a leap. This transition is termed crystallization. Freezing

water offers the most familiar instance of a formation of this kind. There the

process begins by straight threads of ice forming. These unite at angles of

60”, whilst others similarly attach themselves to them at every point until the

whole has turned into ice. But while this is going on, the water between the

threads of ice does not keep getting gradually more viscous, but remains as

thoroughly fluid as it would be at a much higher temperature, although it is

perfectly ice-cold. The matter that frees itself that makes its sudden escape at

the moment of solidification-is a considerable quantum of caloric. As this

was merely required to preserve fluidity, its disappearance leaves the existing

ice not a whit colder than the water which but a moment before was there as

fluid.

              There are many salts and also stones of a crystalline figure which

owe their origin in like manner to some earthly substance being dissolved in

water under the influence of agencies little understood. The drusy

configurations of many minerals, of the cubical sulphide of lead, of the red

silver ore, etc., are presumably also similarly formed in water, and by the

concursion of their particles, on their being forced by some cause or other to

relinquish this vehicle and to unite among themselves in definite external

shapes.

              But, further, all substances rendered fluid by heat, which have

become solid as the result of cooling, give, when broken, internal evidences

of a definite texture, thus suggesting the inference that only for the

interference of their own weight or the disturbance of the air, the exterior

would also have exhibited their proper specific shape. This has been observed

in the case of some metals where the exterior of a molten mass has hardened,

but the interior remained fluid, and then. owing to the withdrawal of the still

fluid portion in the interior, there has been an undisturbed concursion of the

remaining parts on the inside. A number of such mineral crystallizations,

such as spars, hematite, aragonite, frequently present extremely beautiful

shapes such as it might take art all its time to devise; and the halo in the

grotto of Antiparos is merely the work of water percolating through strata of

gypsum.

              The fluid state is, to all appearance, on the whole older than the

solid, and plants as well as animal bodies are built up out of fluid nutritivesubstance, so far as this takes form undisturbed-in the case of the latter,

admittedly, in obedience, primarily, to a certain original bent of nature

directed to ends (which, as will be shown in Part II, must not be judged

aesthetically, but teleologically by the principle of realism); but still all the

while, perhaps, also following the universal law of the affinity of substances

in the way they shoot together and form in freedom. In the same way, again,

where an atmosphere, which is a composite of different kinds of gas, is

charged with watery fluids, and these separate from it owing to a reduction of

the temperature, they produce snow-figures of shapes differing with the

actual composition of the atmosphere. These are frequently of very artistic

appearance and of extreme beauty. So without at all derogating from the

teleological principle by which an organization is judged, it is readily

conceivable how with beauty of flowers, of the plumage of birds, of

crustacea, both as to their shape and their colour, we have only what may be

ascribed to nature and its capacity for originating in free activity aesthetically

final forms, independently of any particular guiding ends, according to

chemical laws, by means of the chemical integration of the substance

requisite for the organization.

              But what shows plainly that the principle of the ideality of the

finality in the beauty of nature is the one upon which we ourselves invariably

take our stand in our aesthetic judgements, forbidding us to have recourse to

any realism of a natural end in favour of our faculty of representation as a

principle of explanation, is that in our general estimate of beauty we seek its

standard a priori in ourselves, and, that the aesthetic faculty is itself

legislative in respect of the judgement whether anything is beautiful or not.

This could not be so on the assumption of a realism of the finality of nature;

because in that case we should have to go to nature for instruction as to what

we should deem beautiful, and the judgement of taste would be subject to

empirical principles. For in such an estimate the question does not turn on

what nature is, or even on what it is for us in the way of an end, but on how

we receive it. For nature to have fashioned its forms for our delight would

inevitably imply an objective finality on the part of nature, instead of a

subjective finality resting on the play of imagination in its freedom, where it

is we who receive nature with favour, and not nature that does us a favour.

That nature affords us an opportunity for perceiving the inner finality in the

relation of our mental powers engaged in the estimate of certain of its

products, and, indeed, such a finality as arising from a supersensible basis isto be pronounced necessary and of universal validity, is a property of nature

which cannot belong to it as its end, or rather, cannot be estimated by us to be

such an end. For otherwise the judgement that would be determined by

reference to such an end would found upon heteronomy, instead of founding

upon autonomy and being free, as befits a judgement of taste.

              The principle of the idealism of finality is still more clearly apparent

in fine art. For the point that sensations do not enable us to adopt an aesthetic

realism of finality (which would make art merely agreeable instead of

beautiful) is one which it enjoys in common with beautiful nature. But the

further point that the delight arising from aesthetic ideas must not be made

dependent upon the successful attainment of determinate ends (as an art

mechanically directed to results), and that, consequently, even in the case of

the rationalism of the principle, an ideality of the ends and not their reality is

fundamental, is brought home to us by the fact that fine art, as such, must not

be regarded as a product of understanding and science, but of genius, and

must, therefore, derive its rule from aesthetic ideas, which are essentially

different from rational ideas of determinate ends.

              Just as the ideality of objects of sense as phenomena is the only way

of explaining the possibility of their forms admitting of a priori

determination, so, also, the idealism of the finality in estimating the beautiful

in nature and in art is the only hypothesis upon which a critique can explain

the possibility of a judgement of taste that demands a priori validity for every

one (yet without basing the finality represented in the object upon concepts).                    § 59. Beauty as the symbol of morality.

 

 

              Intuitions are always required to verify the reality of our concepts. If

the concepts are empirical, the intuitions are called examples: if they are pure

concepts of the understanding, the intuitions go by the name of schemata. But

to call for a verification of the objective reality of rational concepts, i.e., of

ideas, and, what is more, on behalf of the theoretical cognition of such a

reality, is to demand an impossibility, because absolutely no intuition

adequate to them can be given.

              All hypotyposis (presentation, subjectio sub adspectum) as a

rendering in terms of sense, is twofold. Either it is schematic, as where the

intuition corresponding to a concept comprehended by the understanding is

given a priori, or else it is symbolic, as where the concept is one which only

reason can think, and to which no sensible intuition can be adequate. In the

latter case the concept is supplied with an intuition such that the procedure of

judgement in dealing with it is merely analogous to that which it observes in

schematism. In other words, what agrees with the concept is merely the rule

of this procedure, and not the intuition itself. Hence the agreement is merely

in the form of reflection, and not in the content.

              Notwithstanding the adoption of the word symbolic by modern

logicians in a sense opposed to an intuitive mode of representation, it is a

wrong use of the word and subversive of its true meaning; for the symbolic is

only a mode of any intrinsic connection with the intuition of sentation is, in

fact, divisible into the schematic and the symbolic. Both are hypotyposes, i.e.,

presentations (exhibitiones), not mere marks. Marks are merely designations

of concepts by the aid of accompanying sensible signs devoid of any intrinsic

connection with the intuition of the object. Their sole function is to afford a

means of reinvoking the concepts according to the imagination’s law of

association-a purely subjective role. Such marks are either words or visible
                                                                                  25
(algebraic or even mimetic) signs, simply as expressions for concepts.

        25
              The intuitive mode of knowledge must be contrasted with the

discursive mode (not with the symbolic). The former is either schematic, by

mean demonstration, symbolic, as a representation following a mere analogy.              All intuitions by which a priori concepts are given a foothold are,

therefore, either schemata or symbols. Schemata contain direct, symbols

indirect, presentations of the concept. Schemata effect this presentation

demonstratively, symbols by the aid of an analogy (for which recourse is had

even to empirical intuitions), in which analogy judgement performs a double

function: first in applying the concept to the object of a sensible intuition, and

then, secondly, in applying the mere rule of its reflection upon that intuition

to quite another object, of which the former is but the symbol. In this way, a

monarchical state is represented as a living body when it is governed by

constitutional laws, but as a mere machine (like a handmill) when it is

governed by an individual absolute will; but in both cases the representation

is merely symbolic. For there is certainly no likeness between a despotic state

and a handmill, whereas there surely is between the rules of reflection upon

both and their causality. Hitherto this function has been but little analysed,

worthy as it is of a deeper study. Still this is not the place to dwell upon it. In

language we have many such indirect presentations modelled upon an

analogy enabling the expression in question to contain, not the proper schema

for the concept, but merely a symbol for reflection. Thus the words ground

(support, basis), to depend (to be held up from above), to flow from (instead

of to follow), substance (as Locke puts it: the support of accidents), and

numberless others, are not schematic, but rather symbolic hypotyposes, and

express concepts without employing a direct intuition for the purpose, but

only drawing upon an analogy with one, i.e., transferring the reflection upon

an object of intuition to quite a new concept, and one with which perhaps no

intuition could ever directly correspond. Supposing the name of knowledge

may be given to what only amounts to a mere mode of representation (which

is quite permissible where this is not a principle of the theoretical

determination of the object in respect of what it is in itself, but of the practical

determination of what the idea of it ought to be for us and for its final

employment), then all our knowledge of God is merely symbolic; and one

who takes it, with the properties of understanding, will, and so forth, which

only evidence their objective reality in beings of this world, to be schematic,

falls into anthropomorphism, just as, if he abandons every intuitive element,

he falls into Deism which furnishes no knowledge whatsoever-not even from

a practical point of view.

              Now, I say, the beautiful is the symbol of the morally good, and only

in this light (a point of view natural to every one, and one which every oneexacts from others as a duty) does it give us pleasure with an attendant claim

to the agreement of every one else, whereupon the mind becomes conscious

of a certain ennoblement and elevation above mere sensibility to pleasure

from impressions of sense, and also appraises the worth of others on the score

of a like maxim of their judgement. This is that intelligible to which taste, as

noticed in the preceding paragraph, extends its view. It is, that is to say, what

brings even our higher cognitive faculties into common accord, and is that

apart from which sheer contradiction would arise between their nature and

the claims put forward by taste. In this faculty, judgement does not find itself

subjected to a heteronomy of laws of experience as it does in the empirical

estimate of things-in respect of the objects of such a pure delight it gives the

law to itself, just as reason does in respect of the faculty of desire. Here, too,

both on account of this inner possibility in the subject, and on account of the

external possibility of a nature harmonizing therewith, it finds a reference in

itself to something in the subject itself and outside it, and which is not nature,

nor yet freedom, but still is connected with the ground of the latter, i.e., the

supersensible-a something in which the theoretical faculty gets bound up into

unity with the practical in an intimate and obscure manner. We shall bring

out a few points of this analogy, while taking care, at the same time, not to let

the points of difference escape us.

              (1) The beautiful pleases immediately (but only in reflective

intuition, not, like morality, in its concept). (2) It pleases apart from all

interest (pleasure in the morally good is no doubt necessarily bound up with

an interest, but not with one of the kind that are antecedent to the judgement

upon the delight, but with one that judgement itself for the first time calls into

existence). (3) The freedom of the imagination (consequently of our faculty

in respect of its sensibility) is, in estimating the beautiful, represented as in

accord with the understanding’s conformity to law (in moral judgements the

freedom of the will is thought as the harmony of the latter with itself

according to universal laws of Reason). (4) The subjective principles of the

estimate of the beautiful is represented as universal, i.e., valid for every man,

but as incognizable by means of any universal concept (the objective

principle of morality is set forth as also universal, i.e., for all individuals, and,

at the same time, for all actions of the same individual, and, besides, as

cognizable by means of a universal concept). For this reason the moral

judgement not alone admits of definite constitutive principles, but is only

possible by adopting these principles and their universality as the ground ofits maxims.

              Even common understanding is wont to pay regard to this analogy;

and we frequently apply to beautiful objects of nature or of art names that

seem to rely upon the basis of a moral estimate. We call buildings or trees

majestic and stately, or plains laughing and gay; even colours are called

innocent, modest, soft, because they excite sensations containing something

analogous to the consciousness of the state of mind produced by moral

judgements. Taste makes, as it were, the transition from the charm of sense to

habitual moral interest possible without too violent a leap, for it represents

the imagination, even in its freedom, as amenable to a final determination for

understanding, and teaches us to find, even in sensuous objects, a free delight

apart from any charm of sense.                § 60. APPENDIX. The methodology of taste.

 

 

              The division of a critique into elementology and methodology-a

division which is introductory to science-is one inapplicable to the critique of

taste. For there neither is, nor can be, a science of the beautiful, and the

judgement of taste is not determinable by principles. For, as to the element of

science in every art — a matter which turns upon truth in the presentation of

the object of the art-while this is, no doubt, the indispensable condition

(conditio sine qua non) of fine art, it is not itself fine art. Fine art, therefore,

has only got a manner (modus), and not a method of teaching (methodus).

The master must illustrate what the pupil is to achieve and how achievement

is to be attained, and the proper function of the universal rules to which he

ultimately reduces his treatment is rather that of supplying a convenient text

for recalling its chief moments to the pupil’s mind, than of prescribing them

to him. Yet, in all this, due regard must be paid to a certain ideal which art

must keep in view, even though complete success ever eludes its happiest

efforts. Only by exciting the pupil’s imagination to conformity with a given

concept, by pointing out how the expression falls short of the idea to which,

as aesthetic, the concept itself fails to attain, and by means of severe

criticism, is it possible to prevent his promptly looking upon the examples set

before him as the prototypes of excellence, and as models for him to imitate,

without submission to any higher standard or to his own critical judgement.

This would result in genius being stifled, and, with it, also the freedom of the

imagination in its very conformity to law-a freedom without which a fine art

is not possible, nor even as much as a correct taste of one’s own for

estimating it.

              The propaedeutic to all fine art, so far as the highest degree of its

perfection is what is in view, appears to lie, not in precepts, but in the culture

of the mental powers produced by a sound preparatory education in what are

called the humaniora-so called, presumably, because humanity signifies, on

the one hand, the universal feeling of sympathy, and, on the other, the faculty

of being able to communicate universally one’s inmost self-properties

constituting in conjunction the befitting social spirit of mankind, in

contradistinction to the narrow life of the lower animals. There was an ageand there were nations in which the active impulse towards a social life

regulated by laws-what converts a people into a permanent community-

grappled with the huge difficulties presented by the trying problem of

bringing freedom (and therefore equality also) into union with constraining

force (more that of respect and dutiful submission than of fear). And such

must have been the age, and such the nation, that first discovered the art of

reciprocal communication of ideas between the more cultured and ruder

sections of the community, and how to bridge the difference between the

amplitude and refinement of the former and the natural simplicity and

originality of the latter-in this way hitting upon that mean between higher

culture and the modest worth of nature, that forms for taste also, as a sense

common to all mankind, that true standard which no universal rules can

supply.

              Hardly will a later age dispense with those models. For nature will

ever recede farther into the background, so that eventually, with no

permanent example retained from the past, a future age would scarce be in a

position to form a concept of the happy union, in one and the same people, of

the law-directed constraint belonging to the highest culture, with the force

and truth of a free nature sensible of its proper worth.

              However, taste is, in the ultimate analysis, a critical faculty that

judges of the rendering of moral ideas in terms of sense (through the

intervention of a certain analogy in our reflection on both); and it is this

rendering also, and the increased sensibility, founded upon it, for the feeling

which these ideas evoke (termed moral sense), that are the origin of that

pleasure which taste declares valid for mankind in general and not merely for

the private feeling of each individual. This makes it clear that the true

propaedeutic for laying the foundations of taste is the development of moral

ideas and the culture of the moral feeling. For only when sensibility is

brought into harmony with moral feeling can genuine taste assume a definite

unchangeable form.

 

 

                     The Critique of Judgement

 

            Translated with introduction and notes by J.H. Bernard

 

                                     CONTENTS

 

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND EDITION
GLOSSARY OF KANT’S PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS
PREFACE
INTRODUCTION
I.  OF THE DIVISION OF PHILOSOPHY
II. OF THE REALM OF PHILOSOPHY IN GENERAL
III. OF THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGEMENT AS A MEANS OF COMBINING THE TWO PARTS OF PHILOSOPHY INTO A
WHOLE.
IV. OF JUDGEMENT AS A FACULTY LEGISLATING A PRIORI
V. THE PRINCIPLE OF THE FORMAL PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE IS A TRANSCENDENTAL PRINCIPLE OF
JUDGEMENT.
VI. OF THE COMBINATION OF THE FEELING OF PLEASURE WITH THE CONCEPT OF THE PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE.
VII. OF THE AESTHETICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE.
VIII. OF THE LOGICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE
IX. OF THE CONNEXION OF THE LEGISLATION OF UNDERSTANDING WITH THAT OF REASON BY MEANS OF THE
JUDGEMENT
PART I: CRITIQUE OF THE AESTHETICAL JUDGEMENT
FIRST DIVISION: ANALYTIC OF THE AESTHETICAL JUDGEMENT
FIRST BOOK – ANALYTIC OF THE BEAUTIFUL
FIRST MOMENT – OF THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE1 ACCORDING TO QUALITY
§ 1. THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS AESTHETICAL
§ 2. THE SATISFACTION WHICH DETERMINES THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS DISINTERESTED
§ 3. THE SATISFACTION IN THE PLEASANT IS BOUND UP WITH INTEREST
§ 4. THE SATISFACTION IN THE GOOD IS BOUND UP WITH INTEREST
§ 5. COMPARISON OF THE THREE SPECIFICALLY DIFFERENT KINDS OF SATISFACTION
SECOND MOMENT – OF THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE, VIZ. ACCORDING TO QUANTITY
§ 6. THE BEAUTIFUL IS THAT WHICH APART FROM CONCEPTS IS REPRESENTED AS THE OBJECT OF A UNIVERSAL
SATISFACTION
§ 7. COMPARISON OF THE BEAUTIFUL WITH THE PLEASANT AND THE GOOD BY MEANS OF THE ABOVE
CHARACTERISTIC
§ 8. THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE SATISFACTION IS REPRESENTED IN A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE ONLY AS SUBJECTIVE
§ 9. INVESTIGATION OF THE QUESTION WHETHER IN THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE THE FEELING OF PLEASURE PRECEDES
OR FOLLOWS THE JUDGING OF THE OBJECT
EXPLANATION OF THE BEAUTIFUL RESULTING FROM THE SECOND MOMENT
THIRD MOMENT – OF JUDGEMENTS OF TASTE, ACCORDING TO THE RELATION OF THE PURPOSES WHICH ARE
BROUGHT INTO CONSIDERATION THEREIN.
§ 10. OF PURPOSIVENESS IN GENERAL
§ 11. THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE HAS NOTHING AT ITS BASIS BUT THE FORM OF THE PURPOSIVENESS OF AN OBJECT
(OR OF ITS MODE OF REPRESENTATION)
§ 12. THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE RESTS ON A PRIORI GROUNDS
§ 13. THE PURE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS INDEPENDENT OF CHARM AND EMOTION
§ 14. ELUCIDATION BY MEANS OF EXAMPLES
§ 15. THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS QUITE INDEPENDENT OF THE CONCEPT OF PERFECTION§ 16. THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE, BY WHICH AN OBJECT IS DECLARED TO BE BEAUTIFUL UNDER THE CONDITION OF A
DEFINITE CONCEPT, IS NOT PURE
§ 17. OF THE IDEAL OF BEAUTY
EXPLANATION OF THE BEAUTIFUL DERIVED FROM THIS THIRD MOMENT
FOURTH MOMENT – OF THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE, ACCORDING TO THE MODALITY OF THE SATISFACTION IN THE
OBJECT
§ 18. WHAT THE MODALITY IN A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS
§ 19. THE SUBJECTIVE NECESSITY, WHICH WE ASCRIBE TO THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE, IS CONDITIONED
§ 20. THE CONDITION OF NECESSITY WHICH A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE ASSERTS IS THE IDEA OF A COMMON SENSE
§ 21.  HAVE WE GROUND FOR PRESUPPOSING A COMMON SENSE?
§ 22. THE NECESSITY OF THE UNIVERSAL AGREEMENT THAT IS THOUGHT IN A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE IS A
SUBJECTIVE NECESSITY, WHICH IS REPRESENTED AS OBJECTIVE UNDER THE PRESUPPOSITION OF A COMMON SENSE
EXPLANATION OF THE BEAUTIFUL RESULTING FROM THE FOURTH MOMENT
GENERAL REMARK ON THE FIRST SECTION OF THE ANALYTIC
SECOND BOOK – ANALYTIC OF THE SUBLIME
§ 23. TRANSITION FROM THE FACULTY WHICH JUDGES OF THE BEAUTIFUL TO THAT WHICH JUDGES OF THE SUBLIME
§ 24. OF THE DIVISIONS OF AN INVESTIGATION INTO THE FEELING OF THE SUBLIME
A.— OF THE MATHEMATICALLY SUBLIME
§ 25. EXPLANATION OF THE TERM “SUBLIME”
§ 26. OF THAT ESTIMATION OF THE MAGNITUDE OF NATURAL THINGS WHICH IS REQUISITE FOR THE IDEA OF THE
SUBLIME
§ 27. OF THE QUALITY OF THE SATISFACTION IN OUR JUDGEMENTS UPON THE SUBLIME
B.— OF THE DYNAMICALLY SUBLIME IN NATURE
§ 28. OF NATURE REGARDED AS MIGHT
§ 29. OF THE MODALITY OF THE JUDGEMENT UPON THE SUBLIME IN NATURE
GENERAL REMARK UPON THE EXPOSITION OF THE AESTHETICAL REFLECTIVE JUDGEMENT
DEDUCTION OF [PURE]1 AESTHETICAL JUDGEMENTS
§ 30. THE DEDUCTION OF AESTHETICAL JUDGEMENTS ON THE OBJECTS OF NATURE MUST NOT BE DIRECTED TO
WHAT WE CALL SUBLIME IN NATURE, BUT ONLY TO THE BEAUTIFUL.
§ 31. OF THE METHOD OF DEDUCTION OF JUDGEMENTS OF TASTE
§ 32. FIRST PECULIARITY OF THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE
§ 33. SECOND PECULIARITY OF THE JUDGEMENT OF TASTE
§ 34. THERE IS NO OBJECTIVE PRINCIPLE OF TASTE POSSIBLE
§ 35. THE PRINCIPLE OF TASTE IS THE SUBJECTIVE PRINCIPLE OF JUDGEMENT IN GENERAL
§ 36. OF THE PROBLEM OF A DEDUCTION OF JUDGEMENTS OF TASTE
§ 37. WHAT IS PROPERLY ASSERTED A PRIORI OF AN OBJECT IN A JUDGEMENT OF TASTE
§ 38. DEDUCTION OF JUDGEMENTS OF TASTE
§ 39. OF THE COMMUNICABILITY OF A SENSATION
§ 40. OF TASTE AS A KIND OF SENSUS COMMUNIS
§ 41. OF THE EMPIRICAL INTEREST IN THE BEAUTIFUL
§ 42. OF THE INTELLECTUAL INTEREST IN THE BEAUTIFUL
§ 43. OF ART IN GENERAL
§ 44. OF BEAUTIFUL ART
§ 45. BEAUTIFUL ART IS AN ART, IN SO FAR AS IT SEEMS LIKE NATURE
§ 46. BEAUTIFUL ART IS THE ART OF GENIUS
§ 47. ELUCIDATION AND CONFIRMATION OF THE ABOVE EXPLANATION OF GENIUS
§ 48. OF THE RELATION OF GENIUS TO TASTE
§ 49. OF THE FACULTIES OF THE MIND THAT CONSTITUTE GENIUS
§ 50. OF THE COMBINATION OF TASTE WITH GENIUS IN THE PRODUCTS OF BEAUTIFUL ART
§ 51. OF THE DIVISION OF THE BEAUTIFUL ARTS§ 52. OF THE COMBINATION OF BEAUTIFUL ARTS IN ONE AND THE SAME PRODUCT
§ 53. COMPARISON OF THE RESPECTIVE AESTHETICAL WORTH OF THE BEAUTIFUL ARTS
§ 54. REMARK
SECOND DIVISION: DIALECTIC OF THE AESTHETICAL JUDGEMENT
§ 55.
§ 56. REPRESENTATION OF THE ANTINOMY OF TASTE
§ 57. SOLUTION OF THE ANTINOMY OF TASTE
§ 58. OF THE IDEALISM OF THE PURPOSIVENESS OF BOTH NATURE AND ART AS THE UNIQUE PRINCIPLE OF THE
AESTHETICAL JUDGEMENT.
§ 59. OF BEAUTY AS THE SYMBOL OF MORALITY
APPENDIX
§ 60. OF THE METHOD OF TASTE
PART II: CRITIQUE OF THE TELEOLOGICAL JUDGEMENT
§ 61. OF THE OBJECTIVE PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE
FIRST DIVISION – ANALYTIC OF THE TELEOLOGICAL JUDGEMENT
§ 62. OF THE OBJECTIVE PURPOSIVENESS WHICH IS MERELY FORMAL AS DISTINGUISHED FROM THAT WHICH IS
MATERIAL
§ 63. OF THE RELATIVE, AS DISTINGUISHED FROM THE INNER, PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE
§ 64. OF THE PECULIAR CHARACTER OF THINGS AS NATURAL PURPOSES
§ 65. THINGS REGARDED AS NATURAL PURPOSES ARE ORGANISED BEINGS
§ 66. OF THE PRINCIPLE OF JUDGING OF INTERNAL PURPOSIVENESS IN ORGANISED BEINGS
§ 67. OF THE PRINCIPLE OF THE TELEOLOGICAL JUDGING OF NATURE IN GENERAL AS A SYSTEM OF PURPOSES
§ 68. OF THE PRINCIPLE OF TELEOLOGY AS INTERNAL PRINCIPLE OF NATURAL SCIENCE
SECOND DIVISION – DIALECTIC OF THE TELEOLOGICAL JUDGEMENT
§ 69. WHAT IS AN ANTINOMY OF THE JUDGEMENT?
§ 70. REPRESENTATION OF THIS ANTINOMY
§ 71. PRELIMINARY TO THE SOLUTION OF THE ABOVE ANTINOMY
§ 72. OF THE DIFFERENT SYSTEMS WHICH DEAL WITH THE PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE
§ 73. NONE OF THE ABOVE SYSTEMS GIVE WHAT THEY PRETEND
§ 74. THE REASON THAT WE CANNOT TREAT THE CONCEPT OF A TECHNIC OF NATURE DOGMATICALLY IS THE FACT
THAT A NATURAL PURPOSE IS INEXPLICABLE
§ 75. THE CONCEPT OF AN OBJECTIVE PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE IS A CRITICAL PRINCIPLE OF REASON FOR THE
REFLECTIVE JUDGEMENT
§ 76. REMARK
§ 77. OF THE PECULIARITY OF THE HUMAN UNDERSTANDING, BY MEANS OF WHICH THE CONCEPT OF A NATURAL
PURPOSE IS POSSIBLE
§ 78. OF THE UNION OF THE PRINCIPLE OF THE UNIVERSAL MECHANISM OF MATTER WITH THE TELEOLOGICAL
PRINCIPLE IN THE TECHNIC OF NATURE.
METHODOLOGY OF THE TELEOLOGICAL JUDGEMENT.1
§ 79. WHETHER TELEOLOGY MUST BE TREATED AS IF IT BELONGED TO THE DOCTRINE OF NATURE
§ 80. OF THE NECESSARY SUBORDINATION OF THE MECHANICAL TO THE TELEOLOGICAL PRINCIPLE IN THE
EXPLANATION OF A THING AS A NATURAL PURPOSE.
§ 81. OF THE ASSOCIATION OF MECHANISM WITH THE TELEOLOGICAL PRINCIPLE IN THE EXPLANATION OF A
NATURAL PURPOSE AS A NATURAL PRODUCT.
§ 82. OF THE TELEOLOGICAL SYSTEM IN THE EXTERNAL RELATIONS OF ORGANISED BEINGS
§ 83. OF THE ULTIMATE PURPOSE OF NATURE AS A TELEOLOGICAL SYSTEM
§ 84. OF THE FINAL PURPOSE OF THE EXISTENCE OF A WORLD, I.E. OF CREATION ITSELF
§ 85. OF PHYSICO-THEOLOGY
§ 86. OF ETHICO-THEOLOGY
§ 87. OF THE MORAL PROOF OF THE BEING OF GOD§ 88. LIMITATION OF THE VALIDITY OF THE MORAL PROOF
§ 89. OF THE USE OF THE MORAL ARGUMENT
§ 90. OF THE KIND OF BELIEF IN A TELEOLOGICAL PROOF OF THE BEING OF GOD
§ 91. OF THE KIND OF BELIEF PRODUCED BY A PRACTICAL FAITH
GENERAL REMARK ON TELEOLOGY                              Editor’s Introduction

 

 

              There are not wanting indications that public interest in the Critical

Philosophy has been quickened of recent days in these countries, as well as in

America. To lighten the toil of penetrating through the wilderness of Kant’s

long sentences, the English student has now many aids, which those who

began their studies fifteen or twenty years ago did not enjoy. Translations,

paraphrases, criticisms, have been published in considerable numbers; so that

if it is not yet true that “he who runs may read,” it may at least be said that a

patient student of ordinary industry and intelligence has his way made plain

before him. And yet the very number of aids is dangerous. Whatever may be

the value of short and easy handbooks in other departments of science, it is

certain that no man will become a philosopher, no man will even acquire a

satisfactory knowledge of the history of philosophy, without personal and

prolonged study of the ipsissima verba of the great masters of human

thought. “Above all,” said Schopenhauer, “my truth-seeking young friends,

beware of letting our professors tell you what is contained in the Critique of

the Pure Reason”; and the advice has not become less wholesome with the

lapse of years. The fact, however, that many persons have not sufficient

familiarity with German to enable them to study German Philosophy in the

original with ease, makes translations an educational necessity; and this

translation of Kant’s Critique of the faculty of Judgement has been

undertaken in the hope that it may promote a more general study of that

masterpiece. If any reader wishes to follow Schopenhauer’s advice, he has

only to omit the whole of this prefatory matter and proceed at once to the

Author’s laborious Introduction.

              It is somewhat surprising that the Critique of Judgement has never

yet been made accessible to the English reader. Dr. Watson has indeed

translated a few selected passages, so also has Dr. Caird in his valuable

account of the Kantian philosophy, and I have found their renderings of

considerable service; but the space devoted by both writers to the Critique of

Judgement is very small in comparison with that given to the Critiques of

Pure and Practical Reason. And yet the work is not an unimportant one. Kant

himself regarded it as the coping-stone of his critical edifice; it even formed

the point of departure for his successors, Fichte, Schelling and Hegel, in theconstruction of their respective systems. Possibly the reason of its

comparative neglect lies in its repulsive style. Kant was never careful of style,

and in his later years he became more and more enthralled by those

technicalities and refined distinctions which deter so many from the Critical

Philosophy even in its earlier sections. These “symmetrical architectonic

amusements,” as Schopenhauer called them, encumber every page of Kant’s

later writings, and they are a constant source of embarrassment to his

unhappy translator. For, as every translator knows, no single word in one

language exactly covers any single word in another; and yet if Kant’s

distinctions are to be preserved it is necessary to select with more or less

arbitrariness English equivalents for German technical terms, and retain them

all through. Instances of this will be given later on; I only remark here on the

fact that Kant’s besetting sin of over-technicality is especially conspicuous in

this treatise.

              Another fault — an old fault of Kant — apparent after reading even

a few pages, is that repetitions are very frequent of the same thought in but

slightly varied language. Arguments are repeated over and over again until

they become quite wearisome; and then when the reader’s attention has

flagged, and he is glancing cursorily down the page, some important new

point is introduced without emphasis, as if the author were really anxious to

keep his meaning to himself at all hazards. A book written in such fashion

rarely attracts a wide circle of readers. And yet, not only did Goethe think

highly of it, but it received a large measure of attention in France as well as in

Germany on its first appearance. Originally published at Berlin in 1790, a

Second Edition was called for in 1793; and a French translation was made by

Imhoff in 1796. Other French versions are those by Keratry and Weyland in

1823, and by Barni in 1846. This last I have had before me while performing

my task, but I have not found it of much service; the older French translations

I have not seen. The existence of these French versions, when taken in

connexion with the absence until very recently of any systematic account of

the Critique of Judgement in English, may be perhaps explained by the lively

interest that was taken on the Continent in the Philosophy of Art in the early

part of the century; whereas scientific studies on this subject received little

attention in England during the same period.

              The student of the Critique of Pure Reason will remember how

closely, in his Transcendental Logic, Kant follows the lines of the ordinarylogic of the schools. He finds his whole plan ready made for him, as it were;

and he proceeds to work out the metaphysical principles which underlie the

process of syllogistic reasoning. And as there are three propositions in every

syllogism, he points out that, in correspondence with this triplicity, the higher

faculties of the soul may be regarded as threefold. The Understanding or the

faculty of concepts gives us our major premiss, as it supplies us in the first

instance with a general notion. By means of the Judgement we see that a

particular case comes under the general rule, and by the Reason we draw our

conclusion. These, as three distinct movements in the process of reasoning,

are regarded by Kant as indicating three distinct faculties, with which the

Analytic of Concepts, the Analytic of Principles, and the Dialectic are

respectively concerned. The full significance of this important classification

does not seem, however, to have occurred to Kant at the time, as we may see

from the order in which he wrote his great books.1 The first problem which

arrests the attention of all modern philosophers is, of course, the problem of

knowledge, its conditions and its proper objects. And in the Critique of Pure

Reason this is discussed, and the conclusion is reached that nature as

phenomenon is the only object of which we can hope to acquire any exact

knowledge. But it is apparent that there are other problems which merit

consideration; a complete philosophy includes practice as well as theory; it

has to do not only with logic, but with life. And thus the Critique of Practical

Reason was written, in which is unfolded the doctrine of man’s freedom

standing in sharp contrast with the necessity of natural law. Here, then, it

seems at first sight as if we had covered the whole field of human activity.

For we have investigated the sources of knowledge, and at the same time

have pointed out the conditions of practical life, and have seen that the laws

of freedom are just as true in their own sphere as are the laws of nature.

              But as we reflect on our mental states we find that here no proper

account has been given of the phenomena of feeling, which play so large a

part in experience. And this Kant saw before he had proceeded very far with

the Critique of Practical Reason; and in consequence he adopted a threefold

classification of the higher mental faculties based on that given by previous

psychologists. Knowledge, feeling, desire, these are the three ultimate modes

of consciousness, of which the second has not yet been described. And when

we compare this with the former triple division which we took up from the

Aristotelian logic, we see that the parallelism is significant. Understanding is

par excellence the faculty of knowledge, and Reason the faculty of desire(these points are developed in Kant’s first two Critiques). And this suggests

that the Judgement corresponds to the feeling of pleasure and pain; it

occupies a position intermediate between Understanding and Reason, just as,

roughly speaking, the feeling of pleasure is intermediate between our

perception of an object and our desire to possess it.

              And so the Critique of Judgement completes the whole undertaking

of criticism; its endeavour is to show that there are a priori principles at the

basis of Judgement just as there are in the case of Understanding and of

Reason; that these principles, like the principles of Reason, are not

constitutive but only regulative of experience, i.e. that they do not teach us

anything positive about the characteristics of objects, but only indicate the

conditions under which we find it necessary to view them; and lastly, that we

are thus furnished with an a priori philosophy of pleasure.

              The fundamental principle underlying the procedure of the

Judgement is seen to be that of the purposiveness of Nature; nature is

everywhere adapted to ends or purposes, and thus constitutes a κόσμος, a

well-ordered whole. By this means, nature is regarded by us as if its

particular empirical laws were not isolated and disparate, but connected and

in relation, deriving their unity in seeming diversity from an intelligence

which is at the source of nature. It is only by the assumption of such a

principle that we can construe nature to ourselves; and the principle is then

said to be a transcendental condition of the exercise of our judging faculty,

but valid only for the reflective, not for the determinant Judgement. It gives

us pleasure to view nature in this way; just as the contemplation of chaos

would be painful.

              But this purposiveness may be only formal and subjective, or real

and objective. In some cases the purposiveness resides in the felt harmony

and accordance of the form of the object with the cognitive faculties; in

others the form of the object is judged to harmonise with the purpose in view

in its existence. That is to say, in the one case we judge the form of the object

to be purposive, as in the case of a flower, but could not explain any purpose

served by it; in the other case we have a definite notion of what it is adapted

for. In the former case the aesthetical Judgement is brought to bear, in the

latter the teleological; and it thus appears that the Critique of Judgement has

two main divisions; it treats first of the philosophy of Taste, the Beautiful and

the Sublime in Nature; and secondly, of the Teleology of nature’s working. Itis a curious literary parallel that St. Augustine hints (Confessions iv. 15) that

he had written a book, De Pulchro et Ápto, in which these apparently distinct

topics were combined; “pulchrum esse, quod per se ipsum; aptum, autem,

quod ad aliquid accommodatum deceret.” A beautiful object has no purpose

external to itself and the observer; but a useful object serves further ends.

Both, however, may be brought under the higher category of things that are

reckoned purposive by the Judgement.

              We have here then, in the first place, a basis for an a priori

Philosophy of Taste; and Kant works out its details with great elaboration. He

borrowed little from the writings of his predecessors, but struck out, as was

ever his plan, a line of his own. He quotes with approval from Burke’s

Treatise on the Sublime and Beautiful, which was accessible to him in a

German translation; but is careful to remark that it is as psychology, not as

philosophy, that Burke’s work has value. He may have read in addition

Hutcheson’s Inquiry which had also been translated into German; and he was

complete master of Hume’s opinions. Of other writers on Beauty, he only

names Batteux and Lessing. Batteux was a French writer of repute who had

attempted a twofold arrangement of the Arts as they may be brought under

Space and under Time respectively, a mode of classification which would

naturally appeal to Kant. He does not seem, however, to have read the ancient

text-book on the subject, Aristotle’s Poetics, the principles of which Lessing

declared to be as certain as Euclid.

              Following the guiding thread of the categories, he declares that the

aesthetical judgement about Beauty is according to quality disinterested; a

point which had been laid down by such different writers as Hutcheson and

Moses Mendelssohn. As to quantity, the judgement about beauty gives

universal satisfaction, although it is based on no definite concept. The

universality is only subjective; but still it is there. The maxim Trahit sua

quemque voluptas does not apply to the pleasure afforded by a pure

judgement about beauty. As to relation, the characteristic of the object called

beautiful is that it betrays a purposiveness without definite purpose. The

pleasure is a priori, independent on the one hand of the charms of sense or

the emotions of mere feeling, as Winckelmann had already declared; and on

the other hand is a pleasure quite distinct from that taken which we feel when

viewing perfection, with which Wolff and Baumgarten had identified it. By

his distinction between free and dependent beauty, which we also find in thepages of Hutcheson, Kant further develops his doctrine of the freedom of the

pure judgement of taste from the thraldom of concepts.

              Finally, the satisfaction afforded by the contemplation of a beautiful

object is a necessary satisfaction. This necessity is not, to be sure, theoretical

like the necessity attaching to the Law of Causality; nor is it a practical

necessity as is the need to assume the Moral Law as the guiding principle of

conduct. But it may be called exemplary; that is, we may set up our

satisfaction in a beautiful picture as setting an example to be followed by

others. It is plain, however, that this can only be assumed under certain

presuppositions. We must presuppose the idea of a sensus communis or

common sense in which all men share. As knowledge admits of being

communicated to others, so also does the feeling for beauty. For the relation

between the cognitive faculties requisite for Taste is also requisite for

Intelligence or sound Understanding, and as we always presuppose the latter

to be the same in others as in ourselves, so may we presuppose the former.

              The analysis of the Sublime which follows that of the Beautiful is

interesting and profound; indeed Schopenhauer regarded it as the best part of

the Critique of the Aesthetical Judgement. The general characteristics of our

judgements about the Sublime are similar to those already laid down in the

case of the Beautiful; but there are marked differences in the two cases. If the

pleasure taken in beauty arises from a feeling of the purposiveness of the

object in its relation to the subject, that in sublimity rather expresses a

purposiveness of the subject in respect of the object. Nothing in nature is

sublime; and the sublimity really resides in the mind and there alone. Indeed,

as true Beauty is found, properly speaking, only in beauty of form, the idea of

sublimity is excited rather by those objects which are formless and exhibit a

violation of purpose.

              A distinction not needed in the case of the Beautiful becomes

necessary when we proceed to further analyse the Sublime. For in aesthetical

judgements about the Beautiful the mind is in restful contemplation; but in

the case of the Sublime a mental movement is excited (pp. 105 and 120). This

movement, as it is pleasing, must involve a purposiveness in the harmony of

the mental powers; and the purposiveness may be either in reference to the

faculty of cognition or to that of desire. In the former case the sublime is

called the Mathematically Sublime — the sublime of mere magnitude — the

absolutely great; in the latter it is the sublime of power, the DynamicallySublime. Gioberti, an Italian writer on the philosophy of Taste, has pushed

this distinction so far as to find in it an explanation of the relation between

Beauty and Sublimity. “The dynamical Sublime,” he says, “creates the

Beautiful; the mathematical Sublime contains it,” a remark with which

probably Kant would have no quarrel.

              In both cases, however, we find that the feeling of the Sublime

awakens in us a feeling of the supersensible destination of man. “The very

capacity of conceiving the sublime,” he tells us, “indicates a mental faculty

that far surpasses every standard of sense.” And to explain the necessity

belonging to our judgements about the sublime, Kant points out that as we

find ourselves compelled to postulate a sensus communis to account for the

agreement of men in their appreciation of beautiful objects, so the principle

underlying their consent in judging of the sublime is “the presupposition of

the moral feeling in man.” The feeling of the sublimity of our own moral

destination is the necessary prerequisite for forming such judgements. The

connexion between Beauty and Goodness involved to a Greek in the double

sense of the word καλόν is developed by Kant with keen insight. To feel

interest in the beauty of Nature he regards as a mark of a moral disposition,

though he will not admit that the same inference may be drawn as to the

character of the art connoisseur (§ 42) . But it is specially with reference to

the connexion between the capacity for appreciating the Sublime, and the

moral feeling, that the originality of Kant’s treatment becomes apparent.

              The objects of nature, he continues, which we call sublime, inspire

us with a feeling of pain rather than of pleasure; as Lucretius has it —

              Me quaedam divina voluptas

 

              Percipit atque horror.

 

        1
               Dr. Caird (Critical Philosophy of Kant, vol. ii. p. 406) has given an

instructive account of the gradual development in Kant’s mind of the main

idea of the Critique of Judgement.

 

              But this “horror” must not inspire actual fear. As no extraneouscharm must mingle with the satisfaction felt in a beautiful object, if the

judgement about beauty is to remain pure; so in the case of the sublime we

must not be afraid of the object which yet in certain aspects is fearful.

              This conception of the feelings of sublimity excited by the loneliness

of an Alpine peak or the grandeur of an earthquake is now a familiar one; but

it was not so in Kant’s day. Switzerland had not then become the recreation-

ground of Europe; and though natural beauty was a familiar topic with poets

and painters it was not generally recognised that taste has also to do with the

sublime. De Saussure’s Travels, Haller’s poem Die Alpen, and this work of

Kant’s mark the beginning of a new epoch in our ways of looking at the

sublime and terrible aspects of Nature. And it is not a little remarkable that

the man who could write thus feelingly about the emotions inspired by grand

and savage scenery, had never seen a mountain in his life. The power and the

insight of his observations here are in marked contrast to the poverty of some

of his remarks about the characteristics of beauty. For instance, he puts

forward the curious doctrine that colour in a picture is only an extraneous

charm, and does not really add to the beauty of the form delineated, nay

rather distracts the mind from it. His criticisms on this point, if sound, would

make Flaxman a truer artist than Titian or Paolo Veronese. But indeed his

discussion of Painting or Music is not very appreciative; he was, to the end, a

creature of pure Reason.

              Upon the analysis he gives of the Arts, little need be said here. Fine

Art is regarded as the Art of Genius, “that innate mental disposition through

which Nature gives the rule to Art” (§ 46) . Art differs from Science in the

absence of definite concepts in the mind of the artist. It thus happens that the

great artist can rarely communicate his methods; indeed he cannot explain

them even to himself. Poeta nascitur, non fit; and the same is true in every

form of fine art. Genius is, in short, the faculty of presenting aesthetical

Ideas; an aesthetical Idea being an intuition of the Imagination, to which no

concept is adequate. And it is by the excitation of such ineffable Ideas that a

great work of art affects us. As Bacon tells us, “that is the best part of Beauty

which a picture cannot express; no, nor the first sight of the eye.” This

characteristic of the artistic genius has been noted by all who have thought

upon art; more is present in its productions than can be perfectly expressed in

language. As Pliny said of Timanthus the painter of Iphigenia, “In omnibus

ejus operibus intelligitur plus super quam pingitur.” But this genius requiresto be kept in check by taste; quite in the spirit of the σωϕροσύνη of the best

Greek art, Kant remarks that if in a work of art some feature must be

sacrificed, it is better to lose something of genius than to violate the canons of

taste. It is in this self-mastery that “the sanity of true genius” expresses itself.

              The main question with which the Critique of Judgement is

concerned is, of course, the question as to the purposiveness, the

Zweckmässigkeit, exhibited by nature. That nature appears to be full of

purpose is mere matter of fact. It displays purposiveness in respect of our

faculties of cognition, in those of its phenomena which we designate

beautiful. And also in its organic products we observe methods of operation

which we can only explain by describing them as processes in which means

are used to accomplish certain ends, as processes that are purposive. In our

observation of natural phenomena, as Kuno Fischer puts it, we judge their

forms aesthetically, and their life teleologically.

              As regards the first kind of Zweckmässigkeit, that which is ohne

Zweck — the purposiveness of a beautiful object which does not seem to be

directed to any external end — there are two ways in which we may account

for it. We may either say that it was actually designed to be beautiful by the

Supreme Force behind Nature, or we may say that purposiveness is not really

resident in nature, but that our perception of it is due to the subjective needs

of our judging faculty. We have to contemplate beautiful objects as if they

were purposive, but they may not be so in reality. And this latter idealistic

doctrine is what Kant falls back upon. He appeals in support of it, to the

phenomena of crystallisation (pp. 243 sqq. ), in which many very beautiful

forms seem to be produced by merely mechanical processes. The beauty of a

rock crystal is apparently produced without any forethought on the part of

nature, and he urges that we are not justified in asserting dogmatically that

any laws distinct from those of mechanism are needed to account for beauty

in other cases. Mechanism can do so much; may it not do all? And he brings

forward as a consideration which ought to settle the question, the fact that in

judging of beauty “we invariably seek its gauge in ourselves a priori ”; we do

not learn from nature, but from ourselves, what we are to find beautiful. Mr.

Kennedy in his Donnellan Lectures has here pointed out several weak spots

in Kant’s armour. In the first place, the fact that we seek the gauge of beauty

in our own mind “may be shown from his own definition to be a necessary

result of the very nature of beauty.”1 For Kant tells us that the aestheticaljudgement about beauty always involves “a reference of the representation to

the subject”; and this applies equally to judgements about the beautiful in Art

and the beautiful in Nature. But no one could maintain that from this

definition it follows that we are not compelled to postulate design in the mind

of the artist who paints a beautiful picture. And thus as the fact that “we

always seek the gauge of beauty” in ourselves does not do away with the

belief in a designing mind when we are contemplating works of art, it cannot

be said to exclude the belief in a Master Hand which moulded the forms of

Nature. As Cicero has it, nature is “non artificiosa solum, sed plane artifex.”

But the cogency of this reasoning, for the details of which I must refer the

reader to Mr. Kennedy’s pages, becomes more apparent when we reflect on

that second form of purposiveness, viz. adaptation to definite ends, with

which we meet in the phenomena of organic life.

              If we watch, e.g. the growth of a tree we perceive that its various

parts are not isolated and unconnected, but that on the contrary they are only

possible by reference to the idea of the whole. Each limb affects every other,

and is reciprocally affected by it; in short “in such a product of nature every

part not only exists by means of the other parts, but is thought as existing for

the sake of the others and the whole” (p. 277). The operations of nature in

organised bodies seem to be of an entirely different character from mere

mechanical processes; we cannot construe them to ourselves except under the

hypothesis that nature in them is working towards a designed end. The

distinction between nature’s “Technic” or purposive operation, and nature’s

Mechanism is fundamental for the explanation of natural law. The language

of biology eloquently shows the impossibility of eliminating at least the idea

of purpose from our investigations into the phenomena of life, growth, and

reproduction. And Kant dismisses with scant respect that cheap and easy

philosophy which would fain deny the distinctiveness of nature’s purposive

operation. A doctrine, like that of Epicurus, in which every natural

phenomenon is regarded as the result of the blind drifting of atoms in

accordance with purely mechanical laws, really explains nothing, and least of

all explains that illusion in our teleological judgements which leads us to

assume purpose where really there is none.

              It has been urged by Kirchmann and others that this distinction

between Technic and Mechanism, on which Kant lays so much stress, has

been disproved by the progress of modern science. The doctrines, usuallyassociated with the name of Darwin, of Natural Selection and Survival of the

Fittest, quite sufficiently explain, it is said, on mechanical principles the

semblance of purpose with which nature mocks us. The presence of order is

not due to any purpose behind the natural operation, but to the inevitable

disappearance of the disorderly. It would be absurd, of course, to claim for

Kant that he anticipated the Darwinian doctrines of development; and yet

passages are not wanting in his writings in which he takes a view of the

continuity of species with which modern science would have little fault to

find. “Nature organises itself and its organised products in every species, no

doubt after one general pattern but yet with suitable deviations, which self-

preservation demands according to circumstances” (p. 279). “The analogy of

forms, which with all their differences seem to have been produced according

to a common original type, strengthens our suspicions of an actual

relationship between them in their production from a common parent,

through the gradual approximation of one animal genus to another — from

those in which the principle of purposes seems to be best authenticated, i.e.

from man, down to the polype and again from this down to mosses and

lichens, and finally to crude matter. And so the whole Technic of nature,

which is so incomprehensible to us in organised beings that we believe

ourselves compelled to think a different principle for it, seems to be derived

from matter and its powers according to mechanical laws (like those by

which it works in the formation of crystals)” (p. 337). Such a theory he calls

“a daring venture of reason,” and its coincidences with modern science are

real and striking. But he is careful to add that such a theory, even if

established, would not eliminate purpose from the universe; it would indeed

suggest that certain special processes having the semblance of purpose may

be elucidated on mechanical principles, but on the whole, purposive

operation on the part of Mother Nature it would still be needful to assume (p.

338). “No finite Reason can hope to understand the production of even a

blade of grass by mere mechanical causes” (p. 326). “It is absurd to hope that

another Newton will arise in the future who shall make comprehensible by us

the production of a blade of grass according to natural laws which no design

has ordered” (p. 312).

              Crude materialism thus affording no explanation of the

purposiveness in nature, we go on to ask what other theories are logically

possible. We may dismiss at once the doctrine of Hylozoism, according to

which the purposes in nature are explained in reference to a world-soul,which is the inner principle of the material universe and constitutes its life.

For such a doctrine is self-contradictory, inasmuch as lifelessness, inertia, is

the essential characteristic of matter, and to talk of living matter is absurd (p.

304). A much more plausible system is that of Spinoza, who aimed at

establishing the ideality of the principle of natural purposes. He regarded the

world whole as a complex of manifold determinations inhering in a single

simple substance; and thus reduced our concepts of the purposive in nature to

our own consciousness of existing in an all-embracing Being. But on

reflection we see that this does not so much explain as explain away the

purposiveness of nature; it gives us an unity of inherence in one Substance,

but not an unity of causal dependence on one Substance (p. 303). And this

latter would be necessary in order to explain the unity of purpose which

nature exhibits in its phenomenal working. Spinozism, therefore, does not

give what it pretends to give; it puts us off with a vague and unfruitful unity

of ground, when what we seek is a unity that shall itself contain the causes of

the differences manifest in nature.

              We have left then as the only remaining possible doctrine, Theism,

which represents natural purposes as produced in accordance with the Will

and Design of an Intelligent Author and Governor of Nature. This theory is,

in the first place, “superior to all other grounds of explanation” (p. 305), for it

gives a full solution of the problem before us and enables us to maintain the

reality of the Zweckmässigkeit of nature. “Teleology finds the consummation

of its investigations only in Theology” (p.311). To represent the world and

the natural purposes therein as produced by an intelligent Cause is

“completely satisfactory from every human point of view for both the

speculative and practical use of our Reason” (p. 312). Thus the contemplation

of natural purposes, i.e. the common Argument from Design, enables us to

reach a highest Understanding as Cause of the world “in accordance with the

principles of the reflective Judgement, i.e. in accordance with the constitution

of our human faculty of cognition ” (p. 416).

              It is in this qualifying clause that Kant’s negative attitude in respect

of Theism betrays itself. He regards it as a necessary assumption for the

guidance of scientific investigation, no less than for the practical needs of

morals; but he does not admit that we can claim for it objective validity. In

the language of the Critique of Pure Reason, the Idea of God furnishes a

regulative, not a constitutive principle of Reason; or as he prefers to put it inthe present work, it is valid only for the reflective, not for the determinant

Judgement. We are not justified, Kant maintains, in asserting dogmatically

that God exists; there is only permitted to us the limited formula “We cannot

otherwise conceive the purposiveness which must lie at the basis of our

cognition of the internal possibility of many natural things, than by

representing it and the world in general as produced by an intelligent cause,

i.e. a God” (p. 312).

              We ask then, whence arises this impossibility of objective

statement? It is in the true Kantian spirit to assert that no synthetical

proposition can be made with reference to what lies above and behind the

world of sense; but there is a difficulty in carrying out this principle into

details. Kant’s refusal to infer a designing Hand behind the apparent order of

nature is based, he tells us, on the fact that the concept of a “natural purpose”

is one that cannot be justified to the speculative Reason. For all we know it

may only indicate our way of looking at things, and may point to no

corresponding objective reality. That we are forced by the limited nature of

our faculties to view nature as working towards ends, as purposive, does not

prove that it is really so. We cannot justify such pretended insight into what is

behind the veil.

              It is to be observed, however, that precisely similar arguments might

be urged against our affirmation of purpose, design, will, as the spring of the

actions of other human beings.1 For let us consider why it is that, mind being

assumed as the basis of our own individual consciousness, we go on to

attribute minds of like character to other men. We see that the external

behaviour of other men is similar to our own, and that the most reasonable

way of accounting for such behaviour is to suppose that they have minds like

ourselves, that they are possessed of an active and spontaneously energising

faculty, which is the seat of their personality. But it is instructive to observe

that neither on Kantian principles nor on any other can we demonstrate this;

to cross the chasm which separates one man’s personality from another’s

requires a venture of faith just as emphatically as any theological formula. I

can by no means prove to the determinant Judgement that the complex of

sensations which I constantly experience, and which I call the Prime

Minister, is anything more than a well-ordered machine. It is improbable that

this is the case — highly improbable; but the falsity of such an hypothesis

cannot be proved in the same way that we would prove the falsity of theassertion that two and two make five. But then though the hypothesis cannot

be thus ruled out of court by demonstration of its absurdity, it is not the

simplest hypothesis, nor is it that one which best accounts for the facts. The

assumption, on the other hand, that the men whom I meet every day have

minds like my own, perfectly accounts for all the facts, and is a very simple

assumption. It merely extends by induction the sphere of a force which I

already know to exist. Or in other words, crude materialism not giving me an

intelligent account of my own individual consciousness, I recognise mind,

νονˆ;ς, as a vera causa, as something which really does produce effects in the

field of experience, and which therefore I may legitimately put forward as the

cause of those actions of other men which externally so much resemble my

own. But, as has been said before, this argument, though entirely convincing

to any sane person, is not demonstrative; in Kantian language and on Kantian

principles the reasoning here used would seem to be valid only for the

reflective and not for the determinant Judgement. If the principle of design or

conscious adaptation of means to ends be not a constitutive principle of

experience, but only a regulative principle introduced to account for the facts,

what right have we to put it forward dogmatically as affording an explanation

of the actions of other human beings?

              It cannot be said that Kant’s attempted answer to such a defence of

the Design Argument is quite conclusive. In § 90 of the Methodology (p. 399)

he pleads that though it is perfectly legitimate to argue by analogy from our

own minds to the minds of other men,— nay further, although we may

conclude from those actions of the lower animals which display plan, that

they are not, as Descartes alleged, mere machines — yet it is not legitimate to

conclude from the apparent presence of design in the operations of nature that

a conscious mind directs those operations. For, he argues, that in comparing

the actions of men and the lower animals, or in comparing the actions of one

man with those of another, we are not pressing our analogy beyond the limits

of experience. Men and beasts alike are finite living beings, subject to the

limitations of finite existence; and hence the law which governs the one series

of operations may be regarded by analogy as sufficiently explaining the other

series. But the power at the basis of Nature is utterly above definition or

comprehension, and we are going beyond our legitimate province if we

venture to ascribe to it a mode of operation with which we are only

conversant in the case of beings subject to the conditions of space and time.

He urges in short that when speaking about man and his mind we thoroughlyunderstand what we are talking about; but in speaking of the Mind of Deity

we are dealing with something of which we have no experience, and of which

therefore we have no right to predicate anything.

              But it is apparent that, as has been pointed out, even when we infer

the existence of another finite mind from certain observed operations, we are

making an inference about something which is as mysterious an x as anything

can be. Mind is not a thing that is subject to the laws and conditions of the

world of sense; it is “in the world but not of the world.” And so to infer the

existence of the mind of any individual except myself is a quite different kind

of inference from that by which, for example, we infer the presence of an

electro-magnet in a given field. The action of the latter we understand to a

large extent; but we do not understand the action of mind, which yet we know

from daily experience of ourselves does produce effects in the phenomenal

world, often permanent and important effects. Briefly, the action of mind

upon matter (to use the ordinary phraseology for the sake of clearness) is —

we may assume for our present purpose — an established fact. Hence the

causality of mind is a vera causa; we bring it in to account for the actions of

other human beings, and by precisely the same process of reasoning we

invoke it to explain the operations of nature.

              And it is altogether beside the point to urge, as Kant does

incessantly, that in the latter case the intelligence inferred is infinite; in the

former only finite. All that the Design Argument undertakes to prove is that

mind lies at the basis of nature. It is quite beyond its province to say whether

this mind is finite or infinite; and thus Kant’s criticisms on p. 364 are

somewhat wide of the mark. There is always a difficulty in any argument

which tries to establish the operation of mind anywhere, for mind cannot be

seen or touched or felt; but the difficulty is not peculiar to that particular form

of argument with which theological interests are involved.

              The real plausibility of this objection arises from a vague idea, often

present to us when we speak of infinite wisdom or infinite intelligence,

namely that the epithet infinite in some way alters the meaning of the

attributes to which it is applied. But the truth is that the word infinite, when

applied to wisdom or knowledge or any other intellectual or moral quality,

can only properly have reference to the number of acts of wisdom or

knowledge that we suppose to have been performed. The only sense in which

we have any right to speak of infinite wisdom is that it is that which performsan infinite number of wise acts. And so when we speak of infinite

intelligence, we have not the slightest warrant, either in logic or in common

sense, for supposing that such intelligence is not similar in kind to that finite

intelligence which we know in man.

              To understand Kant’s attitude fully, we must also take into

consideration the great weight that he attaches to the Moral Argument for the

existence of God. The positive side of his teaching on Theism is summed up

in the following sentence (p. 388): “For the theoretical reflective Judgement

physical Teleology sufficiently proves from the purposes of Nature an

intelligent world-cause; for the practical Judgement moral Teleology

establishes it by the concept of a final purpose, which it is forced to ascribe to

creation.” That side of his system which is akin to Agnosticism finds

expression in his determined refusal to admit anything more than this. The

existence of God is for him a “thing of faith”; and is not a fact of knowledge,

strictly so called. “Faith” he holds (p. 409) “is the moral attitude of Reason as

to belief in that which is unattainable by theoretical cognition. It is therefore

the constant principle of the mind to assume as true that which it is necessary

to presuppose as condition of the possibility of the highest moral final

purpose.” As he says elsewhere (Introduction to Logic, ix. p. 60), “That man

is morally unbelieving who does not accept that which, though impossible to

know, is morally necessary to suppose.” And as far as he goes a Theist may

agree with him, and he has done yeoman’s service to Theism by his

insistence on the absolute impossibility of any other working hypothesis as an

explanation of the phenomena of nature. But I have endeavoured to indicate

at what points he does not seem to me to have gone as far as even his own

declared principles would justify him in going. If the existence of a Supreme

Mind be a “thing of faith,” this may with equal justice be said of the finite

minds of the men all around us; and his attempt to show that the argument

from analogy is here without foundation is not convincing.

              Kant, however, in the Critique of Judgement is sadly fettered by the

chains that he himself had forged, and frequently chafes under the restraints

they impose. He indicates more than once a point of view higher than that of

the Critique of Pure Reason, from which the phenomena of life and mind

may be contemplated. He had already hinted in that work that the

supersensible substrate of the ego and the non-ego might be identical. “Both

kinds of objects differ from each other, not internally, but only so far as theone appears external to the other; possibly what is at the basis of phenomenal

matter as a thing in itself may not be so heterogeneous after all as we

imagine.”1 This hypothesis which remains a bare undeveloped possibility in

the earlier work is put forward as a positive doctrine in the Critique of

Judgement. “There must,” says Kant, “be a ground of the unity of the

supersensible, which lies at the basis of nature, with that which the concept of

freedom practically contains” (Introduction, p. 13). That is to say, he

maintains that to explain the phenomena of organic life and the purposiveness

of nature we must hold that the world of sense is not disparate from and

opposed to the world of thought, but that nature is the development of

freedom. The connexion of nature and freedom is suggested by, nay is

involved in, the notion of natural adaptation; and although we can arrive at no

knowledge of the supersensible substrate of both, yet such a common ground

there must be. This principle is the starting-point of the systems which

followed that of Kant; and the philosophy of later Idealism is little more than

a development of the principle in its consequences.

              He approaches the same doctrine by a different path in the Critique

of the Teleological Judgement (§ 77) , where he argues that the distinction

between the mechanical and the teleological working of nature, upon which

so much stress has been justly laid, depends for its validity upon the peculiar

character of our Understanding. When we give what may be called a

mechanical elucidation of any natural phenomenon, we begin with its parts,

and from what we know of them we explain the whole. But in the case of

certain objects, e.g. organised bodies, this cannot be done. In their case we

can only account for the parts by a reference to the whole. Now, were it

possible for us to perceive a whole before its parts and derive the latter from

the former,1 then an organism would be capable of being understood and

would be an object of knowledge in the strictest sense. But our

Understanding is not able to do this, and its inadequacy for such a task leads

us to conceive the possibility of an Understanding, not discursive like ours,

but intuitive, for which knowledge of the whole would precede that of the

parts. “It is at least possible to consider the material world as mere

phenomenon, and to think as its substrate something like a thing in itself

(which is not phenomenon), and to attach to this a corresponding intellectual

intuition. Thus there would be, although incognisable by us, a supersensible

real ground for nature, to which we ourselves belong” (p. 325). Hence,

although Mechanism and Technic must not be confused and must ever standside by side in our scientific investigation of natural law, yet must they be

regarded as coalescing in a single higher principle incognisable by us. The

ground of union is “the supersensible substrate of nature of which we can

determine nothing positively, except that it is the being in itself of which we

merely know the phenomenon.” Thus, then, it appears that the whole force of

Kant’s main argument has proceeded upon an assumption, viz. the permanent

opposition between Sense and Understanding, which the progress of the

argument has shown to be unsound. “Kant seems,” says Goethe,2 “to have

woven a certain element of irony into his method. For, while at one time he

seemed to be bent on limiting our faculties of knowledge in the narrowest

way, at another time he pointed, as it were with a side gesture, beyond the

limits which he himself had drawn.” The fact of adaptation of means to ends

observable in nature seems to break down the barrier between Nature and

Freedom; and if we once relinquish the distinction between Mechanism and

Technic in the operations of nature we are led to the Idea of an absolute

Being, who manifests Himself by action which, though necessary, is yet the

outcome of perfect freedom.

              Kant, however, though he approaches such a position more than

once, can never be said to have risen to it. He deprecates unceasingly the

attempt to combine principles of nature with the principles of freedom as a

task beyond the modest capacity of human reason; and while strenuously

insisting on the practical force of the Moral Argument for the Being of God,

which is found in the witness of man’s conscience, will not admit that it can

in any way be regarded as strengthening the theoretical arguments adduced

by Teleology. The two lines of proof, he holds, are quite distinct; and nothing

but confusion and intellectual disaster can result from the effort to combine

them. The moral proof stands by itself, and it needs no such crutches as the

argument from Design can offer. But, as Mr. Kennedy has pointed out in his

acute criticism1 of the Kantian doctrine of Theism, it would not be possible

to combine a theoretical disbelief in God with a frank acceptance of the

practical belief of His existence borne in upon us by the Moral Law. Kant

himself admits this: “A dogmatical unbelief, ” he says (p. 411), “cannot

subsist together with a moral maxim dominant in the mental attitude.” That

is, though the theoretical argument be incomplete, we cannot reject the

conclusion to which it leads, for this is confirmed by the moral necessities of

conscience.              Kant’s position, then, seems to come to this, that though he never

doubts the existence of God, he has very grave doubts that He can be

theoretically known by man. That He is, is certain; what He is, we cannot

determine. It is a position not dissimilar to current Agnostic doctrines; and as

long as the antithesis between Sense and Understanding, between Matter and

Mind, is insisted upon as expressing a real and abiding truth, Kant’s

reasoning can hardly be refuted with completeness. No doubt it may be urged

that since the practical and theoretical arguments both arrive at the same

conclusion, the cogency of our reasoning in the latter should confirm our trust

in the former. But true conclusions may sometimes seem to follow from quite

insufficient premises; and Kant is thus justified in demanding that each

argument shall be submitted to independent tests. I have endeavoured to

show above that he has not treated the theoretical line of reasoning quite

fairly, and that he has underestimated its force; but its value as an argument

is not increased by showing that another entirely different process of thought

leads to the same result. And that the witness of conscience affords the most

powerful and convincing argument for the existence of a Supreme Being, the

source of law as of love, is a simple matter of experience. Induction,

syllogism, analogy, do not really generate belief in God, though they may

serve to justify to reason a faith that we already possess. The poet has the

truth of it:

              Wer Gott nicht fühlt in sich und allen Lebenskreisen,

 

              Dem werdet Ihr Ihn nicht beweisen mit Beweisen.

 

        1
               Natural Theology and Modern Thought, p. 158.

 

        1
               I reproduce here in part a paper read before the Victoria Institute in

April 1892.

 

        1
               Critique of Pure Reason. Dialectic, Bk. ii. chap. i. near the end.

         1
               Cf. Kuno Fischer, A Critique of Kant, p. 142.

 

        2
               Quoted by Caird, Critical Philosophy of Kant, vol. ii. p. 507, who

reiterates this criticism all through his account of Kant’s teaching.

 

        1
               Natural Theology and Modern Thought, p. 241.

 

              I give at the end of this Introduction a Glossary of the chief

philosophical terms used by Kant; I have tried to render them by the same

English equivalents all through the work, in order to preserve, as far as may

be, the exactness of expression in the original. I am conscious that this makes

the translation clumsy in many places, but have thought it best to sacrifice

elegance to precision. This course is the more necessary to adopt, as Kant

cannot be understood unless his nice verbal distinctions be attended to. Thus

real means quite a different thing from wirklich; Hang from Neigung;

Rührung from Affekt or Leidenschaft; Anschauung from Empfindung or

Wahrnehmung; Endzweck from letzter Zweck; Idee from Vorstellung;

Eigenschaft from Attribut or Beschaffenheit; Schranke from Grenze;

überreden from überzeugen, etc. I am not satisfied with “gratification” and

“grief” as the English equivalents for Vergnügen and Schmerz; but it is

necessary to distinguish these words from Lust and Unlust, and “mental

pleasure,” “mental pain,” which would nearly hit the sense, are awkward.

Again, the constant rendering of schön by beautiful involves the expression

“beautiful art” instead of the more usual phrase “fine art.” Purposive is an

ugly word, but it has come into use lately; and its employment enables us to

preserve the connexion between Zweck and zweckmässig. I have printed

Judgement with a capital letter when it signifies the faculty, with a small

initial when it signifies the act, of judging. And in like manner I distinguish

Objekt from Gegenstand, by printing the word “Object,” when it represents

the former, with a large initial.

              The text I have followed is, in the main, that printed by Hartenstein;

but occasionally Rosenkranz preserves the better reading. All important

variants between the First and Second Editions have been indicated at the

foot of the page. A few notes have been added, which are enclosed in squarebrackets, to distinguish them from those which formed part of the original

work. I have in general quoted Kant’s Introduction to Logic and Critique of

Practical Reason in Dr. Abbott’s translations.

              My best thanks are due to Rev. J. H. Kennedy and Mr. F. Purser for

much valuable aid during the passage of this translation through the press.

And I am under even greater obligations to Mr. Mahaffy, who was good

enough to read through the whole of the proof; by his acute and learned

criticisms many errors have been avoided. Others I have no doubt still

remain, but for these I must be accounted alone responsible.

              J. H. BERNARD.

 

 

              Trinity College, Dublin,May 24, 1892.

 

 

 

 

                     Introduction to the Second Edition

 

 

              More than twenty-one years have passed since the first edition of

this Translation was published, and during that time much has been written,

both in Germany and in England, on the subject of Kant’s Critique of

Judgement. In particular, the German text has been critically determined by

the labours of Professor Windelband, whose fine edition forms the fifth

volume of Kant’s Collected Works as issued by the Royal Prussian Academy

of Sciences (Berlin, 1908). It will be indispensable to future students. An

excellent account of the significance, in the Kantian system, of the

Urtheilskraft, by Mr. R. A. C. Macmillan, appeared in 1912; and Mr. J. C.

Meredith has published recently an English edition of the Critique of

Aesthetical Judgement, with notes and essays, dealing with the philosophy of

art, which goes over the ground very fully.

              Some critics of my first edition took exception to the clumsiness of

the word “representation” as the equivalent of Vorstellung, but I have made

no change in this respect, as it seems to me (and so far as I have observed to

others who have worked on the Critique of Judgement ), that it is necessary to

preserve in English the relation between the noun Vorstellung and the verb

vorstellen, if Kant’s reasoning is to be exhibited clearly. I have, however,

abandoned the attempt to preserve the word Kritik in English, and have

replaced it by Critique or criticism, throughout. The other changes that have

been made are mere corrections or emendations of faulty or obscure

renderings, with a few additional notes. I have left my original Introduction

as it was written in 1892, without attempting any fresh examination of the

problems that Kant set himself.

              JOHN OSSORY.

 

 

              The Palace, Kilkenny,January 6, 1914.

  

                    Glossary of Kant’s Philosophical Terms

 

 

              Absicht : design.

              Achtung : respect.

              Affekt : affection.

              Angenehm : pleasant.

              Anschauung : intuition.

              Attribut : attribute.

              Aufklärung : enlightenment.

              Begehr : desire.

              Begriff : concept.

              Beschaffenheit : constitution or characteristic.

              Bestimmen : to determine.

              Darstellen : to present.

              Dasein : presence or being.

              Eigenschaft : property.

              Empfindung : sensation.

              Endzweck : final purpose.

              Erkenntniss : cognition or knowledge.

              Erklärung : explanation.

              Erscheinung : phenomenon.

              Existenz : existence.

              Fürwahrhalten : belief.

              Gebiet : realm.

              Gefühl : feeling.              Gegenstand : object.

              Geist : spirit.

              Geniessen : enjoyment.

              Geschicklichkeit : skill.

              Geschmack : Taste.

              Gesetzmässigkeit : conformity to law.

              Gewalt : dominion or authority.

              Glaube : faith.

              Grenze : bound.

              Grundsatz : fundamental proposition or principle.

              Hang : propension.

              Idee : Idea.

              Leidenschaft : passion.

              Letzter Zweck : ultimate purpose.

              Lust : pleasure.

              Meinen : opinion.

              Neigung : inclination.

              Objekt : Object.

              Prinzip : principle.

              Real : real.

              Reich : kingdom.

              Reiz : charm.

              Rührung : emotion.

              Schein : illusion.

              Schmerz : grief.

              Schön : beautiful.              Schranke : limit.

              Schwärmerei : fanaticism.

              Seele : soul.

              Ueberreden : to persuade.

              Ueberschwänglich : transcendent.

              Ueberzeugen : to convince.

              Unlust : pain.

              Urtheil : judgement.

              Urtheilskraft : Judgement.

              Verbindung : combination.

              Vergnügen : gratification.

              Verknüpfung : connexion.

              Vermögen : faculty.

              Vernunft : Reason.

              Vernünftelei : sophistry or subtlety.

              Verstand : Understanding.

              Vorstellung : representation.

              Wahrnehmung : perception.

              Wesen : being.

              Willkühr : elective will.

              Wirklich : actual.

              Wohlgefallen : satisfaction.

              Zufriedenheit : contentment.

              Zweck : purpose.

              Zweckmässig : purposive.

              Zweckverbindung : purposive combination, etc. 

 

                                         Preface

 

 

              We may call the faculty of cognition from principles a priori, pure

Reason, and the inquiry into its possibility and bounds generally the Critique

of pure Reason, although by this faculty we only understand Reason in its

theoretical employment, as it appears under that name in the former work;

without wishing to inquire into its faculty, as practical Reason, according to

its special principles. That [Critique] goes merely into our faculty of knowing

things a priori, and busies itself therefore only with the cognitive faculty to

the exclusion of the feeling of pleasure and pain and the faculty of desire; and

of the cognitive faculties it only concerns itself with Understanding,

according to its principles a priori, to the exclusion of Judgement and Reason

(as faculties alike belonging to theoretical cognition), because it is found in

the sequel that no other cognitive faculty but the Understanding can furnish

constitutive principles of cognition a priori. The Critique, then, which sifts

them all, as regards the share which each of the other faculties might pretend

to have in the clear possession of knowledge from its own peculiar root,

leaves nothing but what the Understanding prescribes a priori as law for

nature as the complex of phenomena (whose form also is given a priori ). It

relegates all other pure concepts under Ideas, which are transcendent for our

theoretical faculty of cognition, but are not therefore useless or to be

dispensed with. For they serve as regulative principles; partly to check the

dangerous pretensions of Understanding, as if (because it can furnish a priori

the conditions of the possibility of all things which it can know) it had

thereby confined within these bounds the possibility of all things in general;

and partly to lead it to the consideration of nature according to a principle of

completeness, although it can never attain to this, and thus to further the final

design of all knowledge.

              It was then properly the Understanding which has its special realm

in the cognitive faculty, so far as it contains constitutive principles of

cognition a priori, which by the Critique, comprehensively called the

Critique of pure Reason, was to be placed in certain and sole possession1

against all other competitors. And so also to Reason, which containsconstitutive principles a priori nowhere except simply in respect of the

faculty of desire, should be assigned its place in the Critique of practical

Reason.

              Whether now the Judgement, which in the order of our cognitive

faculties forms a mediating link between Understanding and Reason, has also

principles a priori for itself; whether these are constitutive or merely

regulative (thus indicating no special realm); and whether they give a rule a

priori to the feeling of pleasure and pain, as the mediating link between the

cognitive faculty and the faculty of desire (just as the Understanding

prescribes laws a priori to the first, Reason to the second); these are the

questions with which the present Critique of Judgement is concerned.

              A Critique of pure Reason, i.e. of our faculty of judging a priori

according to principles, would be incomplete, if the Judgement, which as a

cognitive faculty also makes claim to such principles, were not treated as a

particular part of it; although its principles in a system of pure Philosophy

need form no particular part between the theoretical and the practical, but can

be annexed when needful to one or both as occasion requires. For if such a

system is one day to be completed under the general name of Metaphysic

(which it is possible to achieve quite completely, and which is supremely

important for the use of Reason in every reference), the soil for the edifice

must be explored by Criticism as deep down as the foundation of the faculty

of principles independent of experience, in order that it may sink in no part,

for this would inevitably bring about the downfall of the whole.

              We can easily infer from the nature of the Judgement (whose right

use is so necessarily and so universally requisite, that by the name of sound

Understanding nothing else but this faculty is meant), that it must be attended

with great difficulties to find a principle peculiar to it; (some such it must

contain a priori in itself, for otherwise it would not be set apart by the

commonest Criticism as a special cognitive faculty). This principle must not

be derived a priori from concepts, for these belong to the Understanding, and

Judgement is only concerned with their application. It must, therefore, furnish

of itself a concept, through which, properly speaking, no thing is cognised,

but which only serves as a rule, though not an objective one to which it can

adapt its judgement; because for this latter another faculty of Judgement

would be requisite, in order to be able to distinguish whether [any given case]

is or is not the case for the rule.              This perplexity about a principle (whether it is subjective or

objective) presents itself mainly in those judgements that we call aesthetical,

which concern the Beautiful and the Sublime of Nature or of Art. And,

nevertheless, the critical investigation of a principle of Judgement in these is

the most important part in a Critique of this faculty. For although they do not

by themselves contribute to the knowledge of things, yet they belong to the

cognitive faculty alone, and point to an immediate reference of this faculty to

the feeling of pleasure or pain according to some principle a priori; without

confusing this with what may be the determining ground of the faculty of

desire, which has its principles a priori in concepts of Reason.— In the

logical judging of nature, experience exhibits a conformity to law in things,

to the understanding or to the explanation of which the general concept of the

sensible does not attain; here the Judgement can only derive from itself a

principle of the reference of the natural thing to the unknowable

supersensible (a principle which it must only use from its own point of view

for the cognition of nature). And so, though in this case such a principle a

priori can and must be applied to the cognition of the beings of the world,

and opens out at the same time prospects which are advantageous for the

practical Reason, yet it has no immediate reference to the feeling of pleasure

and pain. But this reference is precisely the puzzle in the principle of

Judgement, which renders a special section for this faculty necessary in the

Critique; since the logical judging according to concepts (from which an

immediate inference can never be drawn to the feeling of pleasure and pain)

along with their critical limitation, has at all events been capable of being

appended to the theoretical part of Philosophy.

              The examination of the faculty of taste, as the aesthetical Judgement,

is not here planned in reference to the formation or the culture of taste (for

this will take its course in the future as in the past without any such

investigations), but merely in a transcendental point of view. Hence, I trust

that as regards the deficiency of the former purpose it will be judged with

indulgence, though in the latter point of view it must be prepared for the

severest scrutiny. But I hope that the great difficulty of solving a problem so

involved by nature may serve as excuse for some hardly avoidable obscurity

in its solution, if only it be clearly established that the principle is correctly

stated. I grant that the mode of deriving the phenomena of the Judgement

from it has not all the clearness which might be rightly demanded elsewhere,

viz. in the case of cognition according to concepts; but I believe that I haveattained to it in the second part of this work.

              Here then I end my whole critical undertaking. I shall proceed

without delay to the doctrinal [part] in order to profit, as far as is possible, by

the more favourable moments of my increasing years. It is obvious that in

this [part] there will be no special section for the Judgement, because in

respect of this faculty Criticism serves instead of Theory; but, according to

the division of Philosophy (and also of pure Philosophy) into theoretical and

practical, the Metaphysic of Nature and of Morals will complete the

undertaking.

        1
               [Reading, with Windelband, in sicheren alleinigen Besitz. ]

 

 

                                     Introduction

 

 

 

 

                         I. Of the Division of Philosophy

 

 

              We proceed quite correctly if, as usual, we divide Philosophy, as

containing the principles of the rational cognition of things by means of

concepts (not merely, as logic does, principles of the form of thought in

general without distinction of Objects), into theoretical and practical. But

then the concepts, which furnish their Object to the principles of this rational

cognition, must be specifically distinct; otherwise they would not justify a

division, which always presupposes a contrast between the principles of the

rational cognition belonging to the different parts of a science.

              Now there are only two kinds of concepts, and these admit as many

distinct principles of the possibility of their objects, viz. natural concepts and

the concept of freedom. The former render possible theoretical cognition

according to principles a priori; the latter in respect of this theoretical

cognition only supplies in itself a negative principle (that of mere contrast),

but on the other hand it furnishes fundamental propositions which extend the

sphere of the determination of the will and are therefore called practical. Thus

Philosophy is correctly divided into two parts, quite distinct in their

principles; the theoretical part or Natural Philosophy, and the practical part or

Moral Philosophy (for that is the name given to the practical legislation of

Reason in accordance with the concept of freedom). But up to the present a

gross misuse of these expressions has prevailed, both in the division of the

different principles and consequently also of Philosophy itself. For what is

practical according to natural concepts has been identified with the practical

according to the concept of freedom; and so with the like titles, ‘theoretical’

and ‘practical’ Philosophy, a division has been made, by which in fact

nothing has been divided (for both parts might in such case have principles of

the same kind).

              The will, regarded as the faculty of desire, is (in this view) one of the

many natural causes in the world, viz. that cause which acts in accordance

with concepts. All that is represented as possible (or necessary) by means of a

will is called practically possible (or necessary); as distinguished from the

physical possibility or necessity of an effect, whose cause is not determined

to causality by concepts (but in lifeless matter by mechanism and in animalsby instinct). Here, in respect of the practical, it is left undetermined whether

the concept which gives the rule to the causality of the will, is a natural

concept or a concept of freedom.

              But the last distinction is essential. For if the concept which

determines the causality is a natural concept, then the principles are

technically practical; whereas, if it is a concept of freedom they are morally

practical. And as the division of a rational science depends on the distinction

between objects whose cognition needs distinct principles, the former will

belong to theoretical Philosophy (doctrine of Nature), but the latter alone will

constitute the second part, viz. practical Philosophy (doctrine of Morals).

              All technically practical rules (i.e. the rules of art and skill generally,

or of prudence regarded as skill in exercising an influence over men and their

wills), so far as their principles rest on concepts, must be reckoned only as

corollaries to theoretical Philosophy. For they concern only the possibility of

things according to natural concepts, to which belong not only the means

which are to be met with in nature, but also the will itself (as a faculty of

desire and consequently a natural faculty), so far as it can be determined

conformably to these rules by natural motives. However, practical rules of

this kind are not called laws (like physical laws), but only precepts; because

the will does not stand merely under the natural concept, but also under the

concept of freedom, in relation to which its principles are called laws. These

with their consequences alone constitute the second or practical part of

Philosophy.

              The solution of the problems of pure geometry does not belong to a

particular part of the science; mensuration does not deserve the name of

practical, in contrast to pure, geometry, as a second part of geometry in

general; and just as little ought the mechanical or chemical art of experiment

or observation to be reckoned as a practical part of the doctrine of Nature.

Just as little, in fine, ought housekeeping, farming, statesmanship, the art of

conversation, the prescribing of diet, the universal doctrine of happiness

itself, or the curbing of the inclinations and checking of the affections for the

sake of happiness, to be reckoned as practical Philosophy, or taken to

constitute the second part of Philosophy in general. For all these contain only

rules of skill (and are consequently only technically practical) for bringing

about an effect that is possible according to the natural concepts of causes

and effects, which, since they belong to theoretical Philosophy, are subject tothose precepts as mere corollaries from it (viz. natural science), and can

therefore claim no place in a special Philosophy called practical. On the other

hand, the morally practical precepts, which are altogether based on the

concept of freedom to the complete exclusion of the natural determining

grounds of the will, constitute a quite special class. These, like the rules

which nature obeys, are called simply laws, but they do not, like them, rest on

sensuous conditions but on a supersensible principle; and accordingly they

require for themselves a quite different part of Philosophy, called practical,

corresponding to its theoretical part.

              We hence see that a complex of practical precepts given by

Philosophy does not constitute a distinct part of Philosophy, as opposed to the

theoretical part, because these precepts are practical; for they might be that,

even if their principles were derived altogether from the theoretical cognition

of nature (as technically practical rules). [A distinct branch of Philosophy is

constituted only] if their principle, as it is not borrowed from the natural

concept, which is always sensuously conditioned, rests on the supersensible,

which alone makes the concept of freedom cognisable by formal laws. These

precepts are then morally practical, i.e. not merely precepts or rules in this or

that aspect, but, without any preceding reference to purposes and designs, are

laws.

 

                  II. Of the Realm of Philosophy in General

 

 

              So far as our concepts have a priori application, so far extends the

use of our cognitive faculty according to principles, and with it Philosophy.

              But the complex of all objects, to which those concepts are referred,

in order to bring about a knowledge of them where it is possible, may be

subdivided according to the adequacy or inadequacy of our [cognitive]

faculty to this design.

              Concepts, so far as they are referred to objects, independently of the

possibility or impossibility of the cognition of these objects, have their field

which is determined merely according to the relation that their Object has to

our cognitive faculty in general. The part of this field in which knowledge ispossible for us is a ground or territory (territorium ) for these concepts and

the requisite cognitive faculty. The part of this territory, where they are

legislative, is the realm (ditio ) of these concepts and of the corresponding

cognitive faculties. Empirical concepts have, therefore, their territory in

nature, as the complex of all objects of sense, but no realm, only a dwelling-

place (domicilium ); for though they are produced in conformity to law they

are not legislative, but the rules based on them are empirical and

consequently contingent.

              Our whole cognitive faculty has two realms, that of natural concepts

and that of the concept of freedom; for through both it is legislative a priori.

In accordance with this, Philosophy is divided into theoretical and practical.

But the territory to which its realm extends and in which its legislation is

exercised, is always only the complex of objects of all possible experience, so

long as they are taken for nothing more than mere phenomena; for otherwise

no legislation of the Understanding in respect of them is conceivable.

              Legislation through natural concepts is carried on by means of the

Understanding and is theoretical. Legislation through the concept of freedom

is carried on by the Reason and is merely practical. It is only in the practical

[sphere] that the Reason can be legislative; in respect of theoretical cognition

(of nature) it can merely (as acquainted with law by the Understanding)

deduce from given laws consequences which always remain within [the

limits of] nature. But on the other hand, Reason is not always therefore

legislative, where there are practical rules, for they may be only technically

practical.

              Understanding and Reason exercise, therefore, two distinct

legislations in regard to one and the same territory of experience, without

prejudice to each other. The concept of freedom as little disturbs the

legislation of nature, as the natural concept influences the legislation through

the former.— The possibility of at least thinking without contradiction the

co-existence of both legislations, and of the corresponding faculties in the

same subject, has been shown in the Critique of pure Reason; for it annulled

the objections on the other side by exposing the dialectical illusion which

they contain.

              These two different realms then do not limit each other in their

legislation, though they perpetually do so in the world of sense. That they donot constitute one realm, arises from this, that the natural concept represents

its objects in intuition, not as things in themselves, but as mere phenomena;

the concept of freedom, on the other hand, represents in its Object a thing in

itself, but not in intuition. Hence, neither of them can furnish a theoretical

knowledge of its Object (or even of the thinking subject) as a thing in itself;

this would be the supersensible, the Idea of which we must indeed make the

basis of the possibility of all these objects of experience, but which we can

never extend or elevate into a cognition.

              There is, then, an unbounded but also inaccessible field for our

whole cognitive faculty — the field of the supersensible — wherein we find

no territory, and, therefore, can have in it, for theoretical cognition, no realm

either for concepts of Understanding or Reason. This field we must indeed

occupy with Ideas on behalf of the theoretical as well as the practical use of

Reason, but we can supply to them in reference to the laws [arising] from the

concept of freedom no other than practical reality, by which our theoretical

cognition is not extended in the slightest degree towards the supersensible.

              Now even if an immeasurable gulf is fixed between the sensible

realm of the concept of nature and the supersensible realm of the concept of

freedom, so that no transition is possible from the first to the second (by

means of the theoretical use of Reason), just as if they were two different

worlds of which the first could have no influence upon the second, yet the

second is meant to have an influence upon the first. The concept of freedom

is meant to actualise in the world of sense the purpose proposed by its laws,

and consequently nature must be so thought that the conformity to law of its

form, at least harmonises with the possibility of the purposes to be effected in

it according to laws of freedom.— There must, therefore, be a ground of the

unity of the supersensible, which lies at the basis of nature, with that which

the concept of freedom practically contains; and the concept of this ground,

although it does not attain either theoretically or practically to a knowledge of

the same, and hence has no peculiar realm, nevertheless makes possible the

transition from the mode of thought according to the principles of the one to

that according to the principles of the other.

 

 

   III. Of the Critique of Judgement as a Means of Combining the Two

                        Parts of Philosophy into a Whole.

 

 

              The Critique of the cognitive faculties, as regards what they can

furnish a priori, has properly speaking no realm in respect of Objects,

because it is not a doctrine, but only has to investigate whether and how, in

accordance with the state of these faculties, a doctrine is possible by their

means. Its field extends to all their pretensions, in order to confine them

within their legitimate bounds. But what cannot enter into the division of

Philosophy may yet enter, as a chief part, into the Critique of the pure faculty

of cognition in general, viz. if it contains principles which are available

neither for theoretical nor for practical use.

              The natural concepts, which contain the ground of all theoretical

knowledge a priori, rest on the legislation of the Understanding.— The

concept of freedom, which contains the ground of all sensuously-

unconditioned practical precepts a priori, rests on the legislation of the

Reason. Both faculties, therefore, besides being capable of application as

regards their logical form to principles of whatever origin, have also as

regards their content, their special legislations above which there is no other

(a priori ); and hence the division of Philosophy into theoretical and practical

is justified.

              But in the family of the higher cognitive faculties there is a middle

term between the Understanding and the Reason. This is the Judgement, of

which we have cause for supposing according to analogy that it may contain

in itself, if not a special legislation, yet a special principle of its own to be

sought according to laws, though merely subjective a priori. This principle,

even if it have no field of objects as its realm, yet may have somewhere a

territory with a certain character, for which no other principle can be valid.

              But besides (to judge by analogy) there is a new ground for bringing

the Judgement into connexion with another arrangement of our representative

faculties, which seems to be of even greater importance than that of its

relationship with the family of the cognitive faculties. For all faculties or

capacities of the soul can be reduced to three, which cannot be any furtherderived from one common ground: the faculty of knowledge, the feeling of

pleasure and pain, and the faculty of desire. 1 For the faculty of knowledge

the Understanding is alone legislative, if (as must happen when it is

considered by itself without confusion with the faculty of desire) this faculty

is referred to nature as the faculty of theoretical knowledge; for in respect of

nature (as phenomenon) it is alone possible for us to give laws by means of

natural concepts a priori, i.e. by pure concepts of Understanding.— For the

faculty of desire, as a higher faculty according to the concept of freedom, the

Reason (in which alone this concept has a place) is alone a priori legislative.

— Now between the faculties of knowledge and desire there is the feeling of

pleasure, just as the Judgement is intermediate between the Understanding

and the Reason. We may therefore suppose provisionally that the Judgement

likewise contains in itself an a priori principle. And as pleasure or pain is

necessarily combined with the faculty of desire (either preceding this

principle as in the lower desires, or following it as in the higher, when the

desire is determined by the moral law), we may also suppose that the

Judgement will bring about a transition from the pure faculty of knowledge,

the realm of natural concepts, to the realm of the concept of freedom, just as

in its logical use it makes possible the transition from Understanding to

Reason.

              Although, then, Philosophy can be divided only into two main parts,

the theoretical and the practical, and although all that we may be able to say

of the special principles of Judgement must be counted as belonging in it to

the theoretical part, i.e. to rational cognition in accordance with natural

concepts; yet the Critique of pure Reason, which must decide all this, as

regards the possibility of the system before undertaking it, consists of three

parts; the Critique of pure Understanding, of pure Judgement, and of pure

Reason, which faculties are called pure because they are legislative a priori.

        1
               If we have cause for supposing that concepts which we use as

empirical principles stand in relationship with the pure cognitive faculty a

priori, it is profitable, because of this reference, to seek for them a

transcendental definition; i.e. a definition through pure categories, so far as

these by themselves adequately furnish the distinction of the concept in

question from others. We here follow the example of the mathematician who

leaves undetermined the empirical data of his problem, and only brings their

relation in their pure synthesis under the concepts of pure Arithmetic, andthus generalises the solution. Objection has been brought against a similar

procedure of mine (cf. the Preface to the Critique of Practical Reason,

Abbott’s Translation, p. 94), and my definition of the faculty of desire has

been found fault with, viz. that it is [the being’s] faculty of becoming by

means of its representations the cause of the actuality of the objects of these

representations; for the desires might be mere cravings, and by means of

these alone every one is convinced the Object cannot be produced.— But this

proves nothing more than that there are desires in man, by which he is in

contradiction with himself. For here he strives for the production of the

Object by means of the representation alone, from which he can expect no

result, because he is conscious that his mechanical powers (if I may so call

those which are not psychological) which must be determined by that

representation to bring about the Object (mediately) are either not competent,

or even tend towards what is impossible; e.g. to reverse the past (O mihi

praeteritos . . . etc.), or to annihilate in the impatience of expectation the

interval before the wished for moment.— Although in such fantastic desires

we are conscious of the inadequacy (or even the unsuitability) of our

representations for being causes of their objects, yet their reference as causes,

and consequently the representation of their causality, is contained in every

wish; and this is specially evident if the wish is an affection or longing. For

these [longings] by their dilatation and contraction of the heart and

consequent exhaustion of its powers, prove that these powers are continually

kept on the stretch by representations, but that they perpetually let the mind,

having regard to the impossibility [of the desire], fall back in exhaustion.

Even prayers for the aversion of great and (as far as one can see) unavoidable

evils, and many superstitious means for attaining in a natural way impossible

purposes, point to the causal reference of representations to their Objects; a

reference which cannot at all the checked by the consciousness of the

inadequacy of the effort to produce the effect.— As to why there should be in

our nature this propensity to desires which are consciously vain, that is an

anthropologico-teleological problem. It seems that if we were not determined

to the application of our powers before we were assured of the adequacy of

our faculties to produce an Object, these powers would remain in great part

unused. For we commonly learn to know our powers only by first making

trial of them. This deception in the case of vain wishes is then only the

consequence of a benevolent ordinance in our nature. [This note was added

by Kant in the Second Edition.] 

 

             IV. Of Judgement as a Faculty Legislating A Priori

 

 

              Judgement in general is the faculty of thinking the particular as

contained under the Universal. If the universal (the rule, the principle, the

law) be given, the Judgement which subsumes the particular under it (even if,

as transcendental Judgement, it furnishes a priori, the conditions in

conformity with which subsumption under that universal is alone possible) is

determinant. But if only the particular be given for which the universal has to

be found, the Judgement is merely reflective.

              The determinant Judgement only subsumes under universal

transcendental laws given by the Understanding; the law is marked out for it,

a priori, and it has therefore no need to seek a law for itself in order to be

able to subordinate the particular in nature to the universal.— But the forms

of nature are so manifold, and there are so many modifications of the

universal transcendental natural concepts left undetermined by the laws

given, a priori, by the pure Understanding,— because these only concern the

possibility of a nature in general (as an object of sense),— that there must be

laws for these [forms] also. These, as empirical, may be contingent from the

point of view of our Understanding, and yet, if they are to be called laws (as

the concept of a nature requires), they must be regarded as necessary in virtue

of a principle of the unity of the manifold, though it be unknown to us.— The

reflective Judgement, which is obliged to ascend from the particular in nature

to the universal, requires on that account a principle that it cannot borrow

from experience, because its function is to establish the unity of all empirical

principles under higher ones, and hence to establish the possibility of their

systematic subordination. Such a transcendental principle, then, the reflective

Judgement can only give as a law from and to itself. It cannot derive it from

outside (because then it would be the determinant Judgement); nor can it

prescribe it to nature, because reflection upon the laws of nature adjusts itself

by nature, and not nature by the conditions according to which we attempt to

arrive at a concept of it which is quite contingent in respect of these.

              This principle can be no other than the following: As universal laws

of nature have their ground in our Understanding, which prescribes them to

nature (although only according to the universal concept of it as nature); soparticular empirical laws, in respect of what is in them left undetermined by

these universal laws, must be considered in accordance with such a unity as

they would have if an Understanding (although not our Understanding) had

furnished them to our cognitive faculties, so as to make possible a system of

experience according to particular laws of nature. Not as if, in this way, such

an Understanding must be assumed as actual (for it is only our reflective

Judgement to which this Idea serves as a principle — for reflecting, not for

determining); but this faculty thus gives a law only to itself and not to nature.

              Now the concept of an Object, so far as it contains the ground of the

actuality of this Object, is the purpose; and the agreement of a thing with that

constitution of things, which is only possible according to purposes, is called

the purposiveness of its form. Thus the principle of Judgement, in respect of

the form of things of nature under empirical laws generally, is the

purposiveness of nature in its manifoldness. That is, nature is represented by

means of this concept, as if an Understanding contained the ground of the

unity of the manifold of its empirical laws.

              The purposiveness of nature is therefore a particular concept, a

priori, which has its origin solely in the reflective Judgement. For we cannot

ascribe to natural products anything like a reference of nature in them to

purposes; we can only use this concept to reflect upon such products in

respect of the connexion of phenomena which is given in nature according to

empirical laws. This concept is also quite different from practical

purposiveness (in human art or in morals), though it is certainly thought

according to the analogy of these last.

 

 

       V. The Principle of the Formal Purposiveness of Nature is a

                    Transcendental Principle of Judgement.

 

 

              A transcendental principle is one by means of which is represented,

a priori, the universal condition under which alone things can be in general

Objects of our cognition. On the other hand, a principle is called

metaphysical if it represents the a priori condition under which alone

Objects, whose concept must be empirically given, can be further determined

a priori. Thus the principle of the cognition of bodies as substances, and as

changeable substances, is transcendental, if thereby it is asserted that their

changes must have a cause; it is metaphysical if it asserts that their changes

must have an external cause. For in the former case bodies need only be

thought by means of ontological predicates (pure concepts of Understanding),

e.g. substance, in order to cognise the proposition a priori; but in the latter

case the empirical concept of a body (as a movable thing in space) must lie at

the basis of the proposition, although once this basis has been laid down, it

may be seen completely a priori that this latter predicate (motion only by

external causes) belongs to body.— Thus, as I shall presently show, the

principle of the purposiveness of nature (in the manifoldness of its empirical

laws) is a transcendental principle. For the concept of Objects, so far as they

are thought as standing under this principle, is only the pure concept of

objects of possible empirical cognition in general and contains nothing

empirical. On the other hand, the principle of practical purposiveness, which

must be thought in the Idea of the determination of a free will, is a

metaphysical principle; because the concept of a faculty of desire as a will

must be given empirically (i.e. does not belong to transcendental predicates).

Both principles are, however, not empirical, but a priori; because for the

combination of the predicate with the empirical concept of the subject of their

judgements no further experience is needed, but it can be apprehended

completely a priori.

              That the concept of a purposiveness of nature belongs to

transcendental principles can be sufficiently seen from the maxims of the

Judgement, which lie at the basis of the investigation of nature a priori, and

yet do not go further than the possibility of experience, and consequently ofthe cognition of nature — not indeed nature in general, but nature as

determined through a variety of particular laws. These maxims present

themselves in the course of this science often enough, though in a scattered

way, as sentences of metaphysical wisdom, whose necessity we cannot

demonstrate from concepts. “Nature takes the shortest way (lex parsimoniae

); at the same time it makes no leaps, either in the course of its changes or in

the juxtaposition of specifically different forms (lex continui in natura ); its

great variety in empirical laws is yet unity under a few principles (principia

praeter necessitatem non sunt multiplicanda ),” etc.

              If we propose to set forth the origin of these fundamental

propositions and try to do so by the psychological method, we violate their

sense. For they do not tell us what happens, i.e. by what rule our cognitive

powers actually operate, and how we judge, but how we ought to judge; and

this logical objective necessity does not emerge if the principles are merely

empirical. Hence that purposiveness of nature for our cognitive faculties and

their use, which is plainly apparent from them, is a transcendental principle of

judgements, and needs therefore also a Transcendental Deduction, by means

of which the ground for so judging must be sought in the sources of cognition

a priori.

              We find in the grounds of the possibility of an experience in the very

first place something necessary, viz. the universal laws without which nature

in general (as an object of sense) cannot be thought; and these rest upon the

Categories, applied to the formal conditions of all intuition possible for us, so

far as it is also given a priori. Now under these laws the Judgement is

determinant, for it has nothing to do but to subsume under given laws. For

example, the Understanding says that every change has its cause (universal

law of nature); the transcendental Judgement has nothing further to do than to

supply a priori the condition of subsumption under the concept of the

Understanding placed before it, i.e. the succession [in time] of the

determinations of one and the same thing. For nature in general (as an object

of possible experience) that law is cognised as absolutely necessary.— But

now the objects of empirical cognition are determined in many other ways

than by that formal time-condition, or, at least as far as we can judge a priori,

are determinable. Hence specifically different natures can be causes in an

infinite variety of ways, as well as in virtue of what they have in common as

belonging to nature in general; and each of these modes must (in accordancewith the concept of a cause in general) have its rule, which is a law and

therefore brings necessity with it, although we do not at all comprehend this

necessity, in virtue of the constitution and the limitations of our cognitive

faculties. We must therefore think in nature, in respect of its merely empirical

laws, a possibility of infinitely various empirical laws, which are, as far as

our insight goes, contingent (cannot be cognised a priori ), and in respect of

which we judge nature, according to empirical laws and the possibility of the

unity of experience (as a system according to empirical laws), to be

contingent. But such a unity must be necessarily presupposed and assumed,

for otherwise there would be no thoroughgoing connexion of empirical

cognitions in a whole of experience. The universal laws of nature no doubt

furnish such a connexion of things according to their kind as things of nature

in general, but not specifically, as such particular beings of nature. Hence the

Judgement must assume for its special use this principle a priori, that what in

the particular (empirical) laws of nature is from the human point of view

contingent, yet contains a unity of law in the combination of its manifold into

an experience possible in itself — a unity not indeed to be fathomed by us,

but yet thinkable. Consequently as the unity of law in a combination, which

we cognise as contingent in itself, although in conformity with a necessary

design (a need) of Understanding, is represented as the purposiveness of

Objects (here of nature); so must the Judgement, which in respect of things

under possible (not yet discovered) empirical laws is merely reflection, think

of nature in respect of the latter according to a principle of purposiveness for

our cognitive faculty, which then is expressed in the above maxims of the

Judgement. This transcendental concept of a purposiveness of nature is

neither a natural concept nor a concept of freedom, because it ascribes

nothing to the Object (of nature), but only represents the peculiar way in

which we must proceed in reflection upon the objects of nature in reference

to a thoroughly connected experience, and is consequently a subjective

principle (maxim) of the Judgement. Hence, as if it were a lucky chance

favouring our design, we are rejoiced (properly speaking, relieved of a want),

if we meet with such systematic unity under merely empirical laws; although

we must necessarily assume that there is such a unity without our

comprehending it or being able to prove it.

              In order to convince ourselves of the correctness of this Deduction of

the concept before us, and the necessity of assuming it as a transcendental

principle of cognition, just consider the magnitude of the problem. Theproblem, which lies a priori in our Understanding, is to make a connected

experience out of given perceptions of a nature containing at all events an

infinite variety of empirical laws. The Understanding is, no doubt, in

possession a priori of universal laws of nature, without which nature could

not be an object of experience; but it needs in addition a certain order of

nature in its particular rules, which can only be empirically known and which

are, as regards the Understanding, contingent. These rules, without which we

could not proceed from the universal analogy of a possible experience in

general to the particular, must be thought by it as laws (i.e. as necessary), for

otherwise they would not constitute an order of nature; although their

necessity can never be cognised or comprehended by it. Although, therefore,

the Understanding can determine nothing a priori in respect of Objects, it

must, in order to trace out these empirical so-called laws, place at the basis of

all reflection upon Objects an a priori principle, viz. that a cognisable order

of nature is possible in accordance with these laws. The following

propositions express some such principle. There is in nature a subordination

of genera and species comprehensible by us. Each one approximates to some

other according to a common principle, so that a transition from one to

another and so on to a higher genus may be possible. Though it seems at the

outset unavoidable for our Understanding to assume different kinds of

causality for the specific differences of natural operations, yet these different

kinds may stand under a small number of principles, with the investigation of

which we have to busy ourselves. This harmony of nature with our cognitive

faculty is presupposed a priori by the Judgement, on behalf of its reflection

upon nature in accordance with its empirical laws; whilst the Understanding

at the same time cognises it objectively as contingent, and it is only the

Judgement that ascribes it to nature as a trancendental purposiveness (in

relation to the cognitive faculty of the subject). For without this

presupposition we should have no order of nature in accordance with

empirical laws, and consequently no guiding thread for an experience ordered

by these in all their variety, or for an investigation of them.

              For it might easily be thought that, in spite of all the uniformity of

natural things according to the universal laws, without which we should not

have the form of an empirical cognition in general, the specific variety of the

empirical laws of nature including their effects might yet be so great, that it

would be impossible for our Understanding, to detect in nature a

comprehensible order; to divide its products into genera and species, so as touse the principles which explain and make intelligible one for the explanation

and comprehension of another; or out of such confused material (strictly we

should say, so infinitely various and not to be measured by our faculty of

comprehension) to make a connected experience.

              The Judgement has therefore also in itself a principle a priori of the

possibility of nature, but only in a subjective aspect; by which it prescribes,

not to nature (autonomy), but to itself (heautonomy) a law for its reflection

upon nature. This we might call the law of the specification of nature in

respect of its empirical laws. The Judgement does not cognise this a priori in

nature, but assumes it on behalf of a natural order cognisable by our

Understanding in the division which it makes of the universal laws of nature

when it wishes to subordinate to these the variety of particular laws. If then

we say that nature specifies its universal laws according to the principles of

purposiveness for our cognitive faculty, i.e. in accordance with the necessary

business of the human Understanding of finding the universal for the

particular which perception offers it, and again of finding connexion for the

diverse (which however is a universal for each species) in the unity of a

principle,— we thus neither prescribe to nature a law, nor do we learn one

from it by observation (although such a principle may be confirmed by this

means). For it is not a principle of the determinant but merely of the

reflective Judgement. We only require that, be nature disposed as it may as

regards its universal laws, investigation into its empirical laws may be carried

on in accordance with that principle and the maxims founded thereon,

because it is only so far as that holds that we can make any progress with the

use of our Understanding in experience, or gain knowledge.

 

 

 VI. Of the Combination of the Feeling of Pleasure with the Concept of

                          the Purposiveness of Nature.

 

 

              The thought harmony of nature in the variety of its particular laws

with our need of finding universality of principles for it, must be judged as

contingent in respect of our insight, but yet at the same time as indispensable

for the needs of our Understanding, and consequently as a purposiveness by

which nature is harmonised with our design, which, however, has only

knowledge for its aim. The universal laws of the Understanding, which are at

the same time laws of nature, are just as necessary (although arising from

spontaneity) as the material laws of motion. Their production presupposes no

design on the part of our cognitive faculty, because it is only by means of

them that we, in the first place, attain a concept of what the cognition of

things (of nature) is, and attribute them necessarily to nature as Object of our

cognition in general. But, so far as we can see, it is contingent that the order

of nature according to its particular laws, in all its variety and heterogeneity

possibly at least transcending our comprehension, should be actually

conformable to these [laws]. The discovery of this [order] is the business of

the Understanding which is designedly borne towards a necessary purpose,

viz. the bringing of unity of principles into nature, which purpose then the

Judgement must ascribe to nature, because the Understanding cannot here

prescribe any law to it.

              The attainment of that design is bound up with the feeling of

pleasure, and since the condition of this attainment is a representation a

priori, — as here a principle for the reflective Judgement in general,—

therefore the feeling of pleasure is determined by a ground a priori and valid

for every man, and that merely by the reference of the Object to the cognitive

faculty, the concept of purposiveness here not having the least reference to

the faculty of desire. It is thus quite distinguished from all practical

purposiveness of nature.

              In fact, although from the agreement of perceptions with laws in

accordance with universal natural concepts (the categories), we do not and

cannot find in ourselves the slightest effect upon the feeling of pleasure,because the Understanding necessarily proceeds according to its nature

without any design; yet, on the other hand, the discovery that two or more

empirical heterogeneous laws of nature may be combined under one principle

comprehending them both, is the ground of a very marked pleasure, often

even of an admiration, which does not cease, though we may be already quite

familiar with the objects of it. We no longer find, it is true, any marked

pleasure in the comprehensibility of nature and in the unity of its divisions

into genera and species, whereby are possible all empirical concepts, through

which we cognise it according to its particular laws. But this pleasure has

certainly been present at one time, and it is only because the commonest

experience would be impossible without it that it is gradually confounded

with mere cognition and no longer arrests particular attention. There is then

something in our judgements upon nature which makes us attentive to its

purposiveness for our Understanding — an endeavour to bring, where

possible, its dissimilar laws under higher ones, though still always empirical

— and thus, if successful, makes us feel pleasure in that harmony of these

with our cognitive faculty, which harmony we regard as merely contingent.

On the other hand, a representation of nature would altogether displease, by

which it should be foretold to us that in the smallest investigation beyond the

commonest experience we should meet with a heterogeneity of its laws,

which would make the union of its particular laws under universal empirical

laws impossible for our Understanding. For this would contradict the

principle of the subjectively-purposive specification of nature in its genera,

and also of our reflective Judgement in respect of such principle.

              This presupposition of the Judgement is, however, at the same time

so indeterminate as to how far that ideal purposiveness of nature for our

cognitive faculty should be extended, that if we were told that a deeper or

wider knowledge of nature derived from observation must lead at last to a

variety of laws, which no human Understanding could reduce to a principle,

we should at once acquiesce. But still we more gladly listen to one who offers

hope that the more we know nature internally, and can compare it with

external members now unknown to us, the more simple shall we find it in its

principles, and that the further our experience reaches the more uniform shall

we find it amid the apparent heterogeneity of its empirical laws. For it is a

mandate of our Judgement to proceed according to the principle of the

harmony of nature with our cognitive faculty so far as that reaches, without

deciding (because it is not the determinant Judgement which gives us thisrule) whether or not it is bounded anywhere. For although in respect of the

rational use of our cognitive faculty we can determine such bounds, this is

not possible in the empirical field.

 

 

 VII. Of the Aesthetical Representation of the Purposiveness of Nature.

 

 

              That which in the representation of an Object is merely subjective,

i.e. which decides its reference to the subject, not to the object, is its

aesthetical character; but that which serves or can be used for the

determination of the object (for cognition), is its logical validity. In the

cognition of an object of sense both references present themselves. In the

sense-representation of external things the quality of space wherein we intuite

them is the merely subjective [element] of my representation (by which it

remains undecided what they may be in themselves as Objects), on account

of which reference the object is thought thereby merely as phenomenon. But

space, notwithstanding its merely subjective quality, is at the same time an

ingredient in the cognition of things as phenomena. Sensation, again (i.e.

external sensation), expresses the merely subjective [element] of our

representations of external things, but it is also the proper material (reale) of

them (by which something existing is given), just as space is the mere form a

priori of the possibility of their intuition. Nevertheless, however, sensation is

also employed in the cognition of external Objects.

              But the subjective [element] in a representation which cannot be an

ingredient of cognition, is the pleasure or pain which is bound up with it; for

through it I cognise nothing in the object of the representation, although it

may be the effect of some cognition. Now the purposiveness of a thing, so far

as it is represented in perception, is no characteristic of the Object itself (for

such cannot be perceived), although it may be inferred from a cognition of

things. The purposiveness, therefore, which precedes the cognition of an

Object, and which, even without our wishing to use the representation of it

for cognition, is, at the same time, immediately bound up with it, is that

subjective [element] which cannot be an ingredient in cognition. Hence the

object is only called purposive, when its representation is immediately

combined with the feeling of pleasure; and this very representation is an

aesthetical representation of purposiveness.— The only question is whether

there is, in general, such a representation of purposiveness.

              If pleasure is bound up with the mere apprehension (apprehensio ) of

the form of an object of intuition, without reference to a concept for a definitecognition, then the representation is thereby not referred to the Object, but

simply to the subject; and the pleasure can express nothing else than its

harmony with the cognitive faculties which come into play in the reflective

Judgement, and so far as they are in play; and hence can only express a

subjective formal purposiveness of the Object. For that apprehension of

forms in the Imagination can never take place without the reflective

Judgement, though undesignedly, at least comparing them with its faculty of

referring intuitions to concepts. If now in this comparison the Imagination (as

the faculty of a priori intuitions) is placed by means of a given representation

undesignedly in agreement with the Understanding, as the faculty of

concepts, and thus a feeling of pleasure is aroused, the object must then be

regarded as purposive for the reflective Judgement. Such a judgement is an

aesthetical judgement upon the purposiveness of the Object, which does not

base itself upon any present concept of the object, nor does it furnish any

such. In the case of an object whose form (not the matter of its representation,

as sensation), in the mere reflection upon it (without reference to any concept

to be obtained of it), is judged as the ground of a pleasure in the

representation of such an Object, this pleasure is judged as bound up with the

representation necessarily; and, consequently, not only for the subject which

apprehends this form, but for every judging being in general. The object is

then called beautiful; and the faculty of judging by means of such a pleasure

(and, consequently, with universal validity) is called Taste. For since the

ground of the pleasure is placed merely in the form of the object for reflection

in general — and, consequently, in no sensation of the object, and also

without reference to any concept which anywhere involves design — it is

only the conformity to law in the empirical use of the Judgement in general

(unity of the Imagination with the Understanding) in the subject, with which

the representation of the Object in reflection, whose conditions are

universally valid a priori, harmonises. And since this harmony of the object

with the faculties of the subject is contingent, it brings about the

representation of its purposiveness in respect of the cognitive faculties of the

subject.

              Here now is a pleasure, which, like all pleasure or pain that is not

produced through the concept of freedom (i.e. through the preceding

determination of the higher faculties of desire by pure Reason), can never be

comprehended from concepts, as necessarily bound up with the

representation of an object. It must always be cognised as combined with thisonly by means of reflective perception; and, consequently, like all empirical

judgements, it can declare no objective necessity and lay claim to no a priori

validity. But the judgement of taste also claims, as every other empirical

judgement does, to be valid for every one; and in spite of its inner

contingency this is always possible. The strange and irregular thing is that it

is not an empirical concept, but a feeling of pleasure (consequently not a

concept at all), which by the judgement of taste is attributed to every one,—

just as if it were a predicate bound up with the cognition of the Object — and

which is connected with the representation thereof.

              A singular judgement of experience, e.g., when we perceive a

moveable drop of water in an ice-crystal, may justly claim that every one else

should find it the same; because we have formed this judgement, according to

the universal conditions of the determinant faculty of Judgement, under the

laws of a possible experience in general. Just in the same way he who feels

pleasure in the mere reflection upon the form of an object without respect to

any concept, although this judgement be empirical and singular, justly claims

the agreement of every one; because the ground of this pleasure is found in

the universal, although subjective, condition of reflective judgements, viz.,

the purposive harmony of an object (whether a product of nature or of art)

with the mutual relations of the cognitive faculties (the Imagination and the

Understanding), a harmony which is requisite for every empirical cognition.

The pleasure, therefore, in the judgement of taste is dependent on an

empirical representation, and cannot be bound up a priori with any concept

(we cannot determine a priori what object is or is not according to taste; that

we must find out by experiment). But the pleasure is the determining ground

of this judgement only because we are conscious that it rests merely on

reflection and on the universal though only subjective conditions of the

harmony of that reflection with the cognition of Objects in general, for which

the form of the Object is purposive.

              Thus the reason why judgements of taste according to their

possibility are subjected to a Critique is that they presuppose a principle a

priori, although this principle is neither one of cognition for the

Understanding nor of practice for the Will, and therefore is not in any way

determinant a priori.

              Susceptibility to pleasure from reflection upon the forms of things

(of Nature as well as of Art), indicates not only a purposiveness of theObjects in relation to the reflective Judgement, conformably to the concept of

nature in the subject; but also conversely a purposiveness of the subject in

respect of the objects according to their form or even their formlessness, in

virtue of the concept of freedom. Hence the aesthetical judgement is not only

related as a judgement of taste to the beautiful, but also as springing from a

spiritual feeling is related to the sublime; and thus the Critique of the

aesthetical Judgement must be divided into two corresponding sections.

 

 

   VIII. Of the Logical Representation of the Purposiveness of Nature

 

 

              Purposiveness may be represented in an object given in experience

on a merely subjective ground, as the harmony of its form,— in the

apprehension (apprehensio ) of it prior to any concept,— with the cognitive

faculties, in order to unite the intuition with concepts for a cognition

generally. Or it may be represented objectively as the harmony of the form of

the object with the possibility of the thing itself, according to a concept of it

which precedes and contains the ground of this form. We have seen that the

representation of purposiveness of the first kind rests on the immediate

pleasure in the form of the object in the mere reflection upon it. But the

representation of purposiveness of the second kind, since it refers the form of

the Object, not to the cognitive faculties of the subject in the apprehension of

it, but to a definite cognition of the object under a given concept, has nothing

to do with a feeling of pleasure in things, but only with the Understanding in

its judgement upon them. If the concept of an object is given, the business of

the Judgement in the use of the concept for cognition consists in presentation

(exhibitio ), i.e. in setting a corresponding intuition beside the concept. This

may take place either through our own Imagination, as in Art when we realise

a preconceived concept of an object which is a purpose of ours; or through

Nature in its Technic (as in organised bodies) when we supply to it our

concept of its purpose in order to judge of its products. In the latter case it is

not merely the purposiveness of nature in the form of the thing that is

represented, but this its product is represented as a natural purpose. —

Although our concept of a subjective purposiveness of nature in its forms

according to empirical laws is not a concept of the Object, but only a

principle of the Judgement for furnishing itself with concepts amid the

immense variety of nature (and thus being able to ascertain its own position),

yet we thus ascribe to nature as it were a regard to our cognitive faculty

according to the analogy of purpose. Thus we can regard natural beauty as

the presentation of the concept of the formal (merely subjective)

purposiveness. and natural purposes as the presentation of the concept of a

real (objective) purposiveness. The former of these we judge of by Taste

(aesthetically, by the medium of the feeling of pleasure), the latter byUnderstanding and Reason (logically, according to concepts).

              On this is based the division of the Critique of Judgement into the

Critique of aesthetical and of teleological Judgement. By the first we

understand the faculty of judging of the formal purposiveness (otherwise

called subjective) of Nature by means of the feeling of pleasure or pain; by

the second the faculty of judging its real (objective) purposiveness by means

of Understanding and Reason.

              In a Critique of Judgement the part containing the aesthetical

Judgement is essential, because this alone contains a principle which the

Judgement places quite a priori at the basis of its reflection upon nature; viz.,

the principle of a formal purposiveness of nature, according to its particular

(empirical) laws, for our cognitive faculty, without which the Understanding

could not find itself in nature. On the other hand no reason a priori could be

specified,— and even the possibility of a reason would not be apparent from

the concept of nature as an object of experience whether general or particular,

— why there should be objective purposes of nature, i.e. things which are

only possible as natural purposes; but the Judgement, without containing such

a principle a priori in itself, in given cases (of certain products), in order to

make use of the concept of purposes on behalf of Reason, would only contain

the rule according to which that transcendental principle has already prepared

the Understanding to apply to nature the concept of a purpose (at least as

regards its form).

              But the transcendental principle which represents a purposiveness of

nature (in subjective reference to our cognitive faculty) in the form of a thing

as a principle by which we judge of nature, leaves it quite undetermined

where and in what cases I have to judge of a product according to a principle

of purposiveness, and not rather according to universal natural laws. It leaves

it to the aesthetical Judgement to decide by taste the harmony of this product

(of its form) with our cognitive faculty (so far as this decision rests not on

any agreement with concepts but on feeling). On the other hand, the

Judgement teleologically employed furnishes conditions determinately under

which something (e.g. an organised body) is to be judged according to the

Idea of a purpose of nature; but it can adduce no fundamental proposition

from the concept of nature as an object of experience authorising it to ascribe

to nature a priori a reference to purposes, or even indeterminately to assume

this of such products in actual experience. The reason of this is that we musthave many particular experiences, and consider them under the unity of their

principle, in order to be able to cognise, even empirically, objective

purposiveness in a certain object.— The aesthetical Judgement is therefore a

special faculty for judging of things according to a rule, but not according to

concepts. The teleological Judgement is not a special faculty, but only the

reflective Judgement in general, so far as it proceeds, as it always does in

theoretical cognition, according to concepts; but in respect of certain objects

of nature according to special principles, viz., of a merely reflective

Judgement, and not of a Judgement that determines Objects. Thus as regards

its application it belongs to the theoretical part of Philosophy; and on account

of its special principles which are not determinant, as they must be in

Doctrine, it must constitute a special part of the Critique. On the other hand,

the aesthetical Judgement contributes nothing towards the knowledge of its

objects, and thus must be reckoned as belonging to the criticism of the

judging subject and its cognitive faculties, only so far as they are susceptible

of a priori principles, of whatever other use (theoretical or practical) they

may be. This is the propaedeutic of all Philosophy.

 

 

 IX. Of the Connexion of the Legislation of Understanding with that of

                      Reason by Means of the Judgement

 

 

              The Understanding legislates a priori for nature as an Object of

sense — for a theoretical knowledge of it in a possible experience. Reason

legislates a priori for freedom and its peculiar casuality; as the supersensible

in the subject, for an unconditioned practical knowledge. The realm of the

natural concept under the one legislation and that of the concept of freedom

under the other are entirely removed from all mutual influence which they

might have on one another (each according to its fundamental laws) by the

great gulf that separates the supersensible from phenomena. The concept of

freedom determines nothing in respect of the theoretical cognition of nature;

and the natural concept determines nothing in respect of the practical laws of

freedom. So far then it is not possible to throw a bridge from the one realm to

the other. But although the determining grounds of causality according to the

concept of freedom (and the practical rules which it contains) are not resident

in nature, and the sensible cannot determine the supersensible in the subject,

yet this is possible conversely (not, to be sure, in respect of the cognition of

nature, but as regards the effects of the supersensible upon the sensible). This

in fact is involved in the concept of a causality through freedom, the effect of

which is to take place in the world according to its formal laws. The word

cause, of course, when used of the supersensible only signifies the ground

which determines the causality of natural things to an effect in accordance

with their proper natural laws, although harmoniously with the formal

principle of the laws of Reason. Although the possibility of this cannot be

comprehended, yet the objection of a contradiction alleged to be found in it

can be sufficiently answered.1 — The effect in accordance with the concept

of freedom is the final purpose which (or its phenomenon in the world of

sense) ought to exist; and the condition of the possibility of this is

presupposed in nature (in the nature of the subject as a sensible being, that is,

as man). The Judgement presupposes this a priori and without reference to

the practical; and thus furnishes the mediating concept between the concepts

of nature and that of freedom. It makes possible the transition from the

conformity to law in accordance with the former to the final purpose inaccordance with the latter, and this by the concept of a purposiveness of

nature. For thus is cognised the possibility of the final purpose which alone

can be actualised in nature in harmony with its laws.

              The Understanding by the possibility of its a priori laws for nature,

gives a proof that nature is only cognised by us as phenomenon; and implies

at the same time that it has a supersensible substrate, though it leaves this

quite undetermined. The Judgement by its a priori principle for the judging

of nature according to its possible particular laws, makes the supersensible

substrate (both in us and without us) determinable by means of the

intellectual faculty. But the Reason by its practical a priori law determines it;

and thus the Judgement makes possible the transition from the realm of the

concept of nature to that of the concept of freedom.

              As regards the faculties of the soul in general, in their higher aspect,

as containing an autonomy; the Understanding is that which contains the

constitutive principles a priori for the cognitive faculty (the theoretical

cognition of nature). For the feeling of pleasure and pain there is the

Judgement, independently of concepts and sensations which relate to the

determination of the faculty of desire and can thus be immediately practical.

For the faculty of desire there is the Reason which is practical without the

mediation of any pleasure whatever. It determines for the faculty of desire, as

a superior faculty, the final purpose which carries with it the pure intellectual

satisfaction in the Object.— The concept formed by Judgement of a

purposiveness of nature belongs to natural concepts, but only as a regulative

principle of the cognitive faculty; although the aesthetical judgement upon

certain objects (of Nature of Art) which occasions it is, in respect of the

feeling of pleasure or pain, a constitutive principle. The spontaneity in the

play of the cognitive faculties, the harmony of which contains the ground of

this pleasure, makes the above concept [of the purposiveness of nature] fit to

be the mediating link between the realm of the natural concept and that of the

concept of freedom in its effects; whilst at the same time it promotes the

sensibility of the mind for moral feeling.— The following table may facilitate

the review of all the higher faculties according to their systematic unity.1

    All the faculties of the mind Cognitive faculties. Faculties of desire. Feeling

of pleasure and pain. Cognitive faculties Understanding. Judgement. Reason.

A priori principles Conformity to law. Purposiveness. Final purpose.
                                                      1
Application to Nature. Art. Freedom.                One of the various pretendedcontradictions in this whole distinction of the causality of nature from that of

freedom is this. It is objected that if I speak of obstacles which nature

opposes to causality according to (moral) laws of freedom or of the

assistance it affords, I am admitting an influence of the former upon the

latter. But if we try to understand what has been said, this misinterpretation is

very easy to avoid. The opposition or assistance is not between nature and

freedom, but between the former as phenomenon and the effects of the latter

as phenomena in the world of sense. The causality of freedom itself (of pure

and practical Reason) is the causality of a natural cause subordinated to

freedom (i.e. of the subject considered as man and therefore as phenomenon).

The intelligible, which is thought under freedom, contains the ground of the

determination of this [natural cause] in a way not explicable any further (just

as that intelligible does which constitutes the supersensible substrate of

nature).

        1
               It has been thought a doubtful point that my divisions in pure

Philosophy should always be threefold. But that lies in the nature of the thing.

If there is to be an a priori division it must be either analytical, according to

the law of contradiction, which is always twofold (quodlibet ens est aut A aut

non A ); or it is synthetical. And if in this latter case it is to be derived from a

priori concepts (not as in Mathematic from the intuition corresponding to the

concept), the division must necessarily be trichotomy. For according to what

is requisite for synthetical unity in general there must be (1) a condition, (2) a

conditioned, and (3) the concept which arises from the union of the

conditioned with its condition.

 

 

             Part I: Critique of the Aesthetical Judgement

 

 

 

 

           First Division: Analytic of the Aesthetical Judgement

 

 

 

 

                     First Book – Analytic of the Beautiful

 

 

 

 

   First Moment – Of the Judgement of Taste1 According to Quality

 

 

                  § 1. The judgement of taste is aesthetical

 

 

              In order to decide whether anything is beautiful or not, we refer the

representation, not by the Understanding to the Object for cognition but, by

the Imagination (perhaps in conjunction with the Understanding) to the

subject, and its feeling of pleasure or pain. The judgement of taste is therefore

not a judgement of cognition, and is consequently not logical but aesthetical,

by which we understand that whose determining ground can be no other than

subjective. Every reference of representations, even that of sensations, may

be objective (and then it signifies the real in an empirical representation);

save only the reference to the feeling of pleasure and pain, by which nothing

in the Object is signified, but through which there is a feeling in the subject,

as it is affected by the representation.

              To apprehend a regular, purposive building by means of one’s

cognitive faculty (whether in a clear or a confused way of representation) is

something quite different from being conscious of this representation as

connected with the sensation of satisfaction. Here the representation is

altogether referred to the subject and to its feeling of life, under the name of

the feeling of pleasure or pain. This establishes a quite separate faculty of

distinction and of judgement, adding nothing to cognition, but only

comparing the given representation in the subject with the whole faculty of

representations, of which the mind is conscious in the feeling of its state.

Given representations in a judgement can be empirical (consequently,

aesthetical); but the judgement which is formed by means of them is logical,

provided they are referred in the judgement to the Object. Conversely, if the

given representations are rational, but are referred in a judgement simply to

the subject (to its feeling), the judgement is so far always aesthetical.

        1
               The definition of taste which is laid down here is that it is the

faculty of judging of the beautiful. But the analysis of judgements of taste

must show what is required in order to call an object beautiful. The moments,to which this Judgement has regard in its reflection, I have sought in

accordance with the guidance of the logical functions of judgement (for in a

judgement of taste a reference to the Understanding is always involved). I

have considered the moment of quality first, because the aesthetical

judgement upon the beautiful first pays attention to it.    § 2. The satisfaction which determines the judgement of taste is

                                      disinterested

 

 

              The satisfaction which we combine with the representation of the

existence of an object is called interest. Such satisfaction always has

reference to the faculty of desire, either as its determining ground or as

necessarily connected with its determining ground. Now when the question is

if a thing is beautiful, we do not want to know whether anything depends or

can depend on the existence of the thing either for myself or for any one else,

but how we judge it by mere observation (intuition or reflection). If any one

asks me if I find that palace beautiful which I see before me, I may answer: I

do not like things of that kind which are made merely to be stared at. Or I can

answer like that Iroquois sachem who was pleased in Paris by nothing more

than by the cook-shops. Or again after the manner of Rousseau I may rebuke

the vanity of the great who waste the sweat of the people on such superfluous

things. In fine I could easily convince myself that if I found myself on an

uninhabited island without the hope of ever again coming among men, and

could conjure up just such a splendid building by my mere wish, I should not

even give myself the trouble if I had a sufficiently comfortable hut. This may

all be admitted and approved; but we are not now talking of this. We wish

only to know if this mere representation of the object is accompanied in me

with satisfaction, however indifferent I may be as regards the existence of the

object of this representation. We easily see that in saying it is beautiful and in

showing that I have taste, I am concerned, not with that in which I depend on

the existence of the object, but with that which I make out of this

representation in myself. Every one must admit that a judgement about

beauty, in which the least interest mingles, is very partial and is not a pure

judgement of taste. We must not be in the least prejudiced in favour of the

existence of the things, but be quite indifferent in this respect, in order to play

the judge in things of taste.

              We cannot, however, better elucidate this proposition, which is of

capital importance, than by contrasting the pure disinterested1 satisfaction in

judgements of taste, with that which is bound up with an interest, especially if

we can at the same time be certain that there are no other kinds of interestthan those which are now to be specified.

        1
               A judgement upon an object of satisfaction may be quite

disinterested, but yet very interesting, i.e. not based upon an interest, but

bringing an interest with it; of this kind are all pure moral judgements.

Judgements of taste, however, do not in themselves establish any interest.

Only in society is it interesting to have taste: the reason of this will be shown

in the sequel.      § 3. The satisfaction in the Pleasant is bound up with interest

 

 

              That which pleases the senses in sensation is pleasant. Here the

opportunity presents itself of censuring a very common confusion of the

double sense which the word sensation can have, and of calling attention to it.

All satisfaction (it is said or thought) is itself sensation (of a pleasure).

Consequently everything that pleases is pleasant because it pleases (and

according to its different degrees or its relations to other pleasant sensations it

is agreeable, lovely, delightful, enjoyable, etc.). But if this be admitted, then

impressions of Sense which determine the inclination, fundamental

propositions of Reason which determine the Will, mere reflective forms of

intuition which determine the Judgement, are quite the same, as regards the

effect upon the feeling of pleasure. For this would be pleasantness in the

sensation of one’s state, and since in the end all the operations of our faculties

must issue in the practical and unite in it as their goal, we could suppose no

other way of estimating things and their worth than that which consists in the

gratification that they promise. It is of no consequence at all how this is

attained, and since then the choice of means alone could make a difference,

men could indeed blame one another for stupidity and indiscretion, but never

for baseness and wickedness. For all, each according to his own way of

seeing things, seek one goal, that is, gratification.

              If a determination of the feeling of pleasure or pain is called

sensation, this expression signifies something quite different from what I

mean when I call the representation of a thing (by sense, as a receptivity

belonging to the cognitive faculty) sensation. For in the latter case the

representation is referred to the Object, in the former simply to the subject,

and is available for no cognition whatever, not even for that by which the

subject cognises itself.

              In the above elucidation we understand by the word sensation, an

objective representation of sense; and in order to avoid misinterpretation, we

shall call that, which must always remain merely subjective and can

constitute absolutely no representation of an object, by the ordinary term

“feeling.” The green colour of the meadows belongs to objective sensation, asa perception of an object of sense; the pleasantness of this belongs to

subjective sensation by which no object is represented, i.e. to feeling, by

which the object is considered as an Object of satisfaction (which does not

furnish a cognition of it).

              Now that a judgement about an object, by which I describe it as

pleasant, expresses an interest in it, is plain from the fact that by sensation it

excites a desire for objects of that kind; consequently the satisfaction

presupposes not the mere judgement about it, but the relation of its existence

to my state, so far as this is affected by such an Object. Hence we do not

merely say of the pleasant, it pleases; but, it gratifies. I give to it no mere

approval, but inclination is aroused by it; and in the case of what is pleasant

in the most lively fashion, there is no judgement at all upon the character of

the Object, for those who always lay themselves out only for enjoyment (for

that is the word describing intense gratification) would fain dispense with all

judgement.        § 4. The satisfaction in the Good is bound up with interest

 

 

              Whatever by means of Reason pleases through the mere concept is

good. That which pleases only as a means we call good for something (the

useful); but that which pleases for itself is good in itself. In both there is

always involved the concept of a purpose, and consequently the relation of

Reason to the (at least possible) volition, and thus a satisfaction in the

presence of an Object or an action, i.e. some kind of interest.

              In order to find anything good, I must always know what sort of a

thing the object ought to be, i.e. I must have a concept of it. But there is no

need of this, to find a thing beautiful. Flowers, free delineations, outlines

intertwined with one another without design and called foliage, have no

meaning, depend on no definite concept, and yet they please. The satisfaction

in the beautiful must depend on the reflection upon an object, leading to any

concept (however indefinite); and it is thus distinguished from the pleasant

which rests entirely upon sensation.

              It is true, the Pleasant seems in many cases to be the same as the

Good. Thus people are accustomed to say that all gratification (especially if it

lasts) is good in itself; which is very much the same as to say that lasting

pleasure and the good are the same. But we can soon see that this is merely a

confusion of words; for the concepts which properly belong to these

expressions can in no way be interchanged. The pleasant, which, as such,

represents the object simply in relation to Sense, must first be brought by the

concept of a purpose under principles of Reason, in order to call it good, as

an object of the Will. But that there is [involved] a quite different relation to

satisfaction in calling that which gratifies at the same time good, may be seen

from the fact that in the case of the good the question always is, whether it is

mediately or immediately good (useful or good in itself); but on the contrary

in the case of the pleasant there can be no question about this at all, for the

word always signifies something which pleases immediately. (The same is

applicable to what I call beautiful).

              Even in common speech men distinguish the Pleasant from the

Good. Of a dish which stimulates the taste by spices and other condiments wesay unhesitatingly that it is pleasant, though it is at the same time admitted

not to be good; for though it immediately delights the senses, yet mediately,

i.e. considered by Reason which looks to the after results, it displeases. Even

in the judging of health we may notice this distinction. It is immediately

pleasant to every one possessing it (at least negatively, i.e. as the absence of

all bodily pains). But in order to say that it is good, it must be considered by

Reason with reference to purposes; viz. that it is a state which makes us fit

for all our business. Finally in respect of happiness every one believes

himself entitled to describe the greatest sum of the pleasantnesses of life (as

regards both their number and their duration) as a true, even as the highest,

good. However Reason is opposed to this. Pleasantness is enjoyment. And if

we were concerned with this alone, it would be foolish to be scrupulous as

regards the means which procure it for us, or [to care] whether it is obtained

passively by the bounty of nature or by our own activity and work. But

Reason can never be persuaded that the existence of a man who merely lives

for enjoyment (however busy he may be in this point of view), has a worth in

itself; even if he at the same time is conducive as a means to the best

enjoyment of others, and shares in all their gratifications by sympathy. Only

what he does, without reference to enjoyment, in full freedom and

independently of what nature can procure for him passively, gives an

[absolute1 ] worth to his being, as the existence of a person; and happiness,

with the whole abundance of its pleasures, is far from being an unconditioned

good.2

              However, notwithstanding all this difference between the pleasant

and the good, they both agree in this that they are always bound up with an

interest in their object. [This is true] not only of the pleasant (§ 3) , and the

mediate good (the useful) which is pleasing as a means towards pleasantness

somewhere, but also of that which is good absolutely and in every aspect, viz.

moral good, which brings with it the highest interest. For the good is the

Object of will (i.e. of a faculty of desire determined by Reason). But to will

something, and to have a satisfaction in its existence, i.e. to take an interest in

it, are identical.

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        2
               An obligation to enjoyment is a manifest absurdity. Thus the

obligation to all actions which have merely enjoyment for their aim can only

be a pretended one; however spiritually it may be conceived (or decked out),even if it is a mystical, or so-called heavenly, enjoyment.§ 5. Comparison of the three specifically different kinds of satisfaction

 

 

              The pleasant and the good have both a reference to the faculty of

desire; and they bring with them — the former a satisfaction pathologically

conditioned (by impulses, stimuli )— the latter a pure practical satisfaction,

which is determined not merely by the representation of the object, but also

by the represented connexion of the subject with the existence of the object.

[It is not merely the object that pleases, but also its existence.1 ] On the other

hand, the judgement of taste is merely contemplative; i.e. it is a judgement

which, indifferent as regards the being of an object, compares its character

with the feeling of pleasure and pain. But this contemplation itself is not

directed to concepts; for the judgement of taste is not a cognitive judgement

(either theoretical or practical), and thus is not based on concepts, nor has it

concepts as its purpose.

              The Pleasant, the Beautiful, and the Good, designate then, three

different relations of representations to the feeling of pleasure and pain, in

reference to which we distinguish from each other objects or methods of

representing them. And the expressions corresponding to each, by which we

mark our complacency in them, are not the same. That which gratifies a man

is called pleasant; that which merely pleases him is beautiful; that which is

esteemed [or approved 1 ] by him, i.e. that to which he accords an objective

worth, is good. Pleasantness concerns irrational animals also; but Beauty only

concerns men, i.e. animal, but still rational, beings — not merely quâ rational

(e.g. spirits), but quâ animal also; and the Good concerns every rational being

in general. This is a proposition which can only be completely established

and explained in the sequel. We may say that of all these three kinds of

satisfaction, that of taste in the Beautiful is alone a disinterested and free

satisfaction; for no interest, either of Sense or of Reason, here forces our

assent. Hence we may say of satisfaction that it is related in the three

aforesaid cases to inclination, to favour, or to respect. Now favour is the only

free satisfaction. An object of inclination, and one that is proposed to our

desire by a law of Reason, leave us no freedom in forming for ourselves

anywhere an object of pleasure. All interest presupposes or generates a want;

and, as the determining ground of assent, it leaves the judgement about theobject no longer free.

              As regards the interest of inclination in the case of the Pleasant,

every one says that hunger is the best sauce, and everything that is eatable is

relished by people with a healthy appetite; and thus a satisfaction of this sort

does not indicate choice directed by taste. It is only when the want is

appeased that we can distinguish which of many men has or has not taste. In

the same way there may be manners (conduct) without virtue, politeness

without good-will, decorum without modesty, etc. For where the moral law

speaks there is no longer, objectively, a free choice as regards what is to be

done; and to display taste in its fulfilment (or in judging of another’s

fulfilment of it) is something quite different from manifesting the moral

attitude of thought. For this involves a command and generates a want, whilst

moral taste only plays with the objects of satisfaction, without attaching itself

to one of them.

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        Explanation of the Beautiful Resulting from the First Moment

 

 

              Taste is the faculty of judging of an object or a method of

representing it by an entirely disinterested satisfaction or dissatisfaction. The

object of such satisfaction is called beautiful. 1

        1
               [Ueberweg points out (Hist. of Phil., ii. 528, Eng. Trans.) that

Mendelssohn had already called attention to the disinterestedness of our

satisfaction in the Beautiful. “It appears,” says Mendelssohn, “to be a

particular mark of the beautiful, that it is contemplated with quiet satisfaction,

that it pleases, even though it be not in our possession, and even though we

be never so far removed from the desire to put it to our use.” But, of course,

as Ueberweg remarks, Kant’s conception of disinterestedness extends far

beyond the absence of a desire to possess the object.]

 

 

     Second Moment – Of the Judgement of Taste, Viz. According to

                                        Quantity

 

 

§ 6. The beautiful is that which apart from concepts is represented as the

                        object of a universal satisfaction

 

 

              This explanation of the beautiful can be derived from the preceding

explanation of it as the object of an entirely disinterested satisfaction. For the

fact of which every one is conscious, that the satisfaction is for him quite

disinterested, implies in his judgement a ground of satisfaction for every one.

For since it does not rest on any inclination of the subject (nor upon any other

premeditated interest), but since he who judges feels himself quite free as

regards the satisfaction which he attaches to the object, he cannot find the

ground of this satisfaction in any private conditions connected with his own

subject; and hence it must be regarded as grounded on what he can

presuppose in every other man. Consequently he must believe that he has

reason for attributing a similar satisfaction to every one. He will therefore

speak of the beautiful, as if beauty were a characteristic of the object and the

judgement logical (constituting a cognition of the Object by means of

concepts of it); although it is only aesthetical and involves merely a reference

of the representation of the object to the subject. For it has this similarity to a

logical judgement that we can presuppose its validity for every one. But this

universality cannot arise from concepts; for from concepts there is no

transition to the feeling of pleasure or pain (except in pure practical laws,

which bring an interest with them such as is not bound up with the pure

judgement of taste). Consequently the judgement of taste, accompanied with

the consciousness of separation from all interest, must claim validity for

every one, without this universality depending on Objects. That is, there must

be bound up with it a title to subjective universality.  § 7. Comparison of the Beautiful with the Pleasant and the Good by

                        means of the above characteristic

 

 

              As regards the Pleasant every one is content that his judgement,

which he bases upon private feeling, and by which he says of an object that it

pleases him, should be limited merely to his own person. Thus he is quite

contented that if he says “Canary wine is pleasant,” another man may correct

his expression and remind him that he ought to say “It is pleasant to me. ”

And this is the case not only as regards the taste of the tongue, the palate, and

the throat, but for whatever is pleasant to any one’s eyes and ears. To one

violet colour is soft and lovely, to another it is faded and dead. One man likes

the tone of wind instruments, another that of strings. To strive here with the

design of reproving as incorrect another man’s judgement which is different

from our own, as if the judgements were logically opposed, would be folly.

As regards the pleasant therefore the fundamental proposition is valid, every

one has his own taste (the taste of Sense).

              The case is quite different with the Beautiful. It would (on the

contrary) be laughable if a man who imagined anything to his own taste,

thought to justify himself by saying: “This object (the house we see, the coat

that person wears, the concert we hear, the poem submitted to our judgement)

is beautiful for me. ” For he must not call it beautiful if it merely pleases

himself. Many things may have for him charm and pleasantness; no one

troubles himself at that; but if he gives out anything as beautiful, he supposes

in others the same satisfaction — he judges not merely for himself, but for

every one, and speaks of beauty as if it were a property of things. Hence he

says “the thing is beautiful”; and he does not count on the agreement of

others with this his judgement of satisfaction, because he has found this

agreement several times before, but he demands it of them. He blames them

if they judge otherwise and he denies them taste, which he nevertheless

requires from them. Here then we cannot say that each man has his own

particular taste. For this would be as much as to say that there is no taste

whatever; i.e. no aesthetical judgement, which can make a rightful claim

upon every one’s assent.              At the same time we find as regards the Pleasant that there is an

agreement among men in their judgements upon it, in regard to which we

deny Taste to some and attribute it to others; by this not meaning one of our

organic senses, but a faculty of judging in respect of the pleasant generally.

Thus we say of a man who knows how to entertain his guests with pleasures

(of enjoyment for all the senses), so that they are all pleased, “he has taste.”

But here the universality is only taken comparatively; and there emerge rules

which are only general (like all empirical ones), and not universal; which

latter the judgement of Taste upon the beautiful undertakes or lays claim to. It

is a judgement in reference to sociability, so far as this rests on empirical

rules. In respect of the Good it is true that judgements make rightful claim to

validity for every one; but the Good is represented only by means of a

concept as the Object of a universal satisfaction, which is the case neither

with the Pleasant nor with the Beautiful.§ 8. The universality of the satisfaction is represented in a judgement of

                              Taste only as subjective

 

 

              This particular determination of the universality of an aesthetical

judgement, which is to be met with in a judgement of taste, is noteworthy, not

indeed for the logician, but for the transcendental philosopher. It requires no

small trouble to discover its origin, but we thus detect a property of our

cognitive faculty which without this analysis would remain unknown.

              First, we must be fully convinced of the fact that in a judgement of

taste (about the Beautiful) the satisfaction in the object is imputed to every

one, without being based on a concept (for then it would be the Good).

Further, this claim to universal validity so essentially belongs to a judgement

by which we describe anything as beautiful, that if this were not thought in it,

it would never come into our thoughts to use the expression at all, but

everything which pleases without a concept would be counted as pleasant. In

respect of the latter every one has his own opinion; and no one assumes, in

another, agreement with his judgement of taste, which is always the case in a

judgement of taste about beauty. I may call the first the taste of Sense, the

second the taste of Reflection; so far as the first lays down mere private

judgements, and the second judgements supposed to be generally valid

(public), but in both cases aesthetical (not practical) judgements about an

object merely in respect of the relation of its representation to the feeling of

pleasure and pain. Now here is something strange. As regards the taste of

Sense not only does experience show that its judgement (of pleasure or pain

connected with anything) is not valid universally, but every one is content not

to impute agreement with it to others (although actually there is often found a

very extended concurrence in these judgements). On the other hand, the taste

of Reflection has its claim to the universal validity of its judgements (about

the beautiful) rejected often enough, as experience teaches; although it may

find it possible (as it actually does) to represent judgements which can

demand this universal agreement. In fact for each of its judgements of taste it

imputes this to every one, without the persons that judge disputing as to the

possibility of such a claim; although in particular cases they cannot agree as

to the correct application of this faculty.              Here we must, in the first place, remark that a universality which

does not rest on concepts of Objects (not even on empirical ones) is not

logical but aesthetical, i.e. it involves no objective quantity of the judgement

but only that which is subjective. For this I use the expression general

validity which signifies the validity of the reference of a representation, not to

the cognitive faculty but, to the feeling of pleasure and pain for every subject.

(We can avail ourselves also of the same expression for the logical quantity

of the judgement, if only we prefix objective to “universal validity,” to

distinguish it from that which is merely subjective and aesthetical.)

              A judgement with objective universal validity is also always valid

subjectively; i.e. if the judgement holds for everything contained under a

given concept, it holds also for every one who represents an object by means

of this concept. But from a subjective universal validity, i.e. aesthetical and

resting on no concept, we cannot infer that which is logical; because that kind

of judgement does not extend to the Object. Hence the aesthetical universality

which is ascribed to a judgement must be of a particular kind, because it does

not unite the predicate of beauty with the concept of the Object, considered in

its whole logical sphere, and yet extends it to the whole sphere of judging

persons.

              In respect of logical quantity all judgements of taste are singular

judgements. For because I must refer the object immediately to my feeling of

pleasure and pain, and that not by means of concepts, they cannot have the

quantity of objective generally valid judgements. Nevertheless if the singular

representation of the Object of the judgement of taste in accordance with the

conditions determining the latter, were transformed by comparison into a

concept, a logically universal judgement could result therefrom. E.g. I

describe by a judgement of taste the rose, that I see, as beautiful. But the

judgement which results from the comparison of several singular judgements,

“Roses in general are beautiful” is no longer described simply as aesthetical,

but as a logical judgement based on an aesthetical one. Again the judgement

“The rose is pleasant” (to smell) is, although aesthetical and singular, not a

judgement of Taste but of Sense. It is distinguished from the former by the

fact that the judgement of Taste carries with it an aesthetical quantity of

universality, i.e. of validity for every one; which cannot be found in a

judgement about the Pleasant. It is only judgements about the Good which —

although they also determine satisfaction in an object,— have logical and notmerely aesthetical universality; for they are valid of the Object, as cognitive

of it, and thus are valid for every one.

              If we judge Objects merely according to concepts, then all

representation of beauty is lost. Thus there can be no rule according to which

any one is to be forced to recognise anything as beautiful. We cannot press

[upon others] by the aid of any reasons or fundamental propositions our

judgement that a coat, a house, or a flower is beautiful. We wish to submit

the Object to our own eyes, as if the satisfaction in it depended on sensation;

and yet if we then call the object beautiful, we believe that we speak with a

universal voice, and we claim the assent of every one, although on the

contrary all private sensation can only decide for the observer himself and his

satisfaction.

              We may see now that in the judgement of taste nothing is postulated

but such a universal voice, in respect of the satisfaction without the

intervention of concepts; and thus the possibility of an aesthetical judgement

that can, at the same time, be regarded as valid for every one. The judgement

of taste itself does not postulate the agreement of every one (for that can only

be done by a logically universal judgement because it can adduce reasons); it

only imputes this agreement to every one, as a case of the rule in respect of

which it expects, not confirmation by concepts, but assent from others. The

universal voice is, therefore, only an Idea (we do not yet inquire upon what it

rests). It may be uncertain whether or not the man, who believes that he is

laying down a judgement of taste, is, as a matter of fact, judging in

conformity with that idea; but that he refers his judgement thereto, and,

consequently, that it is intended to be a judgement of taste, he announces by

the expression “beauty.” He can be quite certain of this for himself by the

mere consciousness of the separation of everything belonging to the Pleasant

and the Good from the satisfaction which is left; and this is all for which he

promises himself the agreement of every one — a claim which would be

justifiable under these conditions, provided only he did not often make

mistakes, and thus lay down an erroneous judgement of taste.§ 9. Investigation of the question whether in the judgement of taste the

      feeling of pleasure precedes or follows the judging of the object

 

 

              The solution of this question is the key to the Critique of Taste, and

so is worthy of all attention.

              If the pleasure in the given object precedes, and it is only its

universal communicability that is to be acknowledged in the judgement of

taste about the representation of the object, there would be a contradiction.

For such pleasure would be nothing different from the mere pleasantness in

the sensation, and so in accordance with its nature could have only private

validity, because it is immediately dependent on the representation through

which the object is given.

              Hence, it is the universal capability of communication of the mental

state in the given representation which, as the subjective condition of the

judgement of taste, must be fundamental, and must have the pleasure in the

object as its consequent. But nothing can be universally communicated

except cognition and representation, so far as it belongs to cognition. For it is

only thus that this latter can be objective; and only through this has it a

universal point of reference, with which the representative power of every

one is compelled to harmonise. If the determining ground of our judgement

as to this universal communicability of the representation is to be merely

subjective, i.e. is conceived independently of any concept of the object, it can

be nothing else than the state of mind, which is to be met with in the relation

of our representative powers to each other, so far as they refer a given

representation to cognition in general.

              The cognitive powers, which are involved by this representation, are

here in free play, because no definite concept limits them to a particular1 rule

of cognition. Hence, the state of mind in this representation must be a feeling

of the free play of the representative powers in a given representation with

reference to a cognition in general. Now a representation by which an object

is given, that is to become a cognition in general, requires Imagination, for

the gathering together the manifold of intuition, and Understanding, for the

unity of the concept uniting the representations. This state of free play of thecognitive faculties in a representation by which an object is given, must be

universally communicable; because cognition, as the determination of the

Object with which given representations (in whatever subject) are to agree, is

the only kind of representation which is valid for every one.

              The subjective universal communicability of the mode of

representation in a judgement of taste, since it is to be possible without

presupposing a definite concept, can refer to nothing else than the state of

mind in the free play of the Imagination and the Understanding (so far as they

agree with each other, as is requisite for cognition in general ). We are

conscious that this subjective relation, suitable for cognition in general, must

be valid for every one, and thus must be universally communicable, just as if

it were a definite cognition, resting always on that relation as its subjective

condition.

              This merely subjective (aesthetical) judging of the object, or of the

representation by which it is given, precedes the pleasure in it, and is the

ground of this pleasure in the harmony of the cognitive faculties; but on the

universality of the subjective conditions for judging of objects is alone based

the universal subjective validity of the satisfaction bound up by us with the

representation of the object that we call beautiful.

              The power of communicating one’s state of mind, even though only

in respect of the cognitive faculties, carries a pleasure with it, as we can

easily show from the natural propension of man towards sociability

(empirical and psychological). But this is not enough for our design. The

pleasure that we feel is, in a judgement of taste, necessarily imputed by us to

every one else; as if, when we call a thing beautiful, it is to be regarded as a

characteristic of the object which is determined in it according to concepts;

though beauty, without a reference to the feeling of the subject, is nothing by

itself. But we must reserve the examination of this question until we have

answered another, viz. “If and how aesthetical judgements are possible a

priori ?”

              We now occupy ourselves with the easier question, in what way we

are conscious of a mutual subjective harmony of the cognitive powers with

one another in the judgement of taste; is it aesthetically by mere internal

sense and sensation? or is it intellectually by the consciousness of our

designed activity, by which we bring them into play?              If the given representation, which occasions the judgement of taste,

were a concept uniting Understanding and Imagination in the judging of the

object, into a cognition of the Object, the consciousness of this relation would

be intellectual (as in the objective schematism of the Judgement of which the

Critique1 treats). But then the judgement would not be laid down in reference

to pleasure and pain, and consequently would not be a judgement of taste.

But the judgement of taste, independently of concepts, determines the Object

in respect of satisfaction and of the predicate of beauty. Therefore that

subjective unity of relation can only make itself known by means of

sensation. The excitement of both faculties (Imagination and Understanding)

to indeterminate, but yet, through the stimulus of the given sensation,

harmonious activity, viz. that which belongs to cognition in general, is the

sensation whose universal communicability is postulated by the judgement of

taste. An objective relation can only be thought, but yet, so far as it is

subjective according to its conditions, can be felt in its effect on the mind;

and, of a relation based on no concept (like the relation of the representative

powers to a cognitive faculty in general), no other consciousness is possible

than that through the sensation of the effect, which consists in the more lively

play of both mental powers (the Imagination and the Understanding) when

animated by mutual agreement. A representation which, as singular and apart

from comparison with others, yet has an agreement with the conditions of

universality which it is the business of the Understanding to supply, brings

the cognitive faculties into that proportionate accord which we require for all

cognition, and so regard as holding for every one who is determined to judge

by means of Understanding and Sense in combination (i.e. for every man).

        1
               [Reading besondere with Windelband; Hartenstein reads

bestimmte. ]

        1
               [I.e. The Critique of Pure Reason, Analytic, bk. ii. c. i.]

    Explanation of the Beautiful Resulting from the Second Moment

 

 

              The beautiful is that which pleases universally, without a concept.

 

  Third Moment – Of Judgements of Taste, According to the Relation of

      the Purposes which are Brought into Consideration Therein.

 

 

                        § 10. Of purposiveness in general

 

 

              If we wish to explain what a purpose is according to its

transcendental determinations (without presupposing anything empirical like

the feeling of pleasure) [we say that] the purpose is the object of a concept, in

so far as the concept is regarded as the cause of the object (the real ground of

its possibility); and the causality of a concept in respect of its Object is its

purposiveness (forma finalis ). Where then not merely the cognition of an

object, but the object itself (its form and existence) is thought as an effect

only possible by means of the concept of this latter, there we think a purpose.

The representation of the effect is here the determining ground of its cause

and precedes it. The consciousness of the causality of a representation, for

maintaining the subject in the same state, may here generally denote what we

call pleasure; while on the other hand pain is that representation which

contains the ground of the determination of the state of representations into

their opposite [of restraining or removing them1 ].

              The faculty of desire, so far as it is determinable only through

concepts, i.e. to act in conformity with the representation of a purpose, would

be the Will. But an Object, or a state of mind, or even an action, is called

purposive, although its possibility does not necessarily presuppose the

representation of a purpose, merely because its possibility can be explained

and conceived by us only so far as we assume for its ground a causality

according to purposes, i.e. a will which would have so disposed it according

to the representation of a certain rule. There can be, then, purposiveness

without2 purpose, so far as we do not place the causes of this form in a will,

but yet can only make the explanation of its possibility intelligible to

ourselves by deriving it from a will. Again, we are not always forced to

regard what we observe (in respect of its possibility) from the point of view

of Reason. Thus we can at least observe a purposiveness according to form,without basing it on a purpose (as the material of the nexus finalis ), and we

can notice it in objects, although only by reflection.

        1
               [Second Edition. Spencer expresses much more concisely what

Kant has in his mind here. “Pleasure . . . is a feeling which we seek to bring

into consciousness and retain there; pain is . . . a feeling which we seek to get

out of consciousness and to keep out.” Principles of Psychology, § 125 .]

        2
               [The editions of Hartenstein and Kirchmann omit ohne before

zweck, which makes havoc of the sentence. It is correctly printed by

Rosenkranz and Windelband.]

§ 11. The judgement of taste has nothing at its basis but the form of the

        purposiveness of an object (or of its mode of representation)

 

 

              Every purpose, if it be regarded as a ground of satisfaction, always

carries with it an interest — as the determining ground of the judgement —

about the object of pleasure. Therefore no subjective purpose can lie at the

basis of the judgement of taste. But neither can the judgement of taste be

determined by any representation of an objective purpose, i.e. of the

possibility of the object itself in accordance with principles of purposive

combination, and consequently it can be determined by no concept of the

good; because it is an aesthetical and not a cognitive judgement. It therefore

has to do with no concept of the character and internal or external possibility

of the object by means of this or that cause, but merely with the relation of

the representative powers to one another, so far as they are determined by a

representation.

              Now this relation in the determination of an object as beautiful is

bound up with the feeling of pleasure, which is declared by the judgement of

taste to be valid for every one; hence a pleasantness, accompanying the

representation, can as little contain the determining ground [of the

judgement] as the representation of the perfection of the object and the

concept of the good can. Therefore it can be nothing else than the subjective

purposiveness in the representation of an object without any purpose (either

objective or subjective); and thus it is the mere form of purposiveness in the

representation by which an object is given to us, so far as we are conscious of

it, which constitutes the satisfaction that we without a concept judge to beuniversally communicable; and, consequently, this is the determining ground

of the judgement of taste.          § 12. The judgement of taste rests on a priori grounds

 

 

              To establish a priori the connexion of the feeling of a pleasure or

pain as an effect, with any representation whatever (sensation or concept) as

its cause, is absolutely impossible; for that would be a [particular]1 causal

relation which (with objects of experience) can always only be cognised a

posteriori, and through the medium of experience itself. We actually have,

indeed, in the Critique of practical Reason, derived from universal moral

concepts a priori the feeling of respect (as a special and peculiar modification

of feeling which will not strictly correspond either to the pleasure or the pain

that we get from empirical objects). But there we could go beyond the bounds

of experience and call in a causality which rested on a supersensible attribute

of the subject, viz. freedom. And even there, properly speaking, it was not

this feeling which we derived from the Idea of the moral as cause, but merely

the determination of the will. But the state of mind which accompanies any

determination of the will is in itself a feeling of pleasure and identical with it,

and therefore does not follow from it as its effect. This last must only be

assumed if the concept of the moral as a good precede the determination of

the will by the law; for in that case the pleasure that is bound up with the

concept could not be derived from it as from a mere cognition.

              Now the case is similar with the pleasure in aesthetical judgements,

only that here it is merely contemplative and does not bring about an interest

in the Object, which on the other hand in the moral judgement it is practical.1

The consciousness of the mere formal purposiveness in the play of the

subject’s cognitive powers, in a representation through which an object is

given, is the pleasure itself; because it contains a determining ground of the

activity of the subject in respect of the excitement of its cognitive powers,

and therefore an inner causality (which is purposive) in respect of cognition

in general without however being limited to any definite cognition; and

consequently contains a mere form of the subjective purposiveness of a

representation in an aesthetical judgement. This pleasure is in no way

practical, neither like that arising from the pathological ground of

pleasantness, nor that from the intellectual ground of the represented good.

But yet it involves causality, viz. of maintaining the state of therepresentation itself, and the exercise of the cognitive powers without further

design. We linger over the contemplation of the beautiful, because this

contemplation strengthens and reproduces itself, which is analogous to

(though not of the same kind as) that lingering which takes place when a

[physical] charm in the representation of the object repeatedly arouses the

attention, the mind being passive.

        1
               [First Edition.]

        1
               [Cf. Metaphysic of Morals, Introd. I. “The pleasure which is

necessarily bound up with the desire (of the object whose representation

affects feeling) may be called practical pleasure, whether it be cause or effect

of the desire. On the contrary, the pleasure which is not necessarily bound up

with the desire of the object, and which, therefore, is at bottom not a pleasure

in the existence of the Object of the representation, but clings to the

representation only, may be called mere contemplative pleasure or passive

satisfaction. The feeling of the latter kind of pleasure we call taste. ”]§ 13. The pure judgement of taste is independent of charm and emotion

 

 

              Every interest spoils the judgement of taste and takes from its

impartiality, especially if the purposiveness is not, as with the interest of

Reason, placed before the feeling of pleasure but grounded on it. This last

always happens in an aesthetical judgement upon anything so far as it

gratifies or grieves us. Hence judgements so affected can lay no claim at all

to a universally valid satisfaction, or at least so much the less claim, in

proportion as there are sensations of this sort among the determining grounds

of taste. That taste is still barbaric which needs a mixture of charms and

emotions in order that there may be satisfaction, and still more so if it make

these the measure of its assent.

              Nevertheless charms are often not only taken account of in the case

of beauty (which properly speaking ought merely to be concerned with form)

as contributory to the aesthetical universal satisfaction; but they are passed

off as in themselves beauties, and thus the matter of satisfaction is substituted

for the form. This misconception, however, like so many others which have

something true at their basis, may be removed by a careful definition of these

concepts.

              A judgement of taste on which charm and emotion have no influence

(although they may be bound up with the satisfaction in the beautiful),—

which therefore has as its determining ground merely the purposiveness of

the form,— is a pure judgement of taste.                    § 14. Elucidation by means of examples

 

 

              Aesthetical judgements can be divided just like theoretical (logical)

judgements into empirical and pure. The first assert pleasantness or

unpleasantness; the second assert the beauty of an object or of the manner of

representing it. The former are judgements of Sense (material aesthetical

judgements); the latter [as formal1 ] are alone strictly judgements of Taste.

              A judgement of taste is therefore pure, only so far as no merely

empirical satisfaction is mingled with its determining ground. But this always

happens if charm or emotion have any share in the judgement by which

anything is to be described as beautiful.

              Now here many objections present themselves, which fallaciously

put forward charm not merely as a necessary ingredient of beauty, but as

alone sufficient [to justify] a thing’s being called beautiful. A mere colour,

e.g. the green of a grass plot, a mere tone (as distinguished from sound and

noise) like that of a violin, are by most people described as beautiful in

themselves; although both seem to have at their basis merely the matter of

representations, viz. simply sensation, and therefore only deserve to be called

pleasant. But we must at the same time remark that the sensations of colours

and of tone have a right to be regarded as beautiful only in so far as they are

pure. This is a determination which concerns their form, and is the only

[element] of these representations which admits with certainty of universal

communicability; for we cannot assume that the quality of sensations is the

same in all subjects, and we can hardly say that the pleasantness of one

colour or the tone of one musical instrument is judged preferable to that of

another in the same1 way by every one.

              If we assume with Euler that colours are isochronous vibrations

(pulsus ) of the aether, as sounds are of the air in a state of disturbance, and,

— what is most important,— that the mind not only perceives by sense the

effect of these in exciting the organ, but also perceives by reflection the

regular play of impressions (and thus the form of the combination of different

representations)— which I still do not doubt2 — then colours and tone

cannot be reckoned as mere sensations, but as the formal determination of theunity of a manifold of sensations, and thus as beauties in themselves.

              But “pure” in a simple mode of sensation means that its uniformity

is troubled and interrupted by no foreign sensation, and it belongs merely to

the form; because here we can abstract from the quality of that mode of

sensation (abstract from the colours and tone, if any, which it represents).

Hence all simple colours, so far as they are pure, are regarded as beautiful;

composite colours have not this advantage, because, as they are not simple,

we have no standard for judging whether they should be called pure or not.

              But as regards the beauty attributed to the object on account of its

form, to suppose it to be capable of augmentation through the charm of the

object is a common error, and one very prejudicial to genuine, uncorrupted,

well-founded taste. We can doubtless add these charms to beauty, in order to

interest the mind by the representation of the object, apart from the bare

satisfaction [received]; and thus they may serve as a recommendation of taste

and its cultivation, especially when it is yet crude and unexercised. But they

actually do injury to the judgement of taste if they draw attention to

themselves as the grounds for judging of beauty. So far are they from adding

to beauty that they must only be admitted by indulgence as aliens; and

provided always that they do not disturb the beautiful form, in cases when

taste is yet weak and untrained.

              In painting, sculpture, and in all the formative arts — in architecture,

and horticulture, so far as they are beautiful arts — the delineation is the

essential thing; and here it is not what gratifies in sensation but what pleases

by means of its form that is fundamental for taste. The colours which light up

the sketch belong to the charm; they may indeed enliven1 the object for

sensation, but they cannot make it worthy of contemplation and beautiful. In

most cases they are rather limited by the requirements of the beautiful form;

and even where charm is permissible it is ennobled solely by this.

              Every form of the objects of sense (both of external sense and also

mediately of internal) is either figure or play. In the latter case it is either play

of figures (in space, viz. pantomime and dancing), or the mere play of

sensations (in time). The charm of colours or of the pleasant tones of an

instrument may be added; but the delineation in the first case and the

composition in the second constitute the proper object of the pure judgement

of taste. To say that the purity of colours and of tones, or their variety andcontrast, seems to add to beauty, does not mean that they supply a

homogeneous addition to our satisfaction in the form because they are

pleasant in themselves; but they do so, because they make the form more

exactly, definitely, and completely, intuitible, and besides by their charm

[excite the representation, whilst they1 ] awaken and fix our attention on the

object itself.

              Even what we call ornaments [parerga1 ], i.e. those things which do

not belong to the complete representation of the object internally as elements

but only externally as complements, and which augment the satisfaction of

taste, do so only by their form; as for example [the frames of pictures,1 or]

the draperies of statues or the colonnades of palaces. But if the ornament does

not itself consist in beautiful form, and if it is used as a golden frame is used,

merely to recommend the painting by its charm, it is then called finery and

injures genuine beauty.

              Emotion, i.e. a sensation in which pleasantness is produced by means

of a momentary checking and a consequent more powerful outflow of the

vital force, does not belong at all to beauty. But sublimity [with which the

feeling of emotion is bound up1 ] requires a different standard of judgement

from that which is at the foundation of taste; and thus a pure judgement of

taste has for its determining ground neither charm nor emotion, in a word, no

sensation as the material of the aesthetical judgement.

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        1
               [First Edition has gleiche; Second Edition has solche. ]

        2
               [First and Second Editions have sehr zweifle; but this was corrected

to nicht zweifle in the Third Edition of 1799.]

        1
               [Belebt machen; First Edition had beliebt. ]

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        1
               [Second Edition.]  § 15. The judgement of taste is quite independent of the concept of

                                        perfection

 

 

              Objective purposiveness can only be cognised by means of the

reference of the manifold to a definite purpose, and therefore only through a

concept. From this alone it is plain that the Beautiful, the judging of which

has at its basis a merely formal purposiveness, i.e. a purposiveness without

purpose, is quite independent of the concept of the Good; because the latter

presupposes an objective purposiveness, i.e. the reference of the object to a

definite purpose.

              Objective purposiveness is either external, i.e. the utility, or internal,

i.e. the perfection of the object. That the satisfaction in an object, on account

of which we call it beautiful, cannot rest on the representation of its utility, is

sufficiently obvious from the two preceding sections; because in that case it

would not be an immediate satisfaction in the object, which is the essential

condition of a judgement about beauty. But objective internal purposiveness,

i.e. perfection, comes nearer to the predicate of beauty; and it has been

regarded by celebrated philosophers1 as the same as beauty, with the proviso,

if it is thought in a confused way. It is of the greatest importance in a Critique

of Taste to decide whether beauty can thus actually be resolved into the

concept of perfection.

              To judge of objective purposiveness we always need not only the

concept of a purpose, but (if that purposiveness is not to be external utility

but internal) the concept of an internal purpose which shall contain the

ground of the internal possibility of the object. Now as a purpose in general is

that whose concept can be regarded as the ground of the possibility of the

object itself; so, in order to represent objective purposiveness in a thing, the

concept of what sort of thing it is to be must come first. The agreement of the

manifold in it with this concept (which furnishes the rule for combining the

manifold) is the qualitative perfection of the thing. Quite different from this

is quantitative perfection, the completeness of a thing after its kind, which is

a mere concept of magnitude (of totality).1 In this what the thing ought to be

is conceived as already determined, and it is only asked if it has all itsrequisites. The formal [element] in the representation of a thing, i.e. the

agreement of the manifold with a unity (it being undetermined what this

ought to be), gives to cognition no objective purposiveness whatever. For

since abstraction is made of this unity as purpose (what the thing ought to

be), nothing remains but the subjective purposiveness of the representations

in the mind of the intuiting subject. And this, although it furnishes a certain

purposiveness of the representative state of the subject, and so a facility of

apprehending a given form by the Imagination, yet furnishes no perfection of

an Object, since the Object is not here conceived by means of the concept of

a purpose. For example, if in a forest I come across a plot of sward, round

which trees stand in a circle, and do not then represent to myself a purpose,

viz. that it is intended to serve for country dances, not the least concept of

perfection is furnished by the mere form. But to represent to oneself a formal

objective purposiveness without purpose, i.e. the mere form of a perfection

(without any matter and without the concept of that with which it is

accordant, even if it were merely the Idea of conformity to law in general1 )

is a veritable contradiction.

              Now the judgement of taste is an aesthetical judgement, i.e. such as

rests on subjective grounds, the determining ground of which cannot be a

concept, and consequently cannot be the concept of a definite purpose.

Therefore in beauty, regarded as a formal subjective purposiveness, there is

in no way thought a perfection of the object, as a wouldbe formal

purposiveness, which yet is objective. And thus to distinguish between the

concepts of the Beautiful and the Good, as if they were only different in

logical form, the first being a confused, the second a clear concept of

perfection, but identical in content and origin, is quite fallacious. For then

there would be no specific difference between them, but a judgement of taste

would be as much a cognitive judgement as the judgement by which a thing

is described as good; just as when the ordinary man says that fraud is unjust

he bases his judgement on confused grounds, whilst the philosopher bases it

on clear grounds, but both on identical principles of Reason. I have already,

however, said that an aesthetical judgement is unique of its kind, and gives

absolutely no cognition (not even a confused cognition) of the Object; this is

only supplied by a logical judgement. On the contrary, it simply refers the

representation, by which an Object is given, to the subject; and brings to our

notice no characteristic of the object, but only the purposive form in the

determination of the representative powers which are occupying themselvestherewith. The judgement is called aesthetical just because its determining

ground is not a concept, but the feeling (of internal sense) of that harmony in

the play of the mental powers, so far as it can be felt in sensation. On the

other hand, if we wish to call confused concepts and the objective judgement

based on them, aesthetical, we shall have an Understanding judging sensibly

or a Sense representing its Objects by means of concepts [both of which are

contradictory.1 ] The faculty of concepts, be they confused or clear, is the

Understanding; and although Understanding has to do with the judgement of

taste, as an aesthetical judgement (as it has with all judgements), yet it has to

do with it not as a faculty by which an object is cognised, but as the faculty

which determines the judgement and its representation (without any concept)

in accordance with its relation to the subject and the subject’s internal feeling,

in so far as this judgement may be possible in accordance with a universal

rule.

        1
               [Kant probably alludes here to Baumgarten (1714–1762), who was

the first writer to give the name of Aesthetics to the Philosophy of Taste. He

defined beauty as “perfection apprehended through the senses.” Kant is said

to have used as a text-book at lectures a work by Meier, a pupil of

Baumgarten’s, on this subject.]

        1
               [Cf. Preface to the Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, v.: “The word

perfection is liable to many misconceptions. It is sometimes understood as a

concept belonging to Transcendental Philosophy; viz. the concept of the

totality of the manifold, which, taken together, constitutes a Thing;

sometimes, again, it is understood as belonging to Teleology, so that it

signifies the agreement of the characteristics of a thing with a purpose.

Perfection in the former sense might be called quantitative (material), in the

latter qualitative (formal) perfection.”]

        1
               [The words even if . . . general were added in the Second Edition.]

        1
               [Second Edition.]  § 16. The judgement of taste, by which an object is declared to be

      beautiful under the condition of a definite concept, is not pure

 

 

              There are two kinds of beauty; free beauty (pulchritudo vaga ) or

merely dependent beauty (pulchritudo adhaerens ). The first presupposes no

concept of what the object ought to be; the second does presuppose such a

concept and the perfection of the object in accordance therewith. The first is

called the (self-subsistent) beauty of this or that thing; the second, as

dependent upon a concept (conditioned beauty), is ascribed to Objects which

come under the concept of a particular purpose.

              Flowers are free natural beauties. Hardly any one but a botanist

knows what sort of a thing a flower ought to be; and even he, though

recognising in the flower the reproductive organ of the plant, pays no regard

to this natural purpose if he is passing judgement on the flower by Taste.

There is then at the basis of this judgement no perfection of any kind, no

internal purposiveness, to which the collection of the manifold is referred.

Many birds (such as the parrot, the humming bird, the bird of paradise), and

many sea shells are beauties in themselves, which do not belong to any object

determined in respect of its purpose by concepts, but please freely and in

themselves. So also delineations à la grecque, foliage for borders or wall-

papers, mean nothing in themselves; they represent nothing — no Object

under a definite concept,— and are free beauties. We can refer to the same

class what are called in music phantasies (i.e. pieces without any theme), and

in fact all music without words.

              In the judging of a free beauty (according to the mere form) the

judgement of taste is pure. There is presupposed no concept of any purpose,

for which the manifold should serve the given Object, and which therefore is

to be represented therein. By such a concept the freedom of the Imagination

which disports itself in the contemplation of the figure would be only limited.

              But human beauty (i.e. of a man, a woman, or a child), the beauty of

a horse, or a building (be it church, palace, arsenal, or summer-house)

presupposes a concept of the purpose which determines what the thing is to

be, and consequently a concept of its perfection; it is therefore adherentbeauty. Now as the combination of the Pleasant (in sensation) with Beauty,

which properly is only concerned with form, is a hindrance to the purity of

the judgement of taste; so also is its purity injured by the combination with

Beauty of the Good (viz. that manifold which is good for the thing itself in

accordance with its purpose).

              We could add much to a building which would immediately please

the eye, if only it were not to be a church. We could adorn a figure with all

kinds of spirals and light but regular lines, as the New Zealanders do with

their tattooing, if only it were not the figure of a human being. And again this

could have much finer features and a more pleasing and gentle cast of

countenance provided it were not intended to represent a man, much less a

warrior.

              Now the satisfaction in the manifold of a thing in reference to the

internal purpose which determines its possibility is a satisfaction grounded on

a concept; but the satisfaction in beauty is such as presupposes no concept,

but is immediately bound up with the representation through which the object

is given (not through which it is thought). If now the judgement of Taste in

respect of the beauty of a thing is made dependent on the purpose in its

manifold, like a judgement of Reason, and thus limited, it is no longer a free

and pure judgement of Taste.

              It is true that taste gains by this combination of aesthetical with

intellectual satisfaction, inasmuch as it becomes fixed; and though it is not

universal, yet in respect to certain purposively determined Objects it becomes

possible to prescribe rules for it. These, however, are not rules of taste, but

merely rules for the unification of Taste with Reason, i.e. of the Beautiful

with the Good, by which the former becomes available as an instrument of

design in respect of the latter. Thus the tone of mind which is self-

maintaining and of subjective universal validity is subordinated to the way of

thinking which can be maintained only by painful resolve, but is of objective

universal validity. Properly speaking, however, perfection gains nothing by

beauty or beauty by perfection; but, when we compare the representation by

which an object is given to us with the Object (as regards what it ought to be)

by means of a concept, we cannot avoid considering along with it the

sensation in the subject. And thus when both states of mind are in harmony

our whole faculty of representative power gains.              A judgement of taste, then, in respect of an object with a definite

internal purpose, can only be pure, if either the person judging has no concept

of this purpose, or else abstracts from it in his judgement. Such a person,

although forming an accurate judgement of taste in judging of the object as

free beauty, would yet by another who considers the beauty in it only as a

dependent attribute (who looks to the purpose of the object) be blamed, and

accused of false taste; although both are right in their own way, the one in

reference to what he has before his eyes, the other in reference to what he has

in his thought. By means of this distinction we can settle many disputes about

beauty between judges of taste; by showing that the one is speaking of free,

the other of dependent, beauty,— that the first is making a pure, the second

an applied, judgement of taste.                            § 17. Of the Ideal of beauty

 

 

              There can be no objective rule of taste which shall determine by

means of concepts what is beautiful. For every judgement from this source is

aesthetical; i.e. the feeling of the subject, and not a concept of the Object, is

its determining ground. To seek for a principle of taste which shall furnish,

by means of definite concepts, a universal criterion of the beautiful, is

fruitless trouble; because what is sought is impossible and self-contradictory.

The universal communicability of sensation (satisfaction or dissatisfaction)

without the aid of a concept — the agreement, as far as is possible, of all

times and peoples as regards this feeling in the representation of certain

objects — this is the empirical criterion, although weak and hardly sufficing

for probability, of the derivation of a taste, thus confirmed by examples, from

the deep-lying grounds of agreement common to all men, in judging of the

forms under which objects are given to them.

              Hence, we consider some products of taste as exemplary. Not that

taste can be acquired by imitating others; for it must be an original faculty.

He who imitates a model shows, no doubt, in so far as he attains to it, skill;

but only shows taste in so far as he can judge of this model itself.1 It follows

from hence that the highest model, the archetype of taste, is a mere Idea,

which every one must produce in himself; and according to which he must

judge every Object of taste, every example of judgement by taste, and even

the taste of every one. Idea properly means a rational concept, and Ideal the

representation of an individual being, regarded as adequate to an Idea.2

Hence that archetype of taste, which certainly rests on the indeterminate Idea

that Reason has of a maximum, but which cannot be represented by concepts,

but only in an individual presentation, is better called the Ideal of the

beautiful. Although we are not in possession of this, we yet strive to produce

it in ourselves. But it can only be an Ideal of the Imagination, because it rests

on a presentation and not on concepts, and the Imagination is the faculty of

presentation.— How do we arrive at such an Ideal of beauty? A priori, or

empirically? Moreover, what species of the beautiful is susceptible of an

Ideal?              First, it is well to remark that the beauty for which an Ideal is to be

sought cannot be vague beauty, but is fixed by a concept of objective

purposiveness; and thus it cannot appertain to the Object of a quite pure

judgement of taste, but to that of a judgement of taste which is in part

intellectual. That is, in whatever grounds of judgement an Ideal is to be

found, an Idea of Reason in accordance with definite concepts must lie at its

basis; which determines a priori the purpose on which the internal possibility

of the object rests. An Ideal of beautiful flowers, of a beautiful piece of

furniture, of a beautiful view, is inconceivable. But neither can an Ideal be

represented of a beauty dependent on definite purposes, e.g. of a beautiful

dwelling-house, a beautiful tree, a beautiful garden, etc.; presumably because

their purpose is not sufficiently determined and fixed by the concept, and thus

the purposiveness is nearly as free as in the case of vague beauty. The only

being which has the purpose of its existence in itself is man, who can

determine his purposes by Reason; or, where he must receive them from

external perception, yet can compare them with essential and universal

purposes, and can judge this their accordance aesthetically. This man is, then,

alone of all objects in the world, susceptible of an Ideal of beauty; as it is

only humanity in his person, as an intelligence, that is susceptible of the Ideal

of perfection.

              But there are here two elements. First, there is the aesthetical normal

Idea, which is an individual intuition (of the Imagination), representing the

standard of our judgement [upon man] as a thing belonging to a particular

animal species. Secondly, there is the rational Idea which makes the purposes

of humanity, so far as they cannot be sensibly represented, the principle for

judging of a figure through which, as their phenomenal effect, those purposes

are revealed. The normal Idea of the figure of an animal of a particular race

must take its elements from experience. But the greatest purposiveness in the

construction of the figure, that would be available for the universal standard

of aesthetical judgement upon each individual of this species — the image

which is as it were designedly at the basis of nature’s Technic, to which only

the whole race and not any isolated individual is adequate — this lies merely

in the Idea of the judging [subject]. And this, with its proportions, as an

aesthetical Idea, can be completely presented in concreto in a model. In order

to make intelligible in some measure (for who can extract her whole secret

from nature?) how this comes to pass, we shall attempt a psychological

explanation.              We must remark that, in a way quite incomprehensible by us, the

Imagination can not only recall, on occasion, the signs for concepts long past,

but can also reproduce the image of the figure of the object out of an

unspeakable number of objects of different kinds or even of the same kind.

Further, if the mind is concerned with comparisons, the Imagination can, in

all probability, actually though unconsciously let one image glide into

another, and thus by the concurrence of several of the same kind come by an

average, which serves as the common measure of all. Every one has seen a

thousand full-grown men. Now if you wish to judge of their normal size,

estimating it by means of comparison, the Imagination (as I think) allows a

great number of images (perhaps the whole thousand) to fall on one another.

If I am allowed to apply here the analogy of optical presentation, it is in the

space where most of them are combined and inside the contour, where the

place is illuminated with the most vivid colours, that the average size is

cognisable; which, both in height and breadth, is equally far removed from

the extreme bounds of the greatest and smallest stature. And this is the stature

of a beautiful man. (We could arrive at the same thing mechanically, by

adding together all thousand magnitudes, heights, breadths, and thicknesses,

and dividing the sum by a thousand. But the Imagination does this by means

of a dynamical effect, which arises from the various impressions of such

figures on the organ of internal sense.) If now in a similar way for this

average man we seek the average head, for this head the average nose, etc.,

such figure is at the basis of the normal Idea in the country where the

comparison is instituted. Thus necessarily under these empirical conditions a

negro must have a different normal Idea of the beauty of the [human figure]

from a white man, a Chinaman a different normal Idea from a European, etc.

And the same is the case with the model of a beautiful horse or dog (of a

certain breed).— This normal Idea is not derived from proportions got from

experience [and regarded] as definite rules; but in accordance with it rules for

judging become in the first instance possible. It is the image for the whole

race, which floats among all the variously different intuitions of individuals,

which nature takes as archetype in her productions of the same species, but

which seems not to be fully reached in any individual case. It is by no means

the whole archetype of beauty in the race, but only the form constituting the

indispensable condition of all beauty, and thus merely correctness in the

[mental] presentation of the race. It is, like the celebrated Doryphorus of

Polycletus, 1 the rule (Myron’s 2 Cow might also be used thus for its kind). Itcan therefore contain nothing specifically characteristic, for otherwise it

would not be the normal Idea for the race. Its presentation pleases, not by its

beauty, but merely because it contradicts no condition, under which alone a

thing of this kind can be beautiful. The presentation is merely correct.3

              We must yet distinguish the normal Idea of the beautiful from the

Ideal, which latter, on grounds already alleged, we can only expect in the

human figure. In this the Ideal consists in the expression of the moral,

without which the object would not please universally and thus positively

(not merely negatively in a correct presentation). The visible expression of

moral Ideas that rule men inwardly, can indeed only be got from experience;

but to make its connexion with all which our Reason unites with the morally

good in the Idea of the highest purposiveness,— goodness of heart, purity,

strength, peace, etc.,— visible as it were in bodily manifestation (as the effect

of that which is internal), requires a union of pure Ideas of Reason with great

imaginative power, even in him who wishes to judge of it, still more in him

who wishes to present it. The correctness of such an Ideal of beauty is shown

by its permitting no sensible charm to mingle with the satisfaction in the

Object and yet allowing us to take a great interest therein. This shows that a

judgement in accordance with such a standard can never be purely

aesthetical, and that a judgement in accordance with an Ideal of beauty is not

a mere judgement of taste.

        1
               Models of taste as regards the arts of speech must be composed in a

dead and learned language. The first, in order that they may not suffer that

change which inevitably comes over living languages, in which noble

expressions become flat, common ones antiquated, and newly created ones

have only a short currency. The second, because learned languages have a

grammar which is subject to no wanton change of fashion, but the rules of

which are preserved unchanged.

        2
               [This distinction between an Idea and an Ideal, as also the further

contrast between Ideals of the Reason and Ideals of the Imagination, had

already been given by Kant in the Critique of Pure Reason, Dialectic, bk. ii.

c. iii. § 1 .]

        1
               [Polycletus of Argos flourished about 430 b.c. His statue of the

Spearbearer (Doryphorus ), afterwards became known as the Canon;

because in it the artist was supposed to have embodied a perfectrepresentation of the ideal of the human figure.]

        2
               [This was a celebrated statue executed by Myron, a Greek sculptor,

contemporary with Polycletus. It is frequently mentioned in the Greek

Anthology.]

        3
               It will be found that a perfectly regular countenance, such as a

painter might wish to have for a model, ordinarily tells us nothing; because it

contains nothing characteristic, and therefore rather expresses the Idea of the

race than the specific [traits] of a person. The exaggeration of a characteristic

of this kind, i.e. such as does violence to the normal Idea (the purposiveness

of the race) is called caricature. Experience also shows that these quite

regular countenances commonly indicate internally only a mediocre man;

presumably (if it may be assumed that external nature expresses the

proportions of internal) because, if no mental disposition exceeds that

proportion which is requisite in order to constitute a man free from faults,

nothing can be expected of what is called genius, in which nature seems to

depart from the ordinary relations of the mental powers on behalf of some

special one.

      Explanation of the Beautiful Derived from this Third Moment

 

 

              Beauty is the form of the purposiveness of an object, so far as this is

perceived in it without any representation of a purpose. 1

        1
               It might be objected to this explanation that there are things, in

which we see a purposive form without cognising any [definite] purpose in

them, like the stone implements often got from old sepulchral tumuli with a

hole in them as if for a handle. These, although they plainly indicate by their

shape a purposiveness of which we do not know the purpose, are nevertheless

not described as beautiful. But if we regard a thing as a work of art, that is

enough to make us admit that its shape has reference to some design and

definite purpose. And hence there is no immediate satisfaction in the

contemplation of it. On the other hand a flower, e.g. a tulip, is regarded as

beautiful; because in perceiving it we find a certain purposiveness which, in

our judgement, is referred to no purpose at all.

  

 Fourth Moment – Of the Judgement of Taste, According to the Modality

                        of the Satisfaction in the Object

 

 

            § 18. What the modality in a judgement of taste is

 

 

              I can say of every representation that it is at least possible that (as a

cognition) it should be bound up with a pleasure. Of a representation that I

call pleasant I say that it actually excites pleasure in me. But the beautiful we

think as having a necessary reference to satisfaction. Now this necessity is of

a peculiar kind. It is not a theoretical objective necessity; in which case it

would be cognised a priori that every one will feel this satisfaction in the

object called beautiful by me. It is not a practical necessity; in which case, by

concepts of a pure rational will serving as a rule for freely acting beings, the

satisfaction is the necessary result of an objective law and only indicates that

we absolutely (without any further design) ought to act in a certain way. But

the necessity which is thought in an aesthetical judgement can only be called

exemplary; i.e. a necessity of the assent of all to a judgement which is

regarded as the example of a universal rule that we cannot state. Since an

aesthetical judgement is not an objective cognitive judgement, this necessity

cannot be derived from definite concepts, and is therefore not apodictic. Still

less can it be inferred from the universality of experience (of a complete

agreement of judgements as to the beauty of a certain object). For not only

would experience hardly furnish sufficiently numerous vouchers for this; but

also, on empirical judgements we can base no concept of the necessity of

these judgements.  § 19. The subjective necessity, which we ascribe to the judgement of

                                taste, is conditioned

 

 

              The judgement of taste requires the agreement of every one; and he

who describes anything as beautiful claims that every one ought to give his

approval to the object in question and also describe it as beautiful. The ought

in the aesthetical judgement is therefore pronounced in accordance with all

the data which are required for judging and yet is only conditioned. We ask

for the agreement of every one else, because we have for it a ground that is

common to all; and we could count on this agreement, provided we were

always sure that the case was correctly subsumed under that ground as rule of

assent.§ 20. The condition of necessity which a judgement of taste asserts is the

                              Idea of a common sense

 

 

              If judgements of taste (like cognitive judgements) had a definite

objective principle, then the person who lays them down in accordance with

this latter would claim an unconditioned necessity for his judgement. If they

were devoid of all principle, like those of the mere taste of sense, we would

not allow them in thought any necessity whatever. Hence they must have a

subjective principle which determines what pleases or displeases only by

feeling and not by concepts, but yet with universal validity. But such a

principle could only be regarded as a common sense, which is essentially

different from common Understanding which people sometimes call common

Sense (sensus communis ); for the latter does not judge by feeling but always

by concepts, although ordinarily only as by obscurely represented principles.

              Hence it is only under the presupposition that there is a common

sense (by which we do not understand an external sense, but the effect

resulting from the free play of our cognitive powers)— it is only under this

presupposition, I say, that the judgement of taste can be laid down.        § 21. Have we ground for presupposing a common sense?

 

 

              Cognitions and judgements must, along with the conviction that

accompanies them, admit of universal communicability; for otherwise there

would be no harmony between them and the Object, and they would be

collectively a mere subjective play of the representative powers, exactly as

scepticism would have it. But if cognitions are to admit of communicability,

so must also the state of mind,— i.e. the accordance of the cognitive powers

with a cognition generally, and that proportion of them which is suitable for a

representation (by which an object is given to us) in order that a cognition

may be made out of it — admit of universal communicability. For without

this as the subjective condition of cognition, knowledge as an effect could not

arise. This actually always takes place when a given object by means of

Sense excites the Imagination to collect the manifold, and the Imagination in

its turn excites the Understanding to bring about a unity of this collective

process in concepts. But this accordance of the cognitive powers has a

different proportion according to the variety of the Objects which are given.

However, it must be such that this internal relation, by which one mental

faculty is excited by another, shall be generally the most beneficial for both

faculties in respect of cognition (of given objects); and this accordance can

only be determined by feeling (not according to concepts). Since now this

accordance itself must admit of universal communicability, and consequently

also our feeling of it (in a given representation), and since the universal

communicability of a feeling presupposes a common sense, we have grounds

for assuming this latter. And this common sense is assumed without relying

on psychological observations, but simply as the necessary condition of the

universal communicability of our knowledge, which is presupposed in every

Logic and in every principle of knowledge that is not sceptical.  § 22. The necessity of the universal agreement that is thought in a

    judgement of taste is a subjective necessity, which is represented as

          objective under the presupposition of a common sense

 

 

              In all judgements by which we describe anything as beautiful, we

allow no one to be of another opinion; without however grounding our

judgement on concepts but only on our feeling, which we therefore place at

its basis not as a private, but as a communal feeling.1 Now this common

sense cannot be grounded on experience; for it aims at justifying judgements

which contain an ought. It does not say that every one will agree with my

judgement, but that he ought. And so common sense, as an example of whose

judgement I here put forward my judgement of taste and on account of which

I attribute to the latter an exemplary validity, is a mere ideal norm, under the

supposition of which I have a right to make into a rule for every one a

judgement that accords therewith, as well as the satisfaction in an Object

expressed in such judgement. For the principle, which concerns the

agreement of different judging persons, although only subjective, is yet

assumed as subjectively universal (an Idea necessary for every one); and thus

can claim universal assent (as if it were objective) provided we are sure that

we have correctly subsumed [the particulars] under it.

              This indeterminate norm of a common sense is actually presupposed

by us; as is shown by our claim to lay down judgements of taste. Whether

there is in fact such a common sense, as a constitutive principle of the

possibility of experience, or whether a yet higher principle of Reason makes

it only into a regulative principle for producing in us a common sense for

higher purposes: whether therefore Taste is an original and natural faculty, or

only the Idea of an artificial one yet to be acquired, so that a judgement of

taste with its assumption of a universal assent in fact, is only a requirement of

Reason for producing such harmony of sentiment; whether the “ought,” i.e.

the objective necessity of the confluence of the feeling of any one man with

that of every other, only signifies the possibility of arriving at this accord, and

the judgement of taste only affords an example of the application of this

principle: these questions we have neither the wish nor the power to

investigate as yet; we have now only to resolve the faculty of taste into itselements in order to unite them at last in the Idea of a common sense.

        1
               [Cp. p. 170, infra. ]

    Explanation of the Beautiful Resulting from the Fourth Moment

 

 

              The beautiful is that which without any concept is cognised as the

object of a necessary satisfaction.

 

            General Remark on the First Section of the Analytic

 

 

              If we seek the result of the preceding analysis we find that

everything runs up into this concept of Taste, that it is a faculty for judging

an object in reference to the Imagination’s free conformity to law. Now if in

the judgement of taste the Imagination must be considered in its freedom, it is

in the first place not regarded as reproductive, as it is subject to the laws of

association, but as productive and spontaneous (as the author of arbitrary

forms of possible intuition). And although in the apprehension of a given

object of sense it is tied to a definite form of this Object, and so far has no

free play (such as that of poetry) yet it may readily be conceived that the

object can furnish it with such a form containing a collection of the manifold,

as the Imagination itself, if it were left free, would project in accordance with

the conformity to law of the Understanding in general. But that the

imaginative power should be free and yet of itself conformed to law, i.e.

bringing antonomy with it, is a contradiction. The Understanding alone gives

the law. If, however, the Imagination is compelled to proceed according to a

definite law, its product in respect of form is determined by concepts as to

what it ought to be. But then, as is above shown, the satisfaction is not that in

the Beautiful, but in the Good (in perfection, at any rate in mere formal

perfection); and the judgement is not a judgement of taste. Hence it is a

conformity to law without a law; and a subjective agreement of the

Imagination and Understanding,— without such an objective agreement as

there is when the representation is referred to a definite concept of an object,

— can subsist along with the free conformity to law of the Understanding

(which is also called purposiveness without purpose) and with the peculiarfeature of a judgement of taste.

              Now geometrically regular figures, such as a circle, a square, a cube,

etc., are commonly adduced by critics of taste as the simplest and most

indisputable examples of beauty; and yet they are called regular, because we

can only represent them by regarding them as mere presentations of a definite

concept which prescribes the rule for the figure (according to which alone it

is possible). One of these two must be wrong, either that judgement of the

critic which ascribes beauty to the said figures, or ours, which regards

purposiveness apart from a concept as requisite for beauty.

              Hardly any one will say that a man must have taste in order that he

should find more satisfaction in a circle than in a scrawled outline, in an

equilateral and equiangular quadrilateral than in one which is oblique,

irregular, and as it were deformed, for this belongs to the ordinary

Understanding and is not Taste at all. Where, e.g. our design is to judge of the

size of an area, or to make intelligible the relation of the parts of it, when

divided, to one another and to the whole, then regular figures and those of the

simplest kind are needed, and the satisfaction does not rest immediately on

the aspect of the figure, but on its availability for all kinds of possible

designs. A room whose walls form oblique angles, or a parterre of this kind,

even every violation of symmetry in the figure of animals (e.g. being one-

eyed), of buildings, or of flower beds, displeases, because it contradicts the

purpose of the thing, not only practically in respect of a definite use of it, but

also when we pass judgement on it as regards any possible design. This is not

the case in the judgement of taste, which when pure combines satisfaction or

dissatisfaction,— without any reference to its use or to a purpose,— with the

mere consideration of the object.

              The regularity which leads to the concept of an object is indeed the

indispensable condition (conditio sine qua non ) for grasping the object in a

single representation and determining the manifold in its form. This

determination is a purpose in respect of cognition, and in reference to this it is

always bound up with satisfaction (which accompanies the execution of

every, even problematical, design). There is here, however, merely the

approval of the solution satisfying a problem, and not a free and indefinite

purposive entertainment of the mental powers with what we call beautiful,

where the Understanding is at the service of Imagination and not vice versa.              In a thing that is only possible by means of design,— a building, or

even an animal,— the regularity consisting in symmetry must express the

unity of the intuition that accompanies the concept of purpose, and this

regularity belongs to cognition. But where only a free play of the

representative powers (under the condition, however, that the Understanding

is to suffer no shock thereby) is to be kept up, in pleasure gardens, room

decorations, all kinds of tasteful furniture, etc., regularity that shows

constraint is avoided as much as possible. Thus in the English taste in

gardens, or in bizarre taste in furniture, the freedom of the Imagination is

pushed almost near to the grotesque, and in this separation from every

constraint of rule we have the case, where taste can display its greatest

perfection in the enterprises of the Imagination.

              All stiff regularity (such as approximates to mathematical regularity)

has something in it repugnant to taste; for our entertainment in the

contemplation of it lasts for no length of time, but it rather, in so far as it has

not expressly in view cognition or a definite practical purpose, produces

weariness. On the other hand that with which Imagination can play in an

unstudied and purposive manner is always new to us, and one does not get

tired of looking at it. Marsden in his description of Sumatra makes the

remark that the free beauties of nature surround the spectator everywhere and

thus lose their attraction for him.1 On the other hand a pepper-garden, where

the stakes on which this plant twines itself form parallel rows, had much

attractiveness for him, if he met with it in the middle of a forest. And hence

he infers that wild beauty, apparently irregular, only pleases as a variation

from the regular beauty of which one has seen enough. But he need only have

made the experiment of spending one day in a pepper-garden, to have been

convinced that, once the Understanding, by the aid of this regularity, has put

itself in accord with the order that it always needs, the object will not

entertain for long,— nay rather it will impose a burdensome constraint upon

the Imagination. On the other hand, nature, which there is prodigal in its

variety even to luxuriance, that is subjected to no constraint of artificial rules,

can supply constant food for taste.— Even the song of birds, which we can

bring under no musical rule, seems to have more freedom, and therefore more

for taste, than a song of a human being which is produced in accordance with

all the rules of music; for we very much sooner weary of the latter, if it is

repeated often and at length. Here, however, we probably confuse our

participation in the mirth of a little creature that we love, with the beauty ofits song; for if this were exactly imitated by man (as sometimes the notes of

the nightingale are)1 it would seem to our ear quite devoid of taste.

              Again, beautiful objects are to be distinguished from beautiful views

of objects (which often on account of their distance cannot be clearly

recognised). In the latter case taste appears not so much in what the

Imagination apprehends in this field, as in the impulse it thus gets to fiction,

i.e. in the peculiar fancies with which the mind entertains itself, whilst it is

continually being aroused by the variety which strikes the eye. An illustration

is afforded, e.g. by the sight of the changing shapes of a fire on the hearth or

of a rippling brook; neither of these has beauty, but they bring with them a

charm for the Imagination, because they entertain it in free play.

        1
               [See The History of Sumatra, by W. Marsden (London, 1783), p.

113.]

        1
               [Cf. § 42 infra. ]

 

 

                     Second Book – Analytic of the Sublime

 

 

§ 23. Transition from the faculty which judges of the Beautiful to that

                          which judges of the Sublime

 

 

              The Beautiful and the Sublime agree in this, that both please in

themselves. Further, neither presupposes a judgement of sense nor a

judgement logically determined, but a judgement of reflection. Consequently

the satisfaction [belonging to them] does not depend on a sensation, as in the

case of the Pleasant, nor on a definite concept, as in the case of the Good; but

it is nevertheless referred to concepts although indeterminate ones. And so

the satisfaction is connected with the mere presentation [of the object] or with

the faculty of presentation; so that in the case of a given intuition this faculty

or the Imagination is considered as in agreement with the faculty of concepts

of Understanding or Reason (in its furtherane of these latter). Hence both

kinds of judgements are singular, and yet announce themselves as universally

valid for every subject; although they lay claim merely to the feeling of

pleasure and not to any knowledge of the object.

              But there are also remarkable differences between the two. The

Beautiful in nature is connected with the form of the object, which consists in

having boundaries. The Sublime, on the other hand, is to be found in a

formless object, so far as in it or by occasion of it boundlessness is

represented, and yet its totality is also present to thought. Thus the Beautiful

seems to be regarded as the presentation of an indefinite concept of

Understanding; the Sublime as that of a like concept of Reason. Therefore the

satisfaction in the one case is bound up with the representation of quality, in

the other with that of quantity. And the latter satisfaction is quite different in

kind from the former, for this [the Beautiful1 ] directly brings with it a

feeling of the furtherance of life, and thus is compatible with charms and with

the play of the Imagination. But the other [the feeling of the Sublime1 ] is a

pleasure that arises only indirectly; viz. it is produced by the feeling of a

momentary checking of the vital powers and a consequent stronger outflowof them, so that it seems to be regarded as emotion,— not play, but earnest in

the exercise of the Imagination.— Hence it is incompatible with charms; and

as the mind is not merely attracted by the object but is ever being alternately

repelled, the satisfaction in the sublime does not so much involve a positive

pleasure as admiration or respect, which rather deserves to be called negative

pleasure.

              But the inner and most important distinction between the Sublime

and Beautiful is, certainly, as follows. (Here, as we are entitled to do, we only

bring under consideration in the first instance the sublime in natural Objects;

for the sublime of Art is always limited by the conditions of agreement with

Nature.) Natural beauty (which is self-subsisting) brings with it a

purposiveness in its form by which the object seems to be, as it were, pre-

adapted to our Judgement, and thus constitutes in itself an object of

satisfaction. On the other hand, that which excites in us, without any

reasoning about it, but in the mere apprehension of it, the feeling of the

sublime, may appear as regards its form to violate purpose in respect of the

Judgement, to be unsuited to our presentative faculty, and, as it were, to do

violence to the Imagination; and yet it is judged to be only the more sublime.

              Now from this we may see that in general we express ourselves

incorrectly if we call any object of nature sublime, although we can quite

correctly call many objects of nature beautiful. For how can that be marked

by an expression of approval, which is apprehended in itself as being a

violation of purpose? All that we can say is that the object is fit for the

presentation of a sublimity which can be found in the mind; for no sensible

form can contain the sublime properly so-called. This concerns only Ideas of

the Reason, which, although no adequate presentation is possible for them, by

this inadequacy that admits of sensible presentation, are aroused and

summoned into the mind. Thus the wide ocean, agitated by the storm, cannot

be called sublime. Its aspect is horrible; and the mind must be already filled

with manifold Ideas if it is to be determined by such an intuition to a feeling

itself sublime, as it is incited to abandon sensibility and to busy itself with

Ideas that involve higher purposiveness.

              Self-subsisting natural beauty discovers to us a Technic of nature,

which represents it as a system in accordance with laws, the principle of

which we do not find in the whole of our faculty of Understanding. That

principle is the principle of purposiveness, in respect of the use of ourJudgement in regard to phenomena; [which requires] that these must not be

judged as merely belonging to nature in its purposeless mechanism, but also

as belonging to something analogous to art. It, therefore, actually extends, not

indeed our cognition of natural Objects, but our concept of nature; [which is

now not regarded] as mere mechanism but as art. This leads to profound

investigations as to the possibility of such a form. But in what we are

accustomed to call sublime there is nothing at all that leads to particular

objective principles and forms of nature corresponding to them; so far from it

that for the most part nature excites the Ideas of the sublime in its chaos or in

its wildest and most irregular disorder and desolation, provided size and

might are perceived. Hence, we see that the concept of the Sublime is not

nearly so important or rich in consequences as the concept of the Beautiful;

and that in general it displays nothing purposive in nature itself, but only in

that possible use of our intuitions of it by which there is produced in us a

feeling of a purposiveness quite independent of nature. We must seek a

ground external to ourselves for the Beautiful of nature; but seek it for the

Sublime merely in ourselves and in our attitude of thought which introduces

sublimity into the representation of nature. This is a very needful preliminary

remark, which quite separates the Ideas of the sublime from that of a

purposiveness of nature, and makes the theory of the sublime a mere

appendix to the aesthetical judging of that purposiveness; because by means

of it no particular form is represented in nature, but there is only developed a

purposive use which the Imagination makes of its representation.

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        1
               [Second Edition.]§ 24. Of the divisions of an investigation into the feeling of the sublime

 

 

              As regards the division of the moments of the aesthetical judging of

objects in reference to the feeling of the sublime, the Analytic can proceed

according to the same principle as was adapted in the analysis of judgements

of taste. For as an act of the aesthetical reflective Judgement, the satisfaction

in the Sublime must be represented just as in the case of the Beautiful,—

according to quantity as universally valid, according to quality as devoid of

interest, according to relation as subjective purposiveness, and according to

modality as necessary. And so the method here will not diverge from that of

the preceding section; unless, indeed, we count it a difference that in the case

where the aesthetical Judgement is concerned with the form of the Object we

began with the investigation of its quality, but here, in view of the

formlessness which may belong to what we call sublime, we shall begin with

quantity, as the first moment of the aesthetical judgement as to the sublime.

The reason for this may be seen from the preceding paragraph.

              But the analysis of the Sublime involves a division not needed in the

case of the Beautiful, viz. a division into the mathematically and the

dynamically sublime.

              For the feeling of the Sublime brings with it as its characteristic

feature a movement of the mind bound up with the judging of the object,

while in the case of the Beautiful taste presupposes and maintains the mind in

restful contemplation. Now this movement ought to be judged as subjectively

purposive (because the sublime pleases us), and thus it is referred through the

Imagination either to the faculty of cognition or of desire. In either reference

the purposiveness of the given representation ought to be judged only in

respect of this faculty (without purpose or interest); but in the first case it is

ascribed to the Object as a mathematical determination of the Imagination, in

the second as dynamical. And hence we have this twofold way of

representing the sublime.                      A.— Of the Mathematically Sublime

 

 

                  § 25. Explanation of the term “sublime”

 

 

              We call that sublime which is absolutely great. But to be great, and

to be a great something are quite different concepts (magnitudo and quantitas

). In like manner to say simply (simpliciter ) that anything is great is quite

different from saying that it is absolutely great (absolute, non comparative

magnum ). The latter is what is great beyond all comparison. — What now is

meant by the expression that anything is great or small or of medium size? It

is not a pure concept of Understanding that is thus signified; still less is it an

intuition of Sense, and just as little is it a concept of Reason, because it brings

with it no principle of cognition. It must therefore be a concept of Judgement

or derived from one; and a subjective purposiveness of the representation in

reference to the Judgement must lie at its basis. That anything is a magnitude

(quantum ) may be cognised from the thing itself, without any comparison of

it with other things; viz. if there is a multiplicity of the homogeneous

constituting one thing. But to cognise how great it is always requires some

other magnitude as a measure. But because the judging of magnitude depends

not merely on multiplicity (number), but also on the magnitude of the unit

(the measure), and since, to judge of the magnitude of this latter again

requires another as measure with which it may be compared, we see that the

determination of the magnitude of phenomena can supply no absolute

concept whatever of magnitude, but only a comparative one.

              If now I say simply that anything is great, it appears that I have no

comparison in view, at least none with an objective measure; because it is

thus not determined at all how great the object is. But although the standard

of comparison is merely subjective, yet the judgement none the less claims

universal assent; “this man is beautiful,” and “he is tall,” are judgements not

limited merely to the judging subject, but, like theoretical judgements,

demanding the assent of every one.

              In a judgement by which anything is designated simply as great, it isnot merely meant that the object has a magnitude, but that this magnitude is

superior to that of many other objects of the same kind, without, however,

any exact determination of this superiority. Thus there is always at the basis

of our judgement a standard which we assume as the same for every one; this,

however, is not available for any logical (mathematically definite) judging of

magnitude, but only for aesthetical judging of the same, because it is a merely

subjective standard lying at the basis of the reflective judgement upon

magnitude. It may be empirical, as, e.g. the average size of the men known to

us, of animals of a certain kind, trees, houses, mountains, etc. Or it may be a

standard given a priori, which through the defects of the judging subject is

limited by the subjective conditions of presentation in concreto; as, e.g. in the

practical sphere, the greatness of a certain virtue, or of the public liberty and

justice in a country; or, in the theoretical sphere, the greatness of the accuracy

or the inaccuracy of an observation or measurement that has been made, etc.

              Here it is remarkable that, although we have no interest whatever in

an Object,— i.e. its existence is indifferent to us,— yet its mere size, even if

it is considered as formless, may bring a satisfaction with it that is universally

communicable, and that consequently involves the consciousness of a

subjective purposiveness in the use of our cognitive faculty. This is not

indeed a satisfaction in the Object (because it may be formless), as in the case

of the Beautiful, in which the reflective Judgement finds itself purposively

determined in reference to cognition in general; but [a satisfaction] in the

extension of the Imagination by itself.

              If (under the above limitation) we say simply of an object “it is

great,” this is no mathematically definite judgement but a mere judgement of

reflection upon the representation of it, which is subjectively purposive for a

certain use of our cognitive powers in the estimation of magnitude; and we

always then bind up with the representation a kind of respect, as also a kind

of contempt for what we simply call “small.” Further, the judging of things as

great or small extends to everything, even to all their characteristics; thus we

describe beauty as great or small. The reason of this is to be sought in the fact

that whatever we present in intuition according to the precept of the

Judgement (and thus represent aesthetically) is always a phenomenon and

thus a quantum.

              But if we call anything not only great, but absolutely great in every

point of view (great beyond all comparison), i.e. sublime, we soon see that itis not permissible to seek for an adequate standard of this outside itself, but

merely in itself. It is a magnitude which is like itself alone. It follows hence

that the sublime is not to be sought in the things of nature, but only in our

Ideas; but in which of them it lies must be reserved for the Deduction.

              The foregoing explanation can be thus expressed: the sublime is that

in comparison with which everything else is small. Here we easily see that

nothing can be given in nature, however great it is judged by us to be, which

could not if considered in another relation be reduced to the infinitely small;

and conversely there is nothing so small, which does not admit of extension

by our Imagination to the greatness of a world, if compared with still smaller

standards. Telescopes have furnished us with abundant material for making

the first remark, microscopes for the second. Nothing, therefore, which can

be an object of the senses, is, considered on this basis, to be called sublime.

But because there is in our Imagination a striving towards infinite progress,

and in our Reason a claim for absolute totality, regarded as a real Idea,

therefore this very inadequateness for that Idea in our faculty for estimating

the magnitude of things of sense, excites in us the feeling of a supersensible

faculty. And it is not the object of sense, but the use which the Judgement

naturally makes of certain objects on behalf of this latter feeling, that is

absolutely great; and in comparison every other use is small. Consequently it

is the state of mind produced by a certain representation with which the

reflective Judgement is occupied, and not the Object, that is to be called

sublime.

              We may therefore append to the preceding formulas explaining the

sublime this other: the sublime is that, the mere ability to think which, shows

a faculty of the mind surpassing every standard of Sense.  § 26. Of that estimation of the magnitude of natural things which is

                      requisite for the Idea of the Sublime

 

 

              The estimation of magnitude by means of concepts of number (or

their signs in Algebra) is mathematical; but that in mere intuition (by the

measurement of the eye) is aesthetical. Now we can come by definite

concepts of how great a thing is, [only]1 by numbers, of which the unit is the

measure (at all events by series of numbers progressing to infinity); and so far

all logical estimation of magnitude is mathematical. But since the magnitude

of the measure must then be assumed known, and this again is only to be

estimated mathematically by means of numbers,— the unit of which must be

another [smaller] measure,— we can never have a first or fundamental

measure, and therefore can never have a definite concept of a given

magnitude. So the estimation of the magnitude of the fundamental measure

must consist in this, that we can immediately apprehend it in intuition and use

it by the Imagination for the presentation of concepts of number. That is, all

estimation of the magnitude of the objects of nature is in the end aesthetical

(i.e. subjectively and not objectively determined).

              Now for the mathematical estimation of magnitude there is, indeed,

no maximum (for the power of numbers extends to infinity); but for its

aesthetical estimation there is always a maximum, and of this I say that if it is

judged as the absolute measure than which no greater is possible subjectively

(for the judging subject), it brings with it the Idea of the sublime and

produces that emotion which no mathematical estimation of its magnitude by

means of numbers can bring about (except so far as the aesthetical

fundamental measure remains vividly in the Imagination). For the former

only presents relative magnitude by means of comparison with others of the

same kind; but the latter presents magnitude absolutely, so far as the mind

can grasp it in an intuition.

              In receiving a quantum into the Imagination by intuition, in order to

be able to use it for a measure or as a unit for the estimation of magnitude by

means of numbers, there are two operations of the Imagination involved:

apprehension (apprehensio ) and comprehension (comprehensio aesthetica ).As to apprehension there is no difficulty, for it can go on ad infinitum; but

comprehension becomes harder the further apprehension advances, and soon

attains to its maximum, viz. the aesthetically greatest fundamental measure

for the estimation of magnitude. For when apprehension has gone so far that

the partial representations of sensuous intuition at first apprehended begin to

vanish in the Imagination, whilst this ever proceeds to the apprehension of

others, then it loses as much on the one side as it gains on the other; and in

comprehension there is a maximum beyond which it cannot go.

              Hence can be explained what Savary 1 remarks in his account of

Egypt, viz. that we must keep from going very near the Pyramids just as

much as we keep from going too far from them, in order to get the full

emotional effect from their size. For if we are too far away, the parts to be

apprehended (the stones lying one over the other) are only obscurely

represented, and the representation of them produces no effect upon the

aesthetical judgement of the subject. But if we are very near, the eye requires

some time to complete the apprehension of the tiers from the bottom up to the

apex; and then the first tiers are always partly forgotten before the

Imagination has taken in the last, and so the comprehension of them is never

complete.— The same thing may sufficiently explain the bewilderment or, as

it were, perplexity which, it is said, seizes the spectator on his first entrance

into St. Peter’s at Rome. For there is here a feeling of the inadequacy of his

Imagination for presenting the Ideas of a whole, wherein the Imagination

reaches its maximum, and, in striving to surpass it, sinks back into itself, by

which, however, a kind of emotional satisfaction is produced.

              I do not wish to speak as yet of the ground of this satisfaction, which

is bound up with a representation from which we should least of all expect it,

viz. a representation which lets us remark its inadequacy and consequently its

subjective want of purposiveness for the Judgement in the estimation of

magnitude. I only remark that if the aesthetical judgement is pure (i.e.

mingled with no teleological judgement or judgement of Reason) and is to be

given as a completely suitable example of the Critique of the aesthetical

Judgement, we must not exhibit the sublime in products of art (e.g. buildings,

pillars, etc.) where human purpose determines the form as well as the size;

nor yet in things of nature the concepts of which bring with them a definite

purpose (e.g. animals with a known natural destination); but in rude nature

(and in this only in so far as it does not bring with it any charm or emotionproduced by actual danger) merely as containing magnitude. For in this kind

of representation nature contains nothing monstrous (either magnificent or

horrible); the magnitude that is apprehended may be increased as much as

you wish provided it can be comprehended in a whole by the Imagination. An

object is monstrous if by its size it destroys the purpose which constitutes the

concept of it. But the mere presentation of a concept is called colossal, which

is almost too great for any presentation (bordering on the relatively

monstrous); because the purpose of the presentation of a concept is made

harder [to realise] by the intuition of the object being almost too great for our

faculty of apprehension.— A pure judgement upon the sublime must,

however, have no purpose of the Object as its determining ground, if it is to

be aesthetical and not mixed up with any judgement of Understanding or

Reason.

              Because everything which is to give disinterested pleasure to the

merely reflective Judgement must bring with the representation of it,

subjective and, as subjective, universally valid purposiveness — although no

purposiveness of the form of the object lies (as in the case of the Beautiful) at

the ground of the judgement — the question arises “what is this subjective

purposiveness?” And how does it come to be prescribed as the norm by

which a ground for universally valid satisfaction is supplied in the mere

estimation of magnitude, even in that which is forced up to the point where

our faculty of Imagination is inadequate for the presentation of the concept of

magnitude?

              In the process of combination requisite for the estimation of

magnitude, the Imagination proceeds of itself to infinity without anything

hindering it; but the Understanding guides it by means of concepts of

number, for which the Imagination must furnish the schema. And in this

procedure, as belonging to the logical estimation of magnitude, there is

indeed something objectively purposive,— in accordance with the concept of

a purpose (as all measurement is),— but nothing purposive and pleasing for

the aesthetical Judgement. There is also in this designed purposiveness

nothing which would force us to push the magnitude of the measure, and

consequently the comprehension of the manifold in an intuition, to the

bounds of the faculty of Imagination, or as far as ever this can reach in its

presentations. For in the estimation of magnitude by the Understanding

(Arithmetic) we only go to a certain point whether we push thecomprehension of the units up to the number 10 (as in the decimal scale) or

only up to 4 (as in the quaternary scale); the further production of magnitude

proceeds by combination or, if the quantum is given in intuition, by

apprehension, but merely by way of progression (not of comprehension) in

accordance with an assumed principle of progression. In this mathematical

estimation of magnitude the Understanding is equally served and contented

whether the Imagination chooses for unit a magnitude that we can take in in a

glance, e.g. a foot or rod, or a German mile or even the earth’s diameter,— of

which the apprehension is indeed possible, but not the comprehension in an

intuition of the Imagination (not possible by comprehensio aesthetica,

although quite possible by comprehensio logica in a concept of number). In

both cases the logical estimation of magnitude goes on without hindrance to

infinity.

              But now the mind listens to the voice of Reason which, for every

given magnitude,— even for those that can never be entirely apprehended,

although (in sensible representation) they are judged as entirely given,—

requires totality. Reason consequently desires comprehension in one

intuition, and so the presentation of all these members of a progressively

increasing series. It does not even exempt the infinite (space and past time)

from this requirement; it rather renders it unavoidable to think the infinite (in

the judgement of common Reason) as entirely given (according to its

totality).

              But the infinite is absolutely (not merely comparatively) great.

Compared with it everything else (of the same kind of magnitudes) is small.

And what is most important is that to be able only to think it as a whole

indicates a faculty of mind which surpasses every standard of Sense. For [to

represent it sensibly] would require a comprehension having for unit a

standard bearing a definite relation, expressible in numbers, to the infinite;

which is impossible. Nevertheless, the bare capability of thinking this infinite

without contradiction requires in the human mind a faculty itself

supersensible. For it is only by means of this faculty and its Idea of a

noumenon,— which admits of no intuition, but which yet serves as the

substrate for the intuition of the world, as a mere phenomenon,— that the

infinite of the world of sense, in the pure intellectual estimation of magnitude,

can be completely comprehended under a concept, although in the

mathematical estimation of magnitude by means of concepts of number it cannever be completely thought. The faculty of being able to think the infinite of

supersensible intuition as given (in its intelligible substrate), surpasses every

standard of sensibility, and is great beyond all comparison even with the

faculty of mathematical estimation; not of course in a theoretical point of

view and on behalf of the cognitive faculty, but as an extension of the mind

which feels itself able in another (practical) point of view to go beyond the

limit of sensibility.

              Nature is therefore sublime in those of its phenomena, whose

intuition brings with it the Idea of their infinity. This last can only come by

the inadequacy of the greatest effort of our Imagination to estimate the

magnitude of an object. But now in mathematical estimation of magnitude

the Imagination is equal to providing a sufficient measure for every object;

because the numerical concepts of the Understanding, by means of

progression, can make any measure adequate to any given magnitude.

Therefore it must be the aesthetical estimation of magnitude in which it is felt

that the effort towards comprehension surpasses the power of the Imagination

to grasp in a whole of intuition the progressive apprehension; and at the same

time is perceived the inadequacy of this faculty, unbounded in its progress,

for grasping and using, for the estimation of magnitude, a fundamental

measure which could be made available by the Understanding with little

trouble. Now the proper unchangeable fundamental measure of nature is its

absolute whole; which, regarding nature as a phenomenon, would be infinity

comprehended. But since this fundamental measure is a self-contradictory

concept (on account of the impossibility of the absolute totality of an endless

progress), that magnitude of a natural Object, on which the Imagination

fruitlessly spends its whole faculty of comprehension, must carry our concept

of nature to a supersensible substrate (which lies at its basis and also at the

basis of our faculty of thought). As this, however, is great beyond all

standards of sense, it makes us judge as sublime, not so much the object, as

our own state of mind in the estimation of it.

              Therefore, just as the aesthetical Judgement in judging the Beautiful

refers the Imagination in its free play to the Understanding, in order to

harmonise it with the concepts of the latter in general (without any

determination of them); so does the same faculty when judging a thing as

Sublime refer itself to the Reason in order that it may subjectively be in

accordance with its Ideas (no matter what they are):— i.e. that it mayproduce a state of mind conformable to them and compatible with that

brought about by the influence of definite (practical) Ideas upon feeling.

              We hence see also that true sublimity must be sought only in the

mind of the [subject] judging, not in the natural Object, the judgement upon

which occasions this state. Who would call sublime, e.g. shapeless mountain

masses piled in wild disorder upon each other with their pyramids of ice, or

the gloomy raging sea? But the mind feels itself elevated in its own

judgement if, while contemplating them without any reference to their form,

and abandoning itself to the Imagination and to the Reason — which

although placed in combination with the Imagination without any definite

purpose, merely extends it — it yet finds the whole power of the Imagination

inadequate to its Ideas.

              Examples of the mathematically Sublime of nature in mere intuition

are all the cases in which we are given, not so much a larger numerical

concept as a large unit for the measure of the Imagination (for shortening the

numerical series). A tree, [the height of] which we estimate with reference to

the height of a man, at all events gives a standard for a mountain; and if this

were a mile high, it would serve as unit for the number expressive of the

earth’s diameter, so that the latter might be made intuitible. The earth’s

diameter [would supply a unit] for the known planetary system; this again for

the Milky Way; and the immeasurable number of milky way systems called

nebulae,— which presumably constitute a system of the same kind among

themselves — lets us expect no bounds here. Now the Sublime in the

aesthetical judging of an immeasurable whole like this lies not so much in the

greatness of the number [of units], as in the fact that in our progress we ever

arrive at yet greater units. To this the systematic division of the universe

contributes, which represents every magnitude in nature as small in its turn;

and represents our Imagination with its entire freedom from bounds, and with

it Nature, as a mere nothing in comparison with the Ideas of Reason, if it is

sought to furnish a presentation which shall be adequate to them.

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        1
               [Lettres sur l’Égypte, par M. Savary, Amsterdam, 1787.]  § 27. Of the quality of the satisfaction in our judgements upon the

                                        Sublime

 

 

              The feeling of our incapacity to attain to an Idea, which is a law for

us, is respect. Now the Idea of the comprehension of every phenomenon that

can be given us in the intuition of a whole, is an Idea prescribed to us by a

law of Reason, which recognises no other measure, definite, valid for every

one, and invariable, than the absolute whole. But our Imagination, even in its

greatest efforts, in respect of that comprehension, which we expect from it, of

a given object in a whole of intuition (and thus with reference to the

presentation of the Idea of Reason), exhibits its own limits and inadequacy;

although at the same time it shows that its destination is to make itself

adequate to this Idea regarded as a law. Therefore the feeling of the Sublime

in nature is respect for our own destination, which by a certain subreption we

attribute to an Object of nature (conversion of respect for the Idea of

humanity in our own subject into respect for the Object). This makes

intuitively evident the superiority of the rational determination of our

cognitive faculties to the greatest faculty of our Sensibility.

              The feeling of the Sublime is therefore a feeling of pain, arising from

the want of accordance between the aesthetical estimation of magnitude

formed by the Imagination and the estimation of the same formed by Reason.

There is at the same time a pleasure thus excited, arising from the

correspondence with rational Ideas of this very judgement of the inadequacy

of our greatest faculty of Sense; in so far as it is a law for us to strive after

these Ideas. In fact it is for us a law (of Reason), and belongs to our

destination, to estimate as small, in comparison with Ideas of Reason,

everything which nature, regarded as an object of Sense, contains that is great

for us; and that which arouses in us the feeling of this supersensible

destination agrees with that law. Now the greatest effort of the Imagination in

the presentation of the unit for the estimation of magnitude indicates a

reference to something absolutely great; and consequently a reference to the

law of Reason, which bids us take this alone as the supreme measure of

magnitude. Therefore the inner perception of the inadequacy of all sensible

standards for rational estimation of magnitude indicates a correspondencewith rational laws; it involves a pain, which arouses in us the feeling of our

supersensible destination, according to which it is purposive and therefore

pleasurable to find every standard of Sensibility inadequate to the Ideas of

Understanding.

              The mind feels itself moved in the representation of the Sublime in

nature; whilst in aesthetical judgements about the Beautiful it is in restful

contemplation. This movement may (especially in its beginnings) be

compared to a vibration, i.e. to a quickly alternating attraction towards, and

repulsion from, the same Object. The transcendent (towards which the

Imagination is impelled in its apprehension of intuition) is for the

Imagination like an abyss in which it fears to lose itself; but for the rational

Idea of the supersensible it is not transcendent but in conformity with law to

bring about such an effort of the Imagination, and consequently here there is

the same amount of attraction as there was of repulsion for the mere

Sensibility. But the judgement itself always remains in this case only

aesthetical, because — without having any determinate concept of the Object

at its basis — it merely represents the subjective play of the mental powers

(Imagination and Reason) as harmonious through their very contrast. For just

as Imagination and Understanding, in judging of the Beautiful, generate a

subjective purposiveness of the mental powers by means of their harmony, so

[here1 ] Imagination and Reason do so by means of their conflict. That is,

they bring about a feeling that we possess pure self-subsistent Reason, or a

faculty for the estimation of magnitude, whose pre-eminence can be made

intuitively evident only by the inadequacy of that faculty [Imagination] which

is itself unbounded in the presentation of magnitudes (of sensible objects).

              The measurement of a space (regarded as apprehension) is at the

same time a description of it, and thus an objective movement in the act of

Imagination and a progress. On the other hand, the comprehension of the

manifold in the unity,— not of thought but of intuition,— and consequently

the comprehension of the successively apprehended [elements] in one glance,

is a regress, which annihilates the condition of time in this progress of the

Imagination and makes coexistence intuitible.2 It is therefore (since the time-

series is a condition of the internal sense and of an intuition) a subjective

movement of the Imagination, by which it does violence to the internal sense;

this must be the more noticeable, the greater the quantum is which the

Imagination comprehends in one intuition. The effort, therefore, to receive inone single intuition a measure for magnitudes that requires an appreciable

time to apprehend, is a kind of representation, which, subjectively

considered, is contrary to purpose: but objectively, as requisite for the

estimation of magnitude, it is purposive. Thus that very violence which is

done to the subject through the Imagination is judged as purposive in

reference to the whole determination of the mind.

              The quality of the feeling of the Sublime is that it is a feeling of pain

in reference to the faculty by which we judge aesthetically of an object,

which pain, however, is represented at the same time as purposive. This is

possible through the fact that the very incapacity in question discovers the

consciousness of an unlimited faculty of the same subject, and that the mind

can only judge of the latter aesthetically by means of the former.

              In the logical estimation of magnitude the impossibility of ever

arriving at absolute totality, by means of the progress of the measurement of

things of the sensible world in time and space, was cognised as objective, i.e.

as an impossibility of thinking the infinite as entirely given; and not as merely

subjective or that there was only an incapacity to grasp it. For there we have

not to do with the degree of comprehension in an intuition, regarded as a

measure, but everything depends on a concept of number. But in aesthetical

estimation of magnitude the concept of number must disappear or be

changed, and the comprehension of the Imagination in reference to the unit of

measure (thus avoiding the concepts of a law of the successive production of

concepts of magnitude) is alone purposive for it.— If now a magnitude

almost reaches the limit of our faculty of comprehension in an intuition, and

yet the Imagination is invited by means of numerical magnitudes (in respect

of which we are conscious that our faculty is unbounded) to aesthetical

comprehension in a greater unit, then we mentally feel ourselves confined

aesthetically within bounds. But nevertheless the pain in regard to the

necessary extension of the Imagination for accordance with that which is

unbounded in our faculty of Reason, viz. the Idea of the absolute whole, and

consequently the very unpurposiveness of the faculty of Imagination for

rational Ideas and the arousing of them, are represented as purposive. Thus it

is that the aesthetical judgement itself is subjectively purposive for the

Reason as the source of Ideas, i.e. as the source of an intellectual

comprehension for which all aesthetical comprehension is small; and there

accompanies the reception of an object as sublime a pleasure, which is onlypossible through the medium of a pain.

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        2
               [With this should be compared the similar discussion in the

Critique of Pure Reason, Dialectic, bk. ii. c. ii. § 1 , On the System of

Cosmological Ideas. ]                B.— Of the Dynamically Sublime in Nature

 

 

                      § 28. Of Nature regarded as Might

 

 

              Might is that which is superior to great hindrances. It is called

dominion if it is superior to the resistance of that which itself possesses

might. Nature considered in an aesthetical judgement as might that has no

dominion over us, is dynamically sublime.

              If nature is to be judged by us as dynamically sublime, it must be

represented as exciting fear (although it is not true conversely that every

object which excites fear is regarded in our aesthetical judgement as

sublime). For in aesthetical judgements (without the aid of concepts)

superiority to hindrances can only be judged according to the greatness of the

resistance. Now that which we are driven to resist is an evil, and, if we do not

find our faculties a match for it, is an object of fear. Hence nature can be

regarded by the aesthetical Judgement as might, and consequently as

dynamically sublime, only so far as it is considered an object of fear.

              But we can regard an object as fearful, without being afraid of it; viz.

if we judge of it in such a way that we merely think a case in which we would

wish to resist it, and yet in which all resistance would be altogether vain.

Thus the virtuous man fears God without being afraid of Him; because to

wish to resist Him and His commandments, he thinks is a case as to which he

need not be anxious. But in every such case that he thinks as not impossible,

he cognises Him as fearful.

              He who fears can form no judgement about the Sublime in nature;

just as he who is seduced by inclination and appetite can form no judgement

about the Beautiful. The former flies from the sight of an object which

inspires him with awe; and it is impossible to find satisfaction in a terror that

is seriously felt. Hence the pleasurableness arising from the cessation of an

uneasiness is a state of joy. But this, on account of the deliverance from

danger [which is involved], is a state of joy conjoined with the resolve not toexpose ourselves to the danger again; we cannot willingly look back upon our

sensations [of danger], much less seek the occasion for them again.

              Bold, overhanging, and as it were threatening, rocks; clouds piled up

in the sky, moving with lightning flashes and thunder peals; volcanoes in all

their violence of destruction; hurricanes with their track of devastation; the

boundless ocean in a state of tumult; the lofty waterfall of a mighty river, and

such like; these exhibit our faculty of resistance as insignificantly small in

comparison with their might. But the sight of them is the more attractive, the

more fearful it is, provided only that we are in security; and we readily call

these objects sublime, because they raise the energies of the soul above their

accustomed height, and discover in us a faculty of resistance of a quite

different kind, which gives us courage to measure ourselves against the

apparent almightiness of nature.

              Now, in the immensity of nature, and in the inadequacy of our

faculties for adopting a standard proportionate to the aesthetical estimation of

the magnitude of its realm, we find our own limitation; although at the same

time in our rational faculty we find a different, non-sensuous standard, which

has that infinity itself under it as a unit, and in comparison with which

everything in nature is small. Thus in our mind we find a superiority to nature

even in its immensity. And so also the irresistibility of its might, while

making us recognise our own [physical1 ] impotence, considered as beings of

nature, discloses to us a faculty of judging independently of, and a superiority

over, nature; on which is based a kind of self-preservation, entirely different

from that which can be attacked and brought into danger by external nature.

Thus, humanity in our person remains unhumiliated, though the individual

might have to submit to this dominion. In this way nature is not judged to be

sublime in our aesthetical judgements, in so far as it excites fear; but because

it calls up that power in us (which is not nature) of regarding as small the

things about which we are solicitous (goods, health, and life), and of

regarding its might (to which we are no doubt subjected in respect of these

things), as nevertheless without any dominion over us and our personality to

which we must bow where our highest fundamental propositions, and their

assertion or abandonment, are concerned. Therefore nature is here called

sublime merely because it elevates the Imagination to a presentation of those

cases in which the mind can make felt the proper sublimity of its destination,

in comparison with nature itself.              This estimation of ourselves loses nothing through the fact that we

must regard ourselves as safe in order to feel this inspiriting satisfaction; and

that hence, as there is no seriousness in the danger, there might be also (as

might seem to be the case) just as little seriousness in the sublimity of our

spiritual faculty. For the satisfaction here concerns only the destination of our

faculty which discloses itself in such a case, so far as the tendency to this

destination lies in our nature, whilst its development and exercise remain

incumbent and obligatory. And in this there is truth, however conscious the

man may be of his present actual powerlessness, when he stretches his

reflection so far.

              No doubt this principle seems to be too farfetched and too subtly

reasoned, and consequently seems to go beyond the scope of an aesthetical

judgement; but observation of men proves the opposite, and shows that it

may lie at the root of the most ordinary judgements, although we are not

always conscious of it. For what is that which is, even to the savage, an

object of the greatest admiration? It is a man who shrinks from nothing, who

fears nothing, and therefore does not yield to danger, but rather goes to face it

vigorously with the fullest deliberation. Even in the most highly civilised

state this peculiar veneration for the soldier remains, though only under the

condition that he exhibit all the virtues of peace, gentleness, compassion, and

even a becoming care for his own person; because even by these it is

recognised that his mind is unsubdued by danger. Hence whatever disputes

there may be about the superiority of the respect which is to be accorded

them, in the comparison of a statesman and a general, the aesthetical

judgement decides for the latter. War itself, if it is carried on with order and

with a sacred respect for the rights of citizens, has something sublime in it,

and makes the disposition of the people who carry it on thus, only the more

sublime, the more numerous are the dangers to which they are exposed, and

in respect of which they behave with courage. On the other hand, a long

peace generally brings about a predominant commercial spirit, and along with

it, low selfishness, cowardice, and effeminacy, and debases the disposition of

the people.1

              It appears to conflict with this solution of the concept of the sublime,

so far as sublimity is ascribed to might, that we are accustomed to represent

God as presenting Himself in His wrath and yet in His sublimity, in the

tempest, the storm, the earthquake, etc.; and that it would be foolish andcriminal to imagine a superiority of our minds over these works of His, and,

as it seems, even over the designs of such might. Hence it would appear that

no feeling of the sublimity of our own nature, but rather subjection,

abasement, and a feeling of complete powerlessness, is a fitting state of mind

before the manifestation of such an object, and this is generally bound up

with the Idea of it during natural phenomena of this kind. Generally in

religion, prostration, adoration with bent head, with contrite, anxious

demeanour and voice, seems to be the only fitting behaviour in presence of

the Godhead; and hence most peoples have adopted and still observe it. But

this state of mind is far from being necessarily bound up with the Idea of the

sublimity of a religion and its object. The man who is actually afraid, because

he finds reasons for fear in himself, whilst conscious by his culpable

disposition of offending against a Might whose will is irresistible and at the

same time just, is not in the frame of mind for admiring the divine greatness.

For this a mood of calm contemplation and a quite free judgement are

needed. Only if he is conscious of an upright disposition pleasing to God do

those operations of might serve to awaken in him the Idea of the sublimity of

this Being, for then he recognises in himself a sublimity of disposition

conformable to His will; and thus he is raised above the fear of such

operations of nature, which he no longer regards as outbursts of His wrath.

Even humility, in the shape of a stern judgement upon his own faults,—

which otherwise, with a consciousness of good intentions, could be easily

palliated from the frailty of human nature,— is a sublime state of mind,

consisting in a voluntary subjection of himself to the pain of remorse, in

order that its causes may be gradually removed. In this way religion is

essentially distinguished from superstition. The latter establishes in the mind,

not reverence for the Sublime, but fear and apprehension of the all-powerful

Being to whose will the terrified man sees himself subject, without according

Him any high esteem. From this nothing can arise but a seeking of favour,

and flattery, instead of a religion which consists in a good life.1

              Sublimity, therefore, does not reside in anything of nature, but only

in our mind, in so far as we can become conscious that we are superior to

nature within, and therefore also to nature without us (so far as it influences

us). Everything that excites this feeling in us, e.g. the might of nature which

calls forth our forces, is called then (although improperly) sublime. Only by

supposing this Idea in ourselves, and in reference to it, are we capable of

attaining to the Idea of the sublimity of that Being, which produces respect inus, not merely by the might that it displays in nature, but rather by means of

the faculty which resides in us of judging it fearlessly and of regarding our

destination as sublime in respect of it.

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        1
               [Cf. § 83 , infra. ]

        1
               [In the Philosophical Theory of Religion, pt. i. sub fin. (Abbott’s

Translation, p. 360), Kant, as here, divides “all religions into two classes —

favour-seeking religion (mere worship) and moral religion, that is, the

religion of a good life; ” and he concludes that “amongst all the public

religions that have ever existed the Christian alone is moral.”]  § 29. Of the modality of the judgement upon the sublime in nature

 

 

              There are numberless beautiful things in nature about which we can

assume and even expect, without being far mistaken, the harmony of every

one’s judgement with our own. But in respect of our judgement upon the

sublime in nature, we cannot promise ourselves so easily the accordance of

others. For a far greater culture, as well of the aesthetical Judgement as of the

cognitive faculties which lie at its basis, seems requisite in order to be able to

pass judgement on this pre-eminent quality of natural objects.

              That the mind be attuned to feel the sublime postulates a

susceptibility of the mind for Ideas. For in the very inadequacy of nature to

these latter, and thus only by presupposing them and by straining the

Imagination to use nature as a schema for them, is to be found that which is

terrible to sensibility and yet is attractive. [It is attractive] because Reason

exerts a dominion over sensibility in order to extend it in conformity with its

own realm (the practical) and to make it look out into the Infinite, which is

for it an abyss. In fact, without development of moral Ideas, that which we,

prepared by culture, call sublime, presents itself to the uneducated man

merely as terrible. In the indications of the dominion of nature in destruction,

and in the great scale of its might, in comparison with which his own is a

vanishing quantity, he will only see the misery, danger, and distress which

surround the man who is exposed to it. So the good, and indeed intelligent,

Savoyard peasant (as Herr von Saussure 1 relates) unhesitatingly called all

lovers of snow-mountains fools. And who knows, whether he would have

been so completely wrong, if Saussure had undertaken the danger to which he

exposed himself merely, as most travellers do, from amateur curiosity, or that

he might be able to give a pathetic account of them? But his design was the

instruction of men; and this excellent man gave the readers of his Travels,

soul-stirring sensations such as he himself had, into the bargain.

              But although the judgement upon the Sublime in nature needs

culture (more than the judgement upon the Beautiful), it is not therefore

primarily produced by culture and introduced in a merely conventional way

into society. Rather has it root in human nature, even in that which, alike withcommon Understanding, we can impute to and expect of every one, viz. in

the tendency to the feeling for (practical) Ideas, i.e. to the moral feeling.

              Hereon is based the necessity of that agreement of the judgement of

others about the sublime with our own which we include in the latter. For just

as we charge with want of taste the man who is indifferent when passing

judgement upon an object of nature that we regard as beautiful; so we say of

him who remains unmoved in the presence of that which we judge to be

sublime, he has no feeling. But we claim both from every man, and we

presuppose them in him if he has any culture at all; only with the difference,

that we expect the former directly of every one, because in it the Judgement

refers the Imagination merely to the Understanding, the faculty of concepts;

but the latter, because in it the Imagination is related to the Reason, the

faculty of Ideas, only under a subjective presupposition (which, however, we

believe we are authorised in imputing to every one), viz. the presupposition

of the moral feeling [in man.1 ] Thus it is that we ascribe necessity to this

aesthetical judgement also.

              In this modality of aesthetical judgements, viz. in the necessity

claimed for them, lies an important moment of the Critique of Judgement.

For it enables us to recognise in them an a priori principle, and raises them

out of empirical psychology, in which otherwise they would remain buried

amongst the feelings of gratification and grief (only with the unmeaning

addition of being called finer feelings). Thus it enables us too to place the

Judgement among those faculties that have a priori principles at their basis,

and so to bring it into Transcendental Philosophy.

        1
               [Voyages dans les Alpes, par H. B. de Saussure; vol. i. was

published at Neuchatel in 1779; vol. ii. at Geneva in 1786.]

        1
               [Second Edition.]

 

 

   General Remark Upon the Exposition of the Aesthetical Reflective

                                      Judgement

 

 

              In reference to the feeling of pleasure an object is to be classified as

either pleasant, or beautiful, or sublime, or good (absolutely), (jucundum,

pulchrum, sublime, honestum ).

              The pleasant, as motive of desire, is always of one and the same

kind, no matter whence it comes and however specifically different the

representation (of sense, and sensation objectively considered) may be.

Hence in judging its influence on the mind, account is taken only of the

number of its charms (simultaneous and successive), and so only of the mass,

as it were, of the pleasant sensation; and this can be made intelligible only by

quantity. It has no reference to culture, but belongs to mere enjoyment.— On

the other hand, the beautiful requires the representation of a certain quality of

the Object, that can be made intelligible and reduced to concepts (although it

is not so reduced in an aesthetical judgement); and it cultivates us, in that it

teaches us to attend to the purposiveness in the feeling of pleasure.— The

sublime consists merely in the relation by which the sensible in the

representation of nature is judged available for a possible supersensible use.

— The absolutely good, subjectively judged according to the feeling that it

inspires (the Object of the moral feeling), as capable of determining the

powers of the subject through the representation of an absolutely compelling

law, is specially distinguished by the modality of a necessity that rests a

priori upon concepts. This necessity involves not merely a claim, but a

command for the assent of every one, and belongs in itself to the pure

intellectual, rather than to the aesthetical Judgement; and is by a determinant

and not a mere reflective judgement ascribed not to Nature but to Freedom.

But the determinability of the subject by means of this Idea, and especially of

a subject that can feel hindrances in sensibility, and at the same time its

superiority to them by their subjugation involving a modification of its state

— i.e. the moral feeling,— is yet so far cognate to the aesthetical Judgement

and its formal conditions that it can serve to represent the conformity to law

of action from duty as aesthetical, i.e. as sublime or even as beautiful, without

losing its purity. This would not be so, if we were to put it in naturalcombination with the feeling of the pleasant.

              If we take the result of the foregoing exposition of the two kinds of

aesthetical judgements, there arise therefrom the following short

explanations:

              The Beautiful is what pleases in the mere judgement (and therefore

not by the medium of sensation in accordance with a concept of the

Understanding). It follows at once from this that it must please apart from all

interest.

              The Sublime is what pleases immediately through its opposition to

the interest of sense.

              Both, as explanations of aesthetical universally valid judging, are

referred to subjective grounds; in the one case to grounds of sensibility, in

favour of the contemplative Understanding; in the other case in opposition to

sensibility, but on behalf of the purposes of practical Reason. Both, however,

united in the same subject, are purposive in reference to the moral feeling.

The Beautiful prepares us to love disinterestedly something, even nature

itself; the Sublime prepares us to esteem something highly even in opposition

to our own (sensible) interest.

              We may describe the Sublime thus: it is an object (of nature) the

representation of which determines the mind to think the unattainability of

nature regarded as a presentation of Ideas.

              Literally taken and logically considered, Ideas cannot be presented.

But if we extend our empirical representative faculty (mathematically or

dynamically) to the intuition of nature, Reason inevitably intervenes, as the

faculty expressing the independence of absolute totality,1 and generates the

effort of the mind, vain though it be, to make the representation of the senses

adequate to this. This effort,— and the feeling of the unattainability of the

Idea by means of the Imagination,— is itself a presentation of the subjective

purposiveness of our mind in the employment of the Imagination for its

supersensible destination; and forces us, subjectively, to think nature itself in

its totality as a presentation of something supersensible, without being able

objectively to arrive at this presentation.

              For we soon see that nature in space and time entirely lacks the

unconditioned, and, consequently, that absolute magnitude, which yet isdesired by the most ordinary Reason. It is by this that we are reminded that

we only have to do with nature as phenomenon, and that it must be regarded

as the mere presentation of a nature in itself (of which Reason has the Idea).

But this Idea of the supersensible, which we can no further determine,— so

that we cannot know but only think nature as its presentation,— is awakened

in us by means of an object, whose aesthetical appreciation strains the

Imagination to its utmost bounds, whether of extension (mathematical) or of

its might over the mind (dynamical). And this judgement is based upon a

feeling of the mind’s destination, which entirely surpasses the realm of the

former (i.e. upon the moral feeling), in respect of which the representation of

the object is judged as subjectively purposive.

              In fact, a feeling for the Sublime in nature cannot well be thought

without combining therewith a mental disposition which is akin to the Moral.

And although the immediate pleasure in the Beautiful of nature likewise

presupposes and cultivates a certain liberality in our mental attitude, i.e. a

satisfaction independent of mere sensible enjoyment, yet freedom is thus

represented as in play rather than in that law-directed occupation which is the

genuine characteristic of human morality, in which Reason must exercise

dominion over Sensibility. But in aesthetical judgements upon the Sublime

this dominion is represented as exercised by the Imagination, regarded as an

instrument of Reason.

              The satisfaction in the Sublime of nature is then only negative

(whilst that in the Beautiful is positive ); viz. a feeling that the Imagination is

depriving itself of its freedom, while it is purposively determined according

to a different law from that of its empirical employment. It thus acquires an

extension and a might greater than it sacrifices,— the ground of which,

however, is concealed from itself; whilst yet it feels the sacrifice or the

deprivation and, at the same time, the cause to which it is subjected.

Astonishment, that borders upon terror, the dread and the holy awe which

seizes the observer at the sight of mountain peaks rearing themselves to

heaven, deep chasms and streams raging therein, deep-shadowed solitudes

that dispose one to melancholy meditations — this, in the safety in which we

know ourselves to be, is not actual fear, but only an attempt to feel fear by the

aid of the Imagination; that we may feel the might of this faculty in

combining with the mind’s repose the mental movement thereby excited, and

being thus superior to internal nature,— and therefore to external,— so far asthis can have any influence on our feeling of well-being. For the Imagination

by the laws of Association makes our state of contentment dependent on

physical [causes]; but it also, by the principles of the Schematism of the

Judgement (being so far, therefore, ranked under freedom), is the instrument

of Reason and its Ideas, and, as such, has might to maintain our independence

of natural influences, to regard as small what in reference to them is great,

and so to place the absolutely great only in the proper destination of the

subject. The raising of this reflection of the aesthetical Judgement so as to be

adequate to Reason (though without a definite concept of Reason) represents

the object as subjectively purposive, even by the objective want of

accordance between the Imagination in its greatest extension and the Reason

(as the faculty of Ideas).

              We must here, generally, attend to what has been already noted, that

in the Transcendental Aesthetic of Judgement we must speak solely of pure

aesthetical judgements; consequently our examples are not to be taken from

such beautiful or sublime objects of Nature as presuppose the concept of a

purpose. For, if so, the purposiveness would be either teleological, or would

be based on mere sensations of an object (gratification or grief); and thus

would be in the former case not aesthetical, in the latter not merely formal. If

then we call the sight of the starry heaven sublime, we must not place at the

basis of our judgement concepts of worlds inhabited by rational beings, and

regard the bright points, with which we see the space above us filled, as their

suns moving in circles purposively fixed with reference to them; but we must

regard it, just as we see it, as a distant, all-embracing vault. Only under such a

representation can we range that sublimity which a pure aesthetical

judgement ascribes to this object. And in the same way, if we are to call the

sight of the ocean sublime, we must not think of it as we [ordinarily] do,

endowed as we are with all kinds of knowledge (not contained, however, in

the immediate intuition). For example, we sometimes think of the ocean as a

vast kingdom of aquatic creatures; or as the great source of those vapours that

fill the air with clouds for the benefit of the land; or again as an element

which, though dividing continents from each other, yet promotes the greatest

communication between them: but these furnish merely teleological

judgements. To call the ocean sublime we must regard it as poets do, merely

by what strikes the eye; if it is at rest, as a clear mirror of water only bounded

by the heaven; if it is restless, as an abyss threatening to overwhelm

everything. The like is to be said of the Sublime and Beautiful in the humanfigure. We must not regard as the determining grounds of our judgement the

concepts of the purposes which all our limbs serve, and we must not allow

this coincidence to influence our aesthetical judgement (for then it would no

longer be pure); although it is certainly a necessary condition of aesthetical

satisfaction that there should be no conflict between them. Aesthetical

purposiveness is the conformity to law of the Judgement in its freedom. The

satisfaction in the object depends on the relation in which we wish to place

the Imagination; always provided that it by itself entertains the mind in free

occupation. If, on the other hand, the judgement be determined by anything

else,— whether sensation or concept,— although it may be conformable to

law, it cannot be the act of a free Judgement.

              If then we speak of intellectual beauty or sublimity, these

expressions are, first, not quite accurate, because beauty and sublimity are

aesthetical modes of representation, which would not be found in us at all if

we were pure intelligences (or even regarded ourselves as such in thought).

Secondly, although both, as objects of an intellectual (moral) satisfaction, are

so far compatible with aesthetical satisfaction that they rest upon no interest,

yet they are difficult to unite with it, because they are meant to produce an

interest. This, if its presentation is to harmonise with the satisfaction in the

aesthetical judgement, could only arise by means of a sensible interest that

we combine with it in the presentation; and thus damage would be done to

the intellectual purposiveness, and it would lose its purity.

              The object of a pure and unconditioned intellectual satisfaction is the

Moral Law in that might which it exercises in us over all mental motives that

precede it. This might only makes itself aesthetically known to us through

sacrifices (which causing a feeling of deprivation, though on behalf of

internal freedom, in return discloses in us an unfathomable depth of this

supersensible faculty, with consequences extending beyond our ken); thus the

satisfaction on the aesthetical side (in relation to sensibility) is negative, i.e.

against this interest, but regarded from the intellectual side it is positive and

combined with an interest. Hence it follows that the intellectual, in itself

purposive, (moral) good, aesthetically judged, must be represented as sublime

rather than beautiful, so that it rather awakens the feeling of respect (which

disdains charm) than that of love and familiar inclination; for human nature

does not attach itself to this good spontaneously, but only by the authority

which Reason exercises over Sensibility. Conversely also, that which we callsublime in nature, whether external or internal (e.g. certain affections), is

only represented as a might in the mind to overcome [certain ]1 hindrances of

the Sensibility by means of moral fundamental propositions, and only thus

does it interest.

              I will dwell a moment on this latter point. The Idea of the Good

conjoined with affection is called enthusiasm. This state of mind seems to be

sublime, to the extent that we commonly assert that nothing great could be

done without it. Now every affection2 is blind, either in the choice of its

purpose, or, if this be supplied by Reason, in its accomplishment; for it is a

mental movement which makes it impossible to exercise a free deliberation

about fundamental propositions so as to determine ourselves thereby. It can

therefore in no way deserve the approval of the Reason. Nevertheless,

aesthetically, enthusiasm is sublime, because it is a tension of forces

produced by Ideas, which give an impulse to the mind, that operates far more

powerfully and lastingly than the impulse arising from sensible

representations. But (which seems strange) the absence of affection

(apatheia, phlegma in significatu bono ) in a mind that vigorously follows its

unalterable principles is sublime, and in a far preferable way, because it has

also on its side the satisfaction of pure Reason.1 It is only a mental state of

this kind that is called noble; and this expression is subsequently applied to

things, e.g. a building, a garment, literary style, bodily presence, etc., when

these do not so much arouse astonishment (the affection produced by the

representation of novelty exceeding our expectations), as admiration

(astonishment that does not cease when the novelty disappears); and this is

the case when Ideas agree in their presentation undesignedly and artlessly

with the aesthetical satisfaction.

              Every affection of the strenuous kind (viz. that excites the

consciousness of our power to overcome every obstacle — animi strenui ) is

aesthetically sublime, e.g. wrath, even despair (i.e. the despair of indignation,

not of faintheartedness ). But affections of the languid kind (which make the

very effort of resistance an object of pain — animum languidum ) have

nothing noble in themselves, but they may be reckoned under the sensuously

beautiful. Emotions, which may rise to the strength of affections, are very

different. We have both spirited and tender emotions. The latter, if they rise

to the height of affections, are worthless; the propensity to them is called

sentimentality. A sympathetic grief that will not admit of consolation, or onereferring to imaginary evils to which we deliberately surrender ourselves —

being deceived by fancy — as if they were actual, indicates and produces a

tender,2 though weak, soul — which shows a beautiful side and which can be

called fanciful, though not enthusiastic. Romances, lacrymose plays, shallow

moral precepts, which toy with (falsely) so-called moral dispositions, but in

fact make the heart languid, insensible to the severe precept of duty, and

incapable of all respect for the worth of humanity in our own person, and for

the rights of men (a very different thing from their happiness), and in general

incapable of all steady principle; even a religious discourse,1 which

recommends a cringing, abject seeking of favour and ingratiation of

ourselves, which proposes the abandonment of all confidence in our own

faculties in opposition to the evil within us, instead of a sturdy resolution to

endeavour to overcome our inclinations by means of those powers which

with all our frailty yet remain to us; that false humility which sets the only

way of pleasing the Supreme Being in self-depreciation, in whining

hypocritical repentance and in a mere passive state of mind — these are not

compatible with any frame of mind that can be counted beautiful, still less

with one which is to be counted sublime.

              But even stormy movements of mind which may be connected under

the name of edification with Ideas of religion, or — as merely belonging to

culture — with Ideas containing a social interest, can in no way, however

they strain the Imagination, lay claim to the honour of being sublime

presentations, unless they leave after them a mental mood which, although

only indirectly, has influence upon the mind’s consciousness of its strength,

and its resolution in reference to that which involves pure intellectual

purposiveness (the supersensible). For otherwise all these emotions belong

only to motion, which one would fain enjoy for the sake of health. The

pleasant exhaustion, consequent upon such disturbance produced by the play

of the affections, is an enjoyment of our well-being arising from the restored

equilibrium of the various vital forces. This in the end amounts to the same

thing as that state which Eastern voluptuaries find so delightful, when they

get their bodies as it were kneaded and all their muscles and joints softly

pressed and bent; only that in this case the motive principle is for the most

part external, in the other case it is altogether internal. Many a man believes

himself to be edified by a sermon, when indeed there is no edification at all

(no system of good maxims); or to be improved by a tragedy, when he is only

glad at his ennui being happily dispelled. So the Sublime must always havereference to the disposition, i.e. to the maxims which furnish to the

intellectual [part] and to the Ideas of Reason a superiority over sensibility.

              We need not fear that the feeling of the sublime will lose by so

abstract a mode of presentation,— which is quite negative in respect of what

is sensible,— for the Imagination, although it finds nothing beyond the

sensible to which it can attach itself, yet feels itself unbounded by this

removal of its limitations; and thus that very abstraction is a presentation of

the Infinite, which can be nothing but a mere negative presentation, but

which yet expands the soul. Perhaps there is no sublimer passage in the

Jewish Law than the command, Thou shalt not make to thyself any graven

image, nor the likeness of anything which is in heaven or on the earth or

under the earth, etc. This command alone can explain the enthusiasm that the

Jewish people in their moral period felt for their religion, when they

compared themselves with other peoples; or explain the pride which

Mahommedanism inspires. The same is true of the moral law and of the

tendency to morality in us. It is quite erroneous to fear that if we deprive this

[tendency] of all that can recommend it to sense it will only involve a cold

lifeless assent and no moving force or emotion. It is quite the other way, for

where the senses see nothing more before them, and the unmistakable and

indelible Idea of morality remains, it would be rather necessary to moderate

the impetus of an unbounded Imagination, to prevent it from rising to

enthusiasm, than through fear of the powerlessness of these Ideas to seek aid

for them in images and childish ritual. Thus governments have willingly

allowed religion to be abundantly provided with the latter accessories; and

seeking thereby to relieve their subjects of trouble, they have also sought to

deprive them of the faculty of extending their spiritual powers beyond the

limits that are arbitrarily assigned to them, and by means of which they can

be the more easily treated as mere passive1 beings.

              This pure, elevating, merely negative presentation of morality brings

with it, on the other hand, no danger of fanaticism, which is a delusion that

we can will ourselves to see something beyond all bounds of sensibility, i.e. to

dream in accordance with fundamental propositions (or to go mad with

Reason); and this is so just because this presentation is merely negative. For

the inscrutableness of the Idea of Freedom quite cuts it off from any positive

presentation; but the moral law is in itself sufficiently and originally

determinant in us, so that it does not permit us to cast a glance at any groundof determination external to itself. If enthusiasm is comparable to madness,

fanaticism is comparable to monomania; of which the latter is least of all

compatible with the sublime, because in its detail it is ridiculous. In

enthusiasm, regarded as an affection, the Imagination is without bridle; in

fanaticism, regarded as an inveterate, brooding passion, it is without rule. The

first is a transitory accident which sometimes befalls the soundest

Understanding; the second is a disease which unsettles it.

              Simplicity (purposiveness without art) is as it were the style of

Nature in the sublime, and so also of Morality which is a second

(supersensible) nature; of which we only know the laws without being able to

reach by intuition that supersensible faculty in ourselves which contains the

ground of the legislation.

              Now the satisfaction in the Beautiful, like that in the Sublime, is not

alone distinguishable from other aesthetical judgements by its universal

communicability, but also because, through this very property, it acquires an

interest in reference to society (in which this communication is possible). We

must, however, remark that separation from all society is regarded as

sublime, if it rests upon Ideas that overlook all sensible interest. To be

sufficient for oneself, and consequently to have no need of society, without at

the same time being unsociable, i.e. without flying from it, is something

bordering on the sublime; as is any dispensing with wants. On the other hand,

to fly from men from misanthropy, because we bear ill-will to them, or from

anthropophoby (shyness), because we fear them as foes, is partly hateful,

partly contemptible. There is indeed a misanthropy (very improperly so-

called), the tendency to which frequently appears with old age in many right-

thinking men; which is philanthropic enough as far as goodwill to men is

concerned, but which through long and sad experience is far removed from

satisfaction with men. Evidence of this is afforded by the propensity to

solitude, the fantastic wish for a secluded country seat, or (in the case of

young persons) by the dream of the happiness of passing one’s life with a

little family upon some island unknown to the rest of the world; a dream of

which story-tellers or writers of Robinsonades know how to make good use.

Falsehood, ingratitude, injustice, the childishness of the purposes regarded by

ourselves as important and great, in the pursuit of which men inflict upon

each other all imaginable evils, are so contradictory to the Idea of what men

might be if they would, and conflict so with our lively wish to see thembetter, that, in order that we may not hate them (since we cannot love them),

the renunciation of all social joys seems but a small sacrifice. This sadness —

not the sadness (of which sympathy is the cause) for the evils which fate

brings upon others,— but for those things which men do to one another

(which depends upon an antipathy in fundamental propositions), is sublime,

because it rests upon Ideas, whilst the former can only count as beautiful.—

The brilliant and thorough Saussure, 1 in his account of his Alpine travels,

says of one of the Savoy mountains, called Bonhomme, “There reigns there a

certain insipid sadness. ” He therefore recognised an interesting sadness, that

the sight of a solitude might inspire, to which men might wish to transport

themselves that they might neither hear nor experience any more of the

world; which, however, would not be quite so inhospitable that it would offer

only an extremely painful retreat.— I make this remark solely with the design

of indicating again that even depression (not dejected sadness) may be

counted among the sturdy affections, if it has its ground in moral Ideas. But if

it is grounded on sympathy and, as such, is amiable, it belongs merely to the

languid affections. [I make this remark] to call attention to the state of mind

which is sublime only in the first case.

              We can now compare the above Transcendental Exposition of

aesthetical judgements with the Physiological worked out by Burke and by

many clear-headed men among us, in order to see whither a merely empirical

exposition of the Sublime and Beautiful leads. Burke, who deserves to be

regarded as the most important author who adopts this mode of treatment,

infers by this method “that the feeling of the Sublime rests on the impulse

towards self-preservation and on fear, i.e. on a pain, which not going so far as

actually to derange the parts of the body, produces movements which, since

they purify the finer or grosser vessels of dangerous or troublesome

stoppages, are capable of exciting pleasant sensations; not indeed pleasure,

but a kind of satisfying horror, a certain tranquillity tinged with terror.”1 The

Beautiful, which he founded on love (which he wishes to keep quite separate

from desire), he reduces to “the relaxing, slackening, and enervating of the

fibres of the body, and a consequent weakening, languor, and exhaustion, a

fainting, dissolving, and melting away for enjoyment.”1 And he confirms this

explanation not only by cases in which the Imagination in combination with

the Understanding can excite in us the feeling of the Beautiful or of the

Sublime, but by cases in which it is combined with sensation.— As

psychological observations, these analyses of the phenomena of our mind areexceedingly beautiful, and afford rich material for the favourite investigations

of empirical anthropology. It is also not to be denied that all representations

in us, whether, objectively viewed, they are merely sensible or are quite

intellectual, may yet subjectively be united to gratification or grief, however

imperceptible either may be; because they all affect the feeling of life, and

none of them, so far as it is a modification of the subject, can be indifferent.

And so, as Epicurus maintained, all gratification or grief may ultimately be

corporeal, whether it arises from the representations of the Imagination or the

Understanding; because life without a feeling of bodily organs would be

merely a consciousness of existence, without any feeling of well-being or the

reverse, i.e. of the furthering or the checking of the vital powers. For the

mind is by itself alone life (the principle of life), and hindrances or

furtherances must be sought outside it and yet in the man, consequently in

union with his body.

              If, however, we place the satisfaction in the object altogether in the

fact that it gratifies us by charm or emotion, we must not assume that any

other man agrees with the aesthetical judgement which we pass; for as to

these each one rightly consults his own individual sensibility. But in that case

all censorship of taste would disappear, except indeed the example afforded

by the accidental agreement of others in their judgements were regarded as

commanding our assent; and this principle we should probably resist, and

should appeal to the natural right of subjecting the judgement, which rests on

the immediate feeling of our own well-being, to our own sense and not to that

of any other man.

              If then the judgement of taste is not to be valid merely egoistically,

but according to its inner nature,— i.e. on account of itself and not on

account of the examples that others give of their taste,— to be necessarily

valid pluralistically, if we regard it as a judgement which may exact the

adhesion of every one; then there must lie at its basis some a priori principle

(whether objective or subjective) to which we can never attain by seeking out

the empirical laws of mental changes. For these only enable us to know how

we judge, but do not prescribe to us how we ought to judge. They do not

supply an unconditioned command,1 such as judgements of taste presuppose,

inasmuch as they require that the satisfaction be immediately connected with

the representation. Thus the empirical exposition of aesthetical judgements

may be a beginning of a collection of materials for a higher investigation; buta transcendental discussion of this faculty is also possible, and is an essential

part of the Critique of Taste. For if it had not a priori principles, it could not

possibly pass sentence on the judgements of others, and it could not approve

or blame them with any appearance of right.

              The remaining part of the Analytic of the Aesthetical Judgement

contains first the

        1
               [Als Vermögen der Independenz der absoluten Totalität, a curious

phrase.]

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        2
               Affections are specifically different from passions. The former are

related merely to feeling; the latter belong to the faculty of desire, and are

inclinations which render difficult or impossible all determination of the

[elective] will by principles. The former are stormy and unpremeditated; the

latter are steady and deliberate; thus indignation in the form of wrath is an

affection, but in the form of hatred (revenge) is a passion. The latter can

never and in no reference be called sublime; because while in an affection the

freedom of the mind is hindered, in a passion it is abolished. [Cf. Preface to

the Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, § xvi. , where this distinction is more

fully drawn out. Affection is described as hasty; and passion is defined as the

sensible appetite grown into a permanent inclination.]

        1
               [In the Preface to the Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, § xvii. ,

Kant gives the term moral apathy to that freedom from the sway of the

affections, which is distinguished from indifference to them.]

        2
               [Reading weiche with Rosenkranz and Windelband; Hartenstein

and Kirchmann have weise, which yields no sense.]

        1
               [Cf. p. 129 supra.]

        1
               [Kirchmann has positiv; but this is probably a mere misprint.]

        1
               [L.c. vol. ii. p. 181.]

        1
               [See Burke, On the Sublime and Beautiful, Part IV., Sect. vii. “If

the pain and terror are so modified as not to be actually noxious; if the pain is

not carried to violence, and the terror is not conversant about the present

destruction of the person, as these emotions clear the parts, whether fine or

gross, of a dangerous and troublesome incumbrance, they are capable ofproducing delight; not pleasure, but a sort of delightful horror, a sort of

tranquillity tinged with terror; which, as it belongs to self-preservation, is one

of the strongest of all the passions.” Kant quotes from the German version

published at Riga in 1773. This was a free translation made from Burke’s

fifth edition.]

        1
               [See Burke, l.c., Part IV., Sect. xix. “Beauty acts by relaxing the

solids of the whole system. There are all the appearances of such a relaxation;

and a relaxation somewhat below the natural tone seems to me to be the

cause of all positive pleasure. Who is a stranger to that manner of expression

so common in all times and in all countries, of being softened, relaxed,

enervated, dissolved, melted away by pleasure?”]

        1
               [Reading Gebot; Kirchmann has Gesetz. ]

 

 

                 Deduction of [Pure]1 Aesthetical Judgements

 

 

§ 30. The Deduction of aesthetical judgements on the objects of nature

must not be directed to what we call Sublime in nature, but only to the

                                        Beautiful.

 

 

              The claim of an aesthetical judgement to universal validity for every

subject requires, as a judgement resting on some a priori principle, a

Deduction (or legitimatising of its pretensions) in addition to its Exposition;

if it is concerned with satisfaction or dissatisfaction in the form of the Object.

Of this kind are judgements of taste about the Beautiful in Nature. For in that

case the purposiveness has its ground in the Object and in its figure, although

it does not indicate the reference of this to other objects according to concepts

(for a cognitive judgement), but merely has to do in general with the

apprehension of this form, so far as it shows itself conformable in the mind to

the faculty of concepts and to that of their presentation (which is identical

with that of apprehension). We can thus, in respect of the Beautiful in nature,

suggest many questions touching the cause of this purposiveness of their

forms, e.g. to explain why nature has scattered abroad beauty with such

profusion, even in the depth of the ocean, where the human eye (for which

alone that purposiveness exists) but seldom penetrates.

              But the Sublime in nature — if we are passing upon it a pure

aesthetical judgement, not mixed up with any concepts of perfection or

objective purposiveness, in which case it would be a teleological judgement

— may be regarded as quite formless or devoid of figure, and yet as the

object of a pure satisfaction; and it may display a subjective purposiveness in

the given representation. And we ask if, for an aesthetical judgement of this

kind,— over and above the Exposition of what is thought in it,— a Deduction

also of its claim to any (subjective) a priori principle may be demanded?

              To which we may answer that the Sublime in nature is improperly so

called, and that properly speaking the word should only be applied to a state

of mind, or rather to its foundation in human nature. The apprehension of anotherwise formless and unpurposive object gives merely the occasion,

through which we become conscious of such a state; the object is thus

employed as subjectively purposive, but is not judged as such in itself and on

account of its form (it is, as it were, a species finalis accepta, non data ).

Hence our Exposition of judgements concerning the Sublime in nature was at

the same time their Deduction. For when we analysed the reflection of the

Judgement in such acts, we found in them a purposive relation of the

cognitive faculties, which must be ascribed ultimately to the faculty of

purposes (the will), and hence is itself purposive a priori. This then

immediately involves the Deduction, i.e. the justification of the claim of such

a judgement to universal and necessary validity.

              We shall therefore only have to seek for the deduction of judgements

of Taste, i.e. of judgements about the Beauty of natural things; we shall thus

treat satisfactorily the problem with which the whole faculty of aesthetical

Judgement is concerned.

        1
               [Second Edition.]        § 31. Of the method of deduction of judgements of Taste

 

 

              A Deduction, i.e. the guarantee of the legitimacy of a class of

judgements, is only obligatory if the judgement lays claim to necessity. This

it does, if it demands even subjective universality or the agreement of every

one, although it is not a judgement of cognition but only one of pleasure or

pain in a given object; i.e. it assumes a subjective purposiveness thoroughly

valid for every one, which must not be based on any concept of the thing,

because the judgement is one of taste.

              We have before us in the latter case no cognitive judgement —

neither a theoretical one based on the concept of a Nature in general formed

by the Understanding, nor a (pure) practical one based on the Idea of

Freedom, as given a priori by Reason. Therefore we have to justify a priori

the validity neither of a judgement which represents what a thing is, nor of

one which prescribes that I ought to do something in order to produce it. We

have merely to prove for the Judgement generally the universal validity of a

singular judgement that expresses the subjective purposiveness of an

empirical representation of the form of an object; in order to explain how it is

possible that a thing can please in the mere act of judging it (without

sensation or concept), and how the satisfaction of one man can be proclaimed

as a rule for every other; just as the act of judging of an object for the sake of

a cognition in general has universal rules.

              If now this universal validity is not to be based on any collecting of

the suffrages of others, or on any questioning of them as to the kind of

sensations they have, but is to rest, as it were, on an autonomy of the judging

subject in respect of the feeling of pleasure (in the given representation), i.e.

on his own taste, and yet is not to be derived from concepts; then a judgement

like this — such as the judgement of taste is, in fact — has a twofold logical

peculiarity. First, there is its a priori universal validity, which is not a logical

universality in accordance with concepts, but the universality of a singular

judgement. Secondly, it has a necessity (which must always rest on a priori

grounds), which however does not depend on any a priori grounds of proof,

through the representation of which the assent that every one concedes to thejudgement of taste could be exacted.

              The solution of these logical peculiarities, wherein a judgement of

taste is different from all cognitive judgements — if we at the outset abstract

from all content, viz. from the feeling of pleasure, and merely compare the

aesthetical form with the form of objective judgements as logic prescribes it

— is sufficient by itself for the deduction of this singular faculty. We shall

then represent and elucidate by examples these characteristic properties of

taste.              § 32. First peculiarity of the judgement of Taste

 

 

              The judgement of taste determines its object in respect of

satisfaction (in its beauty) with an accompanying claim for the assent of every

one, just as if it were objective.

              To say that “this flower is beautiful” is the same as to assert its

proper claim to satisfy every one. By the pleasantness of its smell it has no

such claim. A smell which one man enjoys gives another a headache. Now

what are we to presume from this except that beauty is to be regarded as a

property of the flower itself, which does not accommodate itself to any

diversity of persons or of their sensitive organs, but to which these must

accommodate themselves if they are to pass any judgement upon it? And yet

this is not so. For a judgement of taste consists in calling a thing beautiful just

because of that characteristic in respect of which it accommodates itself to

our mode of apprehension.

              Moreover, it is required of every judgement which is to prove the

taste of the subject, that the subject shall judge by himself, without needing to

grope about empirically among the judgements of others, and acquaint

himself previously as to their satisfaction or dissatisfaction with the same

object; thus his judgement should be pronounced a priori, and not be a mere

imitation because the thing actually gives universal pleasure. One would

think, however, that an a priori judgement must contain a concept of the

Object, for the cognition of which it contains the principle; but the judgement

of taste is not based upon concepts at all, and is in general not a cognitive but

an aesthetical judgement.

              Thus a young poet does not permit himself to be dissuaded from his

conviction that his poem is beautiful, by the judgement of the public or of his

friends; and if he gives ear to them he does so, not because he now judges

differently, but because, although (in regard to him) the whole public has

false taste, in his desire for applause he finds reason for accommodating

himself to the common error (even against his judgement). It is only at a later

time, when his Judgement has been sharpened by exercise, that he voluntarily

departs from his former judgements; just as he proceeds with those of hisjudgements which rest upon Reason. Taste [merely]1 claims autonomy. To

make the judgements of others the determining grounds of his own would be

heteronomy.

              That we, and rightly, recommend the works of the ancients as

models and call their authors classical, thus forming among writers a kind of

noble class who give laws to the people by their example, seems to indicate a

posteriori sources of taste, and to contradict the autonomy of taste in every

subject. But we might just as well say that the old mathematicians,— who are

regarded up to the present day as supplying models not easily to be dispensed

with for the supreme profundity and elegance of their synthetical methods,—

prove that our Reason is only imitative, and that we have not the faculty of

producing from it in combination with intuition rigid proofs by means of the

construction of concepts.2 There is no use of our powers, however free, no

use of Reason itself (which must create all its judgements a priori from

common sources) which would not give rise to faulty attempts, if every

subject had always to begin anew from the rude basis of his natural state, and

if others had not preceded him with their attempts. Not that these make mere

imitators of those who come after them, but rather by their procedure they put

others on the track of seeking in themselves principles and so of pursuing

their own course, often a better one. Even in religion — where certainly

every one has to derive the rule of his conduct from himself, because he

remains responsible for it and cannot shift the blame of his transgressions

upon others, whether his teachers or his predecessors — there is never as

much accomplished by means of universal precepts, either obtained from

priests or philosophers or got from oneself, as by means of an example of

virtue or holiness which, exhibited in history, does not dispense with the

autonomy of virtue based on the proper and original Idea of morality (a priori

), or change it into a mechanical imitation. Following, involving something

precedent, not “imitation,” is the right expression for all influence that the

products of an exemplary author may have upon others. And this only means

that we draw from the same sources as our predecessor did, and learn from

him only the way to avail ourselves of them. But of all faculties and talents

Taste, because its judgement is not determinable by concepts and precepts, is

just that one which most needs examples of what has in the progress of

culture received the longest approval; that it may not become again

uncivilised and return to the crudeness of its first essays.        1
               [Second Edition.]

        2
               [Cf. Critique of Pure Reason, Methodology, c. 1, § 1 . “The

construction of a concept is the a priori presentation of the corresponding

intuition.”]            § 33. Second peculiarity of the judgement of Taste

 

 

              The judgement of taste is not determinable by grounds of proof, just

as if it were merely subjective.

              If a man, in the first place, does not find a building, a prospect, or a

poem beautiful, a hundred voices all highly praising it will not force his

inmost agreement. He may indeed feign that it pleases him in order that he

may not be regarded as devoid of taste; he may even begin to doubt whether

he has formed his taste on a knowledge of a sufficient number of objects of a

certain kind (just as one, who believes that he recognises in the distance as a

forest, something which all others regard as a town, doubts the judgement of

his own sight). But he clearly sees that the agreement of others gives no valid

proof of the judgement about beauty. Others might perhaps see and observe

for him; and what many have seen in one way, although he believes that he

has seen it differently, might serve him as an adequate ground of proof of a

theoretical and consequently logical judgement. But that a thing has pleased

others could never serve as the basis of an aesthetical judgement. A

judgement of others which is unfavourable to ours may indeed rightly make

us scrutinise our own with care, but it can never convince us of its

incorrectness. There is therefore no empirical ground of proof which would

force a judgement of taste upon any one.

              Still less, in the second place, can an a priori proof determine

according to definite rules a judgement about beauty. If a man reads me a

poem of his or brings me to a play, which does not after all suit my taste, he

may bring forward in proof of the beauty of his poem Batteux 1 or Lessing or

still more ancient and famous critics of taste, and all the rules laid down by

them; certain passages which displease me may agree very well with rules of

beauty (as they have been put forth by these writers and are universally

recognised): but I stop my ears, I will listen to no arguments and no

reasoning; and I will rather assume that these rules of the critics are false, or

at least that they do not apply to the case in question, than admit that my

judgement should be determined by grounds of proof a priori. For it is to be a

judgement of Taste and not of Understanding or Reason.              It seems that this is one of the chief reasons why this aesthetical

faculty of judgement has been given the name of Taste. For though a man

enumerate to me all the ingredients of a dish, and remark that each is

separately pleasant to me and further extol with justice the wholesomeness of

this particular food — yet am I deaf to all these reasons; I try the dish with

my tongue and my palate, and thereafter (and not according to universal

principles) do I pass my judgement.

              In fact the judgement of Taste always takes the form of a singular

judgement about an Object. The Understanding can form a universal

judgement by comparing the Object in point of the satisfaction it affords with

the judgement of others upon it: e.g. “all tulips are beautiful.” But then this is

not a judgement of taste but a logical judgement, which takes the relation of

an Object to taste as the predicate of things of a certain species. That

judgement, however, in which I find an individual given tulip beautiful, i.e. in

which I find my satisfaction in it to be universally valid, is alone a judgement

of taste. Its peculiarity consists in the fact that, although it has merely

subjective validity, it claims the assent of all subjects, exactly as it would do

if it were an objective judgement resting on grounds of knowledge, that could

be established by a proof.

        1
               [Charles Batteux (1713–1780), author of Les Beaux Arts reduits à

un même principe. ]          § 34. There is no objective principle of Taste possible

 

 

              By a principle of taste I mean a principle under the condition of

which we could subsume the concept of an object and thus infer by means of

a syllogism that the object is beautiful. But that is absolutely impossible. For

I must feel the pleasure immediately in the representation of the object, and

of that I can be persuaded by no grounds of proof whatever. Although, as

Hume says,1 all critics can reason more plausibly than cooks, yet the same

fate awaits them. They cannot expect the determining ground of their

judgement [to be derived] from the force of the proofs, but only from the

reflection of the subject upon its own proper state (of pleasure or pain), all

precepts and rules being rejected.

              But although critics can and ought to pursue their reasonings so that

our judgements of taste may be corrected and extended, it is not with a view

to set forth the determining ground of this kind of aesthetical judgements in a

universally applicable formula, which is impossible; but rather to investigate

the cognitive faculties and their exercise in these judgements, and to explain

by examples the reciprocal subjective purposiveness, the form of which, as

has been shown above, in a given representation, constitutes the beauty of the

object. Therefore the Critique of Taste is only subjective as regards the

representation through which an Object is given to us; viz. it is the art or

science of reducing to rules the reciprocal relation between the Understanding

and the Imagination in the given representation (without reference to any

preceding sensation or concept). That is, it is the art or science of reducing to

rules their accordance or discordance, and of determining them with regard to

their conditions. it is an art, if it only shows this by examples; it is a science

if it derives the possibility of such judgements from the nature of these

faculties, as cognitive faculties in general. We have here, in Transcendental

Criticism, only to do with the latter. It should develop and justify the

subjective principle of taste, as an a priori principle of the Judgement. This

Critique, as an art, merely seeks to apply, in the judging of objects, the

physiological (here psychological), and therefore empirical rules, according

to which taste actually proceeds (without taking any account of their

possibility); and it criticises the products of beautiful art just as, regarded as ascience, it criticises the faculty by which they are judged.

        1
               [Essay XVIII, The Sceptic. “Critics can reason and dispute more

plausibly than cooks or perfumers. We may observe, however, that this

uniformity among human kind, hinders not, but that there is a considerable

diversity in the sentiments of beauty and worth, and that education, custom,

prejudice, caprice, and humour, frequently vary our taste of this kind. . . .

Beauty and worth are merely of a relative nature, and consist in an agreeable

sentiment, produced by an object in a particular mind, according to the

peculiar structure and constitution of that mind.”]§ 35. The principle of Taste is the subjective principle of Judgement in

                                        general

 

 

              The judgement of taste is distinguished from a logical judgement in

this, that the latter subsumes a representation under the concept of the Object,

while the former does not subsume it under any concept; because otherwise

the necessary universal agreement [in these judgements] would be capable of

being enforced by proofs. Nevertheless it is like the latter in this, that it

claims universality and necessity, though not according to concepts of the

Object, and consequently a merely subjective necessity. Now, because the

concepts in a judgement constitute its content (what belongs to the cognition

of the Object), but the judgement of taste is not determinable by concepts, it

is based only on the subjective formal condition of a judgement in general.

The subjective condition of all judgements is the faculty of Judgement itself.

This when used with reference to a representation by which an object is

given, requires the accordance of two representative powers: viz. Imagination

(for the intuition and comprehension of the manifold) and Understanding (for

the concept as a representation of the unity of this comprehension). Now

because no concept of the Object lies here at the basis of the judgement, it

can only consist in the subsumption of the Imagination itself (in the case of a

representation by which an object is given) under the conditions that the

Understanding requires to pass from intuition to concepts. That is, because

the freedom of the Imagination consists in the fact that it schematises without

any concept, the judgement of taste must rest on a mere sensation of the

reciprocal activity of the Imagination in its freedom and the Understanding

with its conformity to law. It must therefore rest on a feeling, which makes us

judge the object by the purposiveness of the representation (by which an

object is given) in respect of the furtherance of the cognitive faculty in its free

play. Taste, then, as subjective Judgement, contains a principle of

subsumption, not of intuitions under concepts, but of the faculty of intuitions

or presentations (i.e. the Imagination) under the faculty of the concepts (i.e.

the Understanding); so far as the former in its freedom harmonises with the

latter in its conformity to law.

              In order to discover this ground of legitimacy by a Deduction of thejudgements of taste we can only take as a clue the formal peculiarities of this

kind of judgements, and consequently can only consider their logical form.      § 36. Of the problem of a Deduction of judgements of Taste

 

 

              The concept of an Object in general can immediately be combined

with the perception of an object, containing its empirical predicates, so as to

form a cognitive judgement; and it is thus that a judgement of experience is

produced.1 At the basis of this lie a priori concepts of the synthetical unity of

the manifold of intuition, by which the manifold is thought as the

determination of an Object. These concepts (the Categories) require a

Deduction, which is given in the Critique of pure Reason; and by it we can

get the solution of the problem, how are synthetical a priori cognitive

judgements possible? This problem concerns then the a priori principles of

the pure Understanding and its theoretical judgements.

              But with a perception there can also be combined a feeling of

pleasure (or pain) and a satisfaction, that accompanies the representation of

the Object and serves instead of its predicate; thus there can result an

aesthetical non-cognitive judgement. At the basis of such a judgement — if it

is not a mere judgement of sensation but a formal judgement of reflection,

which imputes the same satisfaction necessarily to every one,— must lie

some a priori principle; which may be merely subjective (if an objective one

should prove impossible for judgements of this kind), but also as such may

need a Deduction, that we may thereby comprehend how an aesthetical

judgement can lay claim to necessity. On this is founded the problem with

which we are now occupied, how are judgements of taste possible? This

problem then has to do with the a priori principles of the pure faculty of

Judgement in aesthetical judgements; i.e. judgements in which it has not (as

in theoretical ones) merely to subsume under objective concepts of

Understanding, and in which it is subject to a law, but in which it is, itself,

subjectively, both object and law.

              This problem then may be thus represented: how is a judgement

possible, in which merely from our own feeling of pleasure in an object,

independently of its concept, we judge that this pleasure attaches to the

representation of the same Object in every other subject, and that a priori

without waiting for the accordance of others?              It is easy to see that judgements of taste are synthetical, because they

go beyond the concept and even beyond the intuition of the Object, and add

to that intuition as predicate something that is not a cognition, viz. a feeling

of pleasure (or pain). Although the predicate (of the personal pleasure bound

up with the representation) is empirical, nevertheless, as concerns the

required assent of every one the judgements are a priori, or desire to be

regarded as such; and this is already involved in the expressions of this claim.

Thus this problem of the Critique of Judgement belongs to the general

problem of transcendental philosophy, how are synthetical a priori

judgements possible?

        1
               [For the distinction, an important one in Kant, between judgements

of experience and judgements of perception, see his Prolegomena, § 18 . Cf.

Kant’s Critical Philosophy for English Readers, vol. i. p. 116.]§ 37. What is properly asserted a priori of an object in a judgement of

                                          Taste

 

 

              That the representation of an object is immediately bound up with

pleasure can only be internally perceived, and if we did not wish to indicate

anything more than this it would give a merely empirical judgement. For I

cannot combine a definite feeling (of pleasure or pain) with any

representation except where there is at bottom an a priori principle in the

Reason determining the Will. In that case the pleasure (in the moral feeling)

is the consequence of the principle, but cannot be compared with the pleasure

in taste, because it requires a definite concept of a law; and the latter pleasure,

on the contrary, must be bound up with the mere act of judging, prior to all

concepts. Hence also all judgements of taste are singular judgements, because

they do not combine their predicate of satisfaction with a concept, but with a

given individual empirical representation.

              And so it is not the pleasure, but the universal validity of this

pleasure, perceived as mentally bound up with the mere judgement upon an

object, which is represented a priori in a judgement of taste as a universal

rule for the Judgement and valid for every one. It is an empirical judgement

[to say] that I perceive and judge an object with pleasure. But it is an a priori

judgement [to say] that I find it beautiful, i.e. I attribute this satisfaction

necessarily to every one.                    § 38. Deduction of judgements of Taste

 

 

              If it be admitted that in a pure judgement of taste the satisfaction in

the object is combined with the mere act of judging its form, it is nothing else

than its subjective purposiveness for the Judgement which we feel to be

mentally combined with the representation of the object. The Judgement, as

regards the formal rules of its action, apart from all matter (whether sensation

or concept), can only be directed to the subjective conditions of its

employment in general (it is applied1 neither to a particular mode of sense

nor to a particular concept of the Understanding); and consequently to that

subjective [element] which we can presuppose in all men (as requisite for

possible cognition in general). Thus the agreement of a representation with

these conditions of the Judgement must be capable of being assumed as valid

a priori for every one. I.e. we may rightly impute to every one the pleasure or

the subjective purposiveness of the representation for the relation between the

cognitive faculties in the act of judging a sensible object in general.1

        1
               [First Edition has “limited.”]

        1
               In order to be justified in claiming universal assent for an

aesthetical judgement that rests merely on subjective grounds, it is sufficient

to assume, (1) that the subjective conditions of the Judgement, as regards the

relation of the cognitive powers thus put into activity to a cognition in

general, are the same in all men. This must be true, because otherwise men

would not be able to communicate their representations or even their

knowledge. (2) The judgement must merely have reference to this relation

(consequently to the formal condition of the Judgement) and be pure, i.e. not

mingled either with concepts of the Object or with sensations, as determining

grounds. If there has been any mistake as regards this latter condition, then

there is only an inaccurate application of the privilege, which a law gives us,

to a particular case; but that does not destroy the privilege itself in general.

                                        Remark

 

 

              This Deduction is thus easy, because it has no need to justify theobjective reality of any concept, for Beauty is not a concept of the Object and

the judgement of taste is not cognitive. It only maintains that we are justified

in presupposing universally in every man those subjective conditions of the

Judgement which we find in ourselves; and further, that we have rightly

subsumed the given Object under these conditions. The latter has indeed

unavoidable difficulties which do not beset the logical Judgement. There we

subsume under concepts, but in the aesthetical Judgement under a merely

sensible relation between the Imagination and Understanding mutually

harmonising in the representation of the form of the Object,— in which case

the subsumption may easily be fallacious. Yet the legitimacy of the claim of

the Judgement in counting upon universal assent is not thus annulled; it

reduces itself merely to the correctness of the principle of judging validly for

every one from subjective grounds. For as to the difficulty or doubt

concerning the correctness of the subsumption under that principle, it makes

the legitimacy of the claim of an aesthetical judgement in general to such

validity and the principle of the same, as little doubtful, as the like faulty

(though neither so commonly nor readily faulty) subsumption of the logical

Judgement under its principle can make the latter, an objective principle,

doubtful. But if the question were to be, how is it possible to assume nature a

priori to be a complex of objects of taste? this problem has reference to

Teleology, because it must be regarded as a purpose of nature essentially

belonging to its concept to exhibit forms that are purposive for our

Judgement. But the correctness of this latter assumption is very doubtful,

whereas the efficacy of natural beauties is patent to experience.                § 39. Of the communicability of a Sensation

 

 

              If sensation, as the real in perception, is related to knowledge, it is

called sensation of the senses; and its specific quality may be represented as

generally communicable in a uniform way, if we assume that every one has

senses like our own. But this cannot at all be presupposed of any single

sensation. To a man who is deficient in the sense of smell, this kind of

sensation cannot be communicated; and even if it is not wholly deficient, we

cannot be certain that he gets exactly the same sensation from a flower that

we have. But even more must we represent men as differing in respect of the

pleasantness or unpleasantness involved in the sensation from the same

object of sense; and it is absolutely not to be required that every man should

take pleasure in the same objects. Pleasure of this kind, because it comes into

the mind through the senses, in respect of which therefore we are passive, we

may call the pleasure of enjoyment.

              Satisfaction in an action because of its moral character is on the

other hand not the pleasure of enjoyment, but of spontaneity and its

accordance with the Idea of its destination. But this feeling, called moral,

requires concepts, and presents not free purposiveness, but purposiveness that

is conformable to law; it therefore admits of being universally communicated

only by means of Reason, and, if the pleasure is to be homogeneous for every

one, by very definite practical concepts of Reason.

              Pleasure in the Sublime in nature, regarded as a pleasure of rational

contemplation, also makes claim to universal participation; but it

presupposes, besides, a different feeling, viz. that of our supersensible

destination, which, however obscurely, has a moral foundation. But that other

men will take account of it, and will find a satisfaction in the consideration of

the wild greatness of nature (that certainly cannot be ascribed to its aspect,

which is rather terrifying), I am not absolutely justified in supposing.

Nevertheless, in consideration of the fact that on every suitable occasion

regard should be had to these moral dispositions, I can impute such

satisfaction to every man, but only by means of the moral law which on its

side again is based on concepts of Reason.              On the contrary, pleasure in the Beautiful is neither a pleasure of

enjoyment nor of a law-abiding activity, nor even of rational contemplation

in accordance with Ideas, but of mere reflection. Without having as rule any

purpose or fundamental proposition, this pleasure accompanies the ordinary

apprehension of an object by the Imagination, as faculty of intuition, in

relation with the Understanding, as faculty of concepts, by means of a

procedure of the Judgement which it must also exercise on behalf of the

commonest experience; only that in the latter case it is in order to perceive an

empirical objective concept, in the former case (in aesthetical judgements)

merely to perceive the accordance of the representation with the harmonious

(subjectively purposive) activity of both cognitive faculties in their freedom,

i.e. to feel with pleasure the mental state produced by the representation. This

pleasure must necessarily depend for every one on the same conditions, for

they are subjective conditions of the possibility of a cognition in general; and

the proportion between these cognitive faculties requisite for Taste is also

requisite for that ordinary sound Understanding which we have to presuppose

in every one. Therefore he who judges with taste (if only he does not go

astray in this act of consciousness and mistake matter for form or charm for

beauty) may impute to every one subjective purposiveness, i.e. his

satisfaction in the Object, and may assume his feeling to be universally

communicable and that without the mediation of concepts.                § 40. Of Taste as a kind of sensus communis

 

 

              We often give to the Judgement, if we are considering the result

rather than the act of its reflection, the name of a sense, and we speak of a

sense of truth, or of a sense of decorum, of justice, etc. And yet we know, or

at least we ought to know, that these concepts cannot have their place in

Sense, and further, that Sense has not the least capacity for expressing

universal rules; but that no representation of truth, fitness, beauty, or justice,

and so forth, could come into our thoughts if we could not rise beyond Sense

to higher faculties of cognition. The common Understanding of men, which,

as the mere sound (not yet cultivated) Understanding, we regard as the least

to be expected from any one claiming the name of man, has therefore the

doubtful honour of being given the name of common sense (sensus communis

); and in such a way that by the name common (not merely in our language,

where the word actually has a double signification, but in many others) we

understand vulgar, that which is everywhere met with, the possession of

which indicates absolutely no merit or superiority.

              But under the sensus communis we must include the Idea of a

communal sense, i.e. of a faculty of judgement, which in its reflection takes

account (a priori ) of the mode of representation of all other men in thought;

in order as it were to compare its judgement with the collective Reason of

humanity, and thus to escape the illusion arising from the private conditions

that could be so easily taken for objective, which would injuriously affect the

judgement. This is done by comparing our judgement with the possible rather

than the actual judgements of others, and by putting ourselves in the place of

any other man, by abstracting from the limitations which contingently attach

to our own judgement. This, again, is brought about by leaving aside as much

as possible the matter of our representative state, i.e. sensation, and simply

having respect to the formal peculiarities of our representation or

representative state. Now this operation of reflection seems perhaps too

artificial to be attributed to the faculty called common sense; but it only

appears so, when expressed in abstract formulae. In itself there is nothing

more natural than to abstract from charm or emotion if we are seeking a

judgement that is to serve as a universal rule.              The following Maxims of common human Understanding do not

properly come in here, as parts of the Critique of Taste; but yet they may

serve to elucidate its fundamental propositions. They are: 1° to think for

oneself; 2° to put ourselves in thought in the place of every one else; 3°

always to think consistently. The first is the maxim of unprejudiced thought;

the second of enlarged thought; the third of consecutive thought.1 The first is

the maxim of a Reason never passive. The tendency to such passivity, and

therefore to heteronomy of the Reason, is called prejudice; and the greatest

prejudice of all is to represent nature as not subject to the rules that the

Understanding places at its basis by means of its own essential law, i.e. is

superstition. Deliverance from superstition is called enlightenment; 2 because

although this name belongs to deliverance from prejudices in general, yet

superstition specially (in sensu eminenti ) deserves to be called a prejudice.

For the blindness in which superstition places us, which it even imposes on

us as an obligation, makes the need of being guided by others, and the

consequent passive state of our Reason, peculiarly noticeable. As regards the

second maxim of the mind, we are otherwise wont to call him limited (borné,

the opposite of enlarged ) whose talents attain to no great use (especially as

regards intensity). But here we are not speaking of the faculty of cognition,

but of the mode of thought which makes a purposive use thereof. However

small may be the area or the degree to which a man’s natural gifts reach, yet

it indicates a man of enlarged thought if he disregards the subjective private

conditions of his own judgement, by which so many others are confined, and

reflects upon it from a universal standpoint (which he can only determine by

placing himself at the standpoint of others). The third maxim, viz. that of

consecutive thought, is the most difficult to attain, and can only be attained

by the combination of both the former, and after the constant observance of

them has grown into a habit. We may say that the first of these maxims is the

maxim of Understanding, the second of Judgement, and the third of Reason.

              I take up again the threads interrupted by this digression, and I say

that Taste can be called sensus communis with more justice than sound

Understanding can; and that the aesthetical Judgement rather than the

intellectual may bear the name of a communal sense,1 if we are willing to use

the word “sense” of an effect of mere reflection upon the mind: for then we

understand by sense the feeling of pleasure. We could even define Taste as

the faculty of judging of that which makes universally communicable,

without the mediation of a concept, our feeling in a given representation.              The skill that men have in communicating their thoughts requires

also a relation between the Imagination and the Understanding in order to

associate intuitions with concepts, and concepts again with those concepts,

which then combine in a cognition. But in that case the agreement of the two

mental powers is according to law, under the constraint of definite concepts.

Only where the Imagination in its freedom awakens the Understanding, and

is put by it into regular play without the aid of concepts, does the

representation communicate itself not as a thought but as an internal feeling

of a purposive state of the mind.

              Taste is then the faculty of judging a priori of the communicability

of feelings that are bound up with a given representation (without the

mediation of a concept).

              If we could assume that the mere universal communicability of a

feeling must carry in itself an interest for us with it (which, however, we are

not justified in concluding from the character of a merely reflective

Judgement), we should be able to explain why the feeling in the judgement of

taste comes to be imputed to every one, so to speak, as a duty.

        1
               [Kant lays down these three maxims in his Introduction to Logic, §

vii. , as “general rules and conditions of the avoidance of error.”]

        2
               We soon see that although enlightenment is easy in thesi, yet in

hypothesi it is difficult and slow of accomplishment. For not to be passive as

regards Reason, but to be always self-legislative, is indeed quite easy for the

man who wishes only to be in accordance with his essential purpose, and

does not desire to know what is beyond his Understanding. But since we can

hardly avoid seeking this, and there are never wanting others who promise

with much confidence that they are able to satisfy our curiosity, it must be

very hard to maintain in or restore to the mind (especially the mind of the

public) that bare negative which properly constitutes enlightenment.

        1
               We may designate Taste as sensus communis aestheticus, common

Understanding as sensus communis logicus.                § 41. Of the empirical interest in the Beautiful

 

 

              That the judgement of taste by which something is declared beautiful

must have no interest as its determining ground has been sufficiently

established above. But it does not follow that after it has been given as a pure

aesthetical judgement, no interest can be combined with it. This combination,

however, can only be indirect, i.e. taste must first of all be represented as

combined with something else, in order that we may unite with the

satisfaction of mere reflection upon an object a pleasure in its existence (as

that wherein all interest consists). For here also in aesthetical judgements

what we say in cognitive judgements (of things in general) is valid; a posse

ad esse non valet consequentia. This something else may be empirical, viz.

an inclination proper to human nature, or intellectual, as the property of the

Will of being capable of a priori determination by Reason. Both these

involve a satisfaction in the presence of an Object, and so can lay the

foundation for an interest in what has by itself pleased without reference to

any interest whatever.

              Empirically the Beautiful interests only in society. If we admit the

impulse to society as natural to man, and his fitness for it, and his propension

towards it, i.e. sociability, as a requisite for man as a being destined for

society, and so as a property belonging to humanity, we cannot escape from

regarding taste as a faculty for judging everything in respect of which we can

communicate our feeling to all other men, and so as a means of furthering

that which every one’s natural inclination desires.

              A man abandoned by himself on a desert island would adorn neither

his hut nor his person; nor would he seek for flowers, still less would he plant

them, in order to adorn himself therewith. It is only in society that it occurs to

him to be not merely a man, but a refined man after his kind (the beginning of

civilisation). For such do we judge him to be who is both inclined and apt to

communicate his pleasure to others, and who is not contented with an Object

if he cannot feel satisfaction in it in common with others. Again, every one

expects and requires from every one else this reference to universal

communication [of pleasure], as it were from an original compact dictated byhumanity itself. Thus, doubtless, in the beginning only those things which

attracted the senses, e.g. colours for painting oneself (roucou among the

Carabs and cinnabar among the Iroquois), flowers, mussel shells, beautiful

feathers, etc.,— but in time beautiful forms also (e.g. in their canoes, and

clothes, etc.), which bring with them no gratification, or satisfaction of

enjoyment — were important in society, and were combined with great

interest. Until at last civilisation, having reached its highest point, makes out

of this almost the main business of refined inclination; and sensations are

only regarded as of worth in so far as they can be universally communicated.

Here, although the pleasure which every one has in such an object is

inconsiderable and in itself without any marked interest, yet the Idea of its

universal communicability increases its worth in an almost infinite degree.

              But this interest that indirectly attaches to the Beautiful through our

inclination to society, and consequently is empirical, is of no importance for

us here; because we have only to look to what may have a reference, although

only indirectly, to the judgement of taste a priori. For if even in this form an

interest bound up therewith should discover itself, taste would discover a

transition of our judging faculty from sense-enjoyment to moral feeling; and

so not only would we be the better guided in employing taste purposively, but

there would be thus presented a link in the chain of the human faculties a

priori, on which all legislation must depend. We can only say thus much

about the empirical interest in objects of taste and in taste itself. Since it is

subservient to inclination, however refined the latter may be, it may easily be

confounded with all the inclinations and passions, which attain their greatest

variety and highest degree in society; and the interest in the Beautiful, if it is

grounded thereon, can only furnish a very ambiguous transition from the

Pleasant to the Good. But whether this can or cannot be furthered by taste,

taken in its purity, is what we now have to investigate.              § 42. Of the intellectual interest in the Beautiful

 

 

              With the best intentions those persons who refer all activities, to

which their inner natural dispositions impel men, to the final purpose of

humanity, viz. the morally good, have regarded the taking an interest in the

Beautiful in general as a mark of good moral character. But it is not without

reason that they have been contradicted by others who rely on experience; for

this shows that connoisseurs in taste, not only often but generally, are given

up to idle, capricious, and mischievous passions, and that they could perhaps

make less claim than others to any pre-eminent attachment to moral

principles. Thus it would seem that the feeling for the Beautiful is not only

(as actually is the case) specifically different from the Moral feeling; but that

the interest which can be bound up with it is hardly compatible with moral

interest, and certainly has no inner affinity therewith.

              Now I admit at once that the interest in the Beautiful of Art (under

which I include the artificial use of natural beauties for adornment and so for

vanity) furnishes no proof whatever of a disposition attached to the morally

good or even inclined thereto. But on the other hand, I maintain that to take

an immediate interest in the Beauty of Nature (not merely to have taste in

judging it) is always a mark of a good soul; and that when this interest is

habitual it at least indicates a frame of mind favourable to the moral feeling,

if it is voluntarily bound up with the contemplation of nature. It is to be

remembered, however, that I here speak strictly of the beautiful forms of

Nature, and I set aside the charms, that she is wont to combine so abundantly

with them; because, though the interest in the latter is indeed immediate, it is

only empirical.

              He who by himself (and without any design of communicating his

observations to others) regards the beautiful figure of a wild flower, a bird, an

insect, etc., with admiration and love — who would not willingly miss it in

Nature, although it may bring him some hurt, who still less wants any

advantage from it — he takes an immediate and also an intellectual interest in

the beauty of Nature. I.e. it is not merely the form of the product of nature

which pleases him, but its very presence pleases him, the charms of sensehaving no share in this pleasure and no purpose whatever being combined

with it.

              But it is noteworthy that if we secretly deceived this lover of the

beautiful by planting in the ground artificial flowers (which can be

manufactured exactly like natural ones), or by placing artificially carved birds

on the boughs of trees, and he discovered the deceit, the immediate interest

that he previously took in them would disappear at once; though, perhaps, a

different interest, viz. the interest of vanity in adorning his chamber with

them for the eyes of others, would take its place. This thought then must

accompany our intuition and reflection on beauty, viz. that nature has

produced it; and on this alone is based the immediate interest that we take in

it. Otherwise, there remains a mere judgement of taste, either devoid of all

interest, or bound up with a mediate interest, viz. in that it has reference to

society; which latter [interest] furnishes no certain indications of a morally

good disposition.

              This superiority of natural to artificial beauty in that it alone arouses

an immediate interest, although as regards form the first may be surpassed by

the second, harmonises with the refined and well-grounded habit of thought

of all men who have cultivated their moral feeling. If a man who has taste

enough to judge of the products of beautiful Art with the greatest accuracy

and refinement willingly leaves a chamber where are to be found those

beauties that minister to vanity or to any social joys, and turns to the beautiful

in Nature in order to find, as it were, delight for his spirit in a train of thought

that he can never completely evolve, we will regard this choice of his with

veneration, and attribute to him a beautiful soul, to which no connoisseur or

lover [of Art] can lay claim on account of the interest he takes in his [artistic]

objects.— What now is the difference in our estimation of these two different

kinds of Objects, which in the judgement of mere taste it is hard to compare

in point of superiority?

              We have a faculty of mere aesthetical Judgement by which we judge

forms without the aid of concepts, and find a satisfaction in this mere act of

judgement; this we make into a rule for every one, without this judgement

either being based on or producing any interest.— On the other hand, we

have also a faculty of intellectual Judgement which determines an a priori

satisfaction for the mere forms of practical maxims (so far as they are in

themselves qualified for universal legislation); this we make into a law forevery one, without our judgement being based on any interest whatever,

though in this case it produces such an interest. The pleasure or pain in the

former judgement is called that of taste, in the latter, that of moral feeling.

              But it also interests Reason that the Ideas (for which in moral feeling

it arouses an immediate interest) should have objective reality; i.e. that nature

should at least show a trace or give an indication that it contains in itself

some ground for assuming a regular agreement of its products with our

entirely disinterested satisfaction (which we recognise a priori as a law for

every one, without being able to base it upon proofs). Hence Reason must

take an interest in every expression on the part of nature of an agreement of

this kind. Consequently, the mind cannot ponder upon the beauty of Nature

without finding itself at the same time interested therein. But this interest is

akin to moral, and he who takes such an interest in the beauties of nature can

do so only in so far as he previously has firmly established his interest in the

morally good. If, therefore, the beauty of Nature interests a man immediately

we have reason for attributing to him, at least, a basis for a good moral

disposition.

              It will be said that this account of aesthetical judgements, as akin to

the moral feeling, seems far too studied to be regarded as the true

interpretation of that cipher through which Nature speaks to us figuratively in

her beautiful forms. However, in the first place, this immediate interest in the

beautiful is actually not common; but is peculiar to those whose mental

disposition either has already been cultivated in the direction of the good or is

eminently susceptible of such cultivation. In that case the analogy between

the pure judgement of taste which, independently of any interest, causes us to

feel a satisfaction, and also represents it a priori as suitable to humanity in

general, and the moral judgement that does the same thing from concepts

without any clear, subtle, and premeditated reflection — this analogy leads to

a similar immediate interest in the objects of the former as in those of the

latter; only that in the one case the interest is free, in the other it is based on

objective laws. To this is to be added our admiration for Nature, which

displays itself in its beautiful products as Art, not merely by chance, but as it

were designedly, in accordance with a regular arrangement, and as

purposiveness without purpose. This latter, as we never meet with it outside

ourselves, we naturally seek in ourselves; and, in fact, in that which

constitutes the ultimate purpose of our being, viz. our moral destination. (Ofthis question as to the ground of the possibility of such natural purposiveness

we shall first speak in the Teleology.)

              It is easy to explain why the satisfaction in the pure aesthetical

judgement in the case of beautiful Art is not combined with an immediate

interest as it is in the case of beautiful Nature. For the former is either such an

imitation of the latter that it reaches the point of deception and then produces

the same effect as natural beauty (for which it is taken); or it is an art

obviously directed designedly to our satisfaction. In the latter case the

satisfaction in the product would, it is true, be brought about immediately by

taste, but it would be only a mediate interest in the cause lying at its root, viz.

an art that can only interest by means of its purpose and never in itself. It

will, perhaps, be said that this is also the case, if an Object of nature interests

us by its beauty only so far as it is associated with a moral Idea. But it is not

the Object itself which immediately interests us, but its character in virtue of

which it is qualified for such association, which therefore essentially belongs

to it.

              The charms in beautiful Nature, which are so often found, as it were,

blended with beautiful forms, may be referred to modifications either of light

(colours) or of sound (tones). For these are the only sensations that imply not

merely a sensible feeling but also reflection upon the form of these

modifications of Sense; and thus they involve in themselves as it were a

language by which nature speaks to us, which thus seems to have a higher

sense. Thus the white colour of lilies seems to determine the mind to Ideas of

innocence; and the seven colours in order from the red to the violet seem to

suggest the Ideas of (1) Sublimity, (2) Intrepidity, (3) Candour, (4)

Friendliness, (5) Modesty, (6) Constancy, (7) Tenderness. The song of birds

proclaims gladsomeness and contentment with existence. At least so we

interpret nature, whether it have this design or not. But the interest which we

here take in beauty has only to do with the beauty of Nature; it vanishes

altogether as soon as we notice that we are deceived and that it is only Art —

vanishes so completely that taste can no longer find the thing beautiful or

sight find it charming. What is more highly praised by poets than the

bewitching and beautiful note of the nightingale in a lonely copse on a still

summer evening by the soft light of the moon? And yet we have instances of

a merry host, where no such songster was to be found, deceiving to their

great contentment the guests who were staying with him to enjoy the countryair, by hiding in a bush a mischievous boy who knew how to produce this

sound exactly like nature (by means of a reed or a tube in his mouth). But as

soon as we are aware that it is a cheat, no one will remain long listening to

the song which before was counted so charming. And it is just the same with

the songs of all other birds. It must be Nature or be regarded as Nature, if we

are to take an immediate interest in the Beautiful as such; and still more is

this the case if we can require that others should take an interest in it too. This

happens as a matter of fact when we regard as coarse and ignoble the mental

attitude of those persons who have no feeling for beautiful Nature (for thus

we describe a susceptibility to interest in its contemplation), and who confine

themselves to eating and drinking — to the mere enjoyments of sense.                              § 43. Of Art in general

 

 

              (1). Art is distinguished from Nature, as doing (facere ) is

distinguished from acting or working generally (agere ), and as the product or

result of the former is distinguished as work (opus ) from the working

(effectus ) of the latter.

              By right we ought only to describe as Art, production through

freedom, i.e. through a will that places Reason at the basis of its actions. For

although we like to call the product of bees (regularly built cells of wax) a

work of art, this is only by way of analogy: as soon as we feel that this work

of theirs is based on no proper rational deliberation, we say that it is a product

of Nature (of instinct), and as Art only ascribe it to their Creator.

              If, as sometimes happens, in searching through a bog we come upon

a bit of shaped wood, we do not say: this is a product of Nature, but, of Art.

Its producing cause has conceived a purpose to which the bit of wood owes

its form. Elsewhere too we should see art in everything which is made so that

a representation of it in its cause must have preceded its actuality (as even in

the case of the bees), though the effect could not have been thought by the

cause. But if we call anything absolutely a work of art in order to distinguish

it from a natural effect, we always understand by that a work of man.

              (2). Art regarded as human skill differs from science (as can from

know ) as a practical faculty does from a theoretical, as Technic does from

Theory (as mensuration from geometry). And so what we can do, as soon as

we merely know what ought to be done and therefore are sufficiently

cognisant of the desired effect, is not called Art. Only that which a man, even

if he knows it completely, may not therefore have the skill to accomplish,

belongs to Art. Camper 1 describes very exactly how the best shoes must be

made, but he certainly could not make one.2

              (3). Art also differs from handicraft; the first is called free, the other

may be called mercenary. We regard the first as if it could only prove

purposive as play, i.e. as occupation that is pleasant in itself. But the second

is regarded as if it could only be compulsorily imposed upon one as work, i.e.as occupation which is unpleasant (a trouble) in itself, and which is only

attractive on account of its effect (e.g. the wage). Whether or not in the

graded list of the professions we ought to count watchmakers as artists, but

smiths only as handicraftsmen, would require another point of view from

which to judge than that which we are here taking up; viz. [we should have to

consider] the proportion of talents which must be assumed requisite in these

several occupations. Whether or not, again, under the socalled seven free arts

some may be included which ought to be classed as sciences, and many that

are akin rather to handicraft, I shall not here discuss. But it is not inexpedient

to recall that in all free arts there is yet requisite something compulsory, or, as

it is called, mechanism, without which the spirit, which must be free in art

and which alone inspires the work, would have no body and would evaporate

altogether; e.g. in poetry there must be an accuracy and wealth of language,

and also prosody and metre. [It is not inexpedient, I say, to recall this], for

many modern educators believe that the best way to produce a free art is to

remove it from all constraint, and thus to change it from work into mere play.

        1
               [Peter Camper (1722–1789), a celebrated naturalist and

comparative anatomist; for some years professor at Groningen.]

        2
               In my country a common man, if you propose to him such a

problem as that of Columbus with his egg, says, that is not art, it is only

science. I.e. if we know how, we can do it; and he says the same of all the

pretended arts of jugglers. On the other hand, he will not refuse to apply the

term art to the performance of a ropedancer.                              § 44. Of beautiful Art

 

 

              There is no Science of the Beautiful, but only a Critique of it; and

there is no such thing as beautiful Science, but only beautiful Art. For as

regards the first point, if it could be decided scientifically, i.e. by proofs,

whether a thing was to be regarded as beautiful or not, the judgement upon

beauty would belong to science and would not be a judgement of taste. And

as far as the second point is concerned, a science which should be beautiful as

such is a nonentity. For if in such a science we were to ask for grounds and

proofs, we would be put off with tasteful phrases (bonmots).— The source of

the common expression, beautiful science, is without doubt nothing else than

this, as it has been rightly remarked, that for beautiful art in its entire

completeness much science is requisite; e.g. a knowledge of ancient

languages, a learned familiarity with classical authors, history, a knowledge

of antiquities, etc. And hence these historical sciences, because they form the

necessary preparation and basis for beautiful art, and also partly because

under them is included the knowledge of the products of beautiful art

(rhetoric and poetry), have come to be called beautiful sciences by a

confusion of words.

              If art which is adequate to the cognition of a possible object

performs the actions requisite therefor merely in order to make it actual, it is

mechanical art; but if it has for its immediate design the feeling of pleasure, it

is called aesthetical art. This is again either pleasant or beautiful. It is the

first, if its purpose is that the pleasure should accompany the representations

[of the object] regarded as mere sensations; it is the second if they are

regarded as modes of cognition.

              Pleasant arts are those that are directed merely to enjoyment. Of this

class are all those charming arts that can gratify a company at table; e.g. the

art of telling stories in an entertaining way, of starting the company in frank

and lively conversation, of raising them by jest and laugh to a certain pitch of

merriment;1 when, as people say, there may be a great deal of gossip at the

feast, but no one will be answerable for what he says, because they are only

concerned with momentary entertainment, and not with any permanentmaterial for reflection or subsequent discussion. (Among these are also to be

reckoned the way of arranging the table for enjoyment, and, at great feasts,

the management of the music. This latter is a wonderful thing. It is meant to

dispose to gaiety the minds of the guests, regarded solely as a pleasant noise,

without any one paying the least attention to its composition; and it favours

the free conversation of each with his neighbour.) Again, to this class belong

all games which bring with them no further interest than that of making the

time pass imperceptibly.

              On the other hand, beautiful art is a mode of representation which is

purposive for itself, and which, although devoid of [definite] purpose, yet

furthers the culture of the mental powers in reference to social

communication.

              The universal communicability of a pleasure carries with it in its

very concept that the pleasure is not one of enjoyment, from mere sensation,

but must be derived from reflection; and thus aesthetical art, as the art of

beauty, has for standard the reflective Judgement and not sensation.

        1
               [Kant was accustomed to say that the talk at a dinner table should

always pass through these three stages — narrative, discussion, and jest; and

punctilious in this, as in all else, he is said to have directed the conversation

at his own table accordingly (Wallace’s Kant, p. 39).]      § 45. Beautiful Art is an art, in so far as it seems like nature

 

 

              In a product of beautiful art we must become conscious that it is Art

and not Nature; but yet the purposiveness in its form must seem to be as free

from all constraint of arbitrary rules as if it were a product of mere nature. On

this feeling of freedom in the play of our cognitive faculties, which must at

the same time be purposive, rests that pleasure which alone is universally

communicable, without being based on concepts. Nature is beautiful because

it looks like Art; and Art can only be called beautiful if we are conscious of it

as Art while yet it looks like Nature.

              For whether we are dealing with natural or with artificial beauty we

can say generally: That is beautiful which pleases in the mere act of judging

it (not in the sensation of it, or by means of a concept). Now art has always a

definite design of producing something. But if this something were bare

sensation (something merely subjective), which is to be accompanied with

pleasure, the product would please in the act of judgement only by mediation

of sensible feeling. And again, if the design were directed towards the

production of a definite Object, then, if this were attained by art, the Object

would only please by means of concepts. But in both cases the art would not

please in the mere act of judging; i.e. it would not please as beautiful, but as

mechanical.

              Hence the purposiveness in the product of beautiful art, although it is

designed, must not seem to be designed; i.e. beautiful art must look like

nature, although we are conscious of it as art. But a product of art appears

like nature when, although its agreement with the rules, according to which

alone the product can become what it ought to be, is punctiliously observed,

yet this is not painfully apparent; [the form of the schools does not obtrude

itself]1 — it shows no trace of the rule having been before the eyes of the

artist and having fettered his mental powers.

        1
               [Second Edition.]                    § 46. Beautiful Art is the art of genius

 

 

              Genius is the talent (or natural gift) which gives the rule to Art.

Since talent, as the innate productive faculty of the artist, belongs itself to

Nature, we may express the matter thus: Genius is the innate mental

disposition (ingenium ) through which Nature gives the rule to Art.

              Whatever may be thought of this definition, whether it is merely

arbitrary or whether it is adequate to the concept that we are accustomed to

combine with the word genius (which is to be examined in the following

paragraphs), we can prove already beforehand that according to the

signification of the word here adopted, beautiful arts must necessarily be

considered as arts of genius.

              For every art presupposes rules by means of which in the first

instance a product, if it is to be called artistic, is represented as possible. But

the concept of beautiful art does not permit the judgement upon the beauty of

a product to be derived from any rule, which has a concept as its determining

ground, and therefore has at its basis a concept of the way in which the

product is possible. Therefore, beautiful art cannot itself devise the rule

according to which it can bring about its product. But since at the same time a

product can never be called Art without some precedent rule, Nature in the

subject must (by the harmony of its faculties) give the rule to Art; i.e.

beautiful Art is only possible as a product of Genius.

              We thus see (1) that genius is a talent for producing that for which

no definite rule can be given; it is not a mere aptitude for what can be learnt

by a rule. Hence originality must be its first property. (2) But since it also can

produce original nonsense, its products must be models, i.e. exemplary; and

they consequently ought not to spring from imitation, but must serve as a

standard or rule of judgement for others. (3) It cannot describe or indicate

scientifically how it brings about its products, but it gives the rule just as

nature does. Hence the author of a product for which he is indebted to his

genius does not himself know how he has come by his Ideas; and he has not

the power to devise the like at pleasure or in accordance with a plan, and to

communicate it to others in precepts that will enable them to produce similarproducts. (Hence it is probable that the word genius is derived from genius,

that peculiar guiding and guardian spirit given to a man at his birth, from

whose suggestion these original Ideas proceed.) (4) Nature by the medium of

genius does not prescribe rules to Science, but to Art; and to it only in so far

as it is to be beautiful Art.§ 47. Elucidation and confirmation of the above explanation of Genius

 

 

              Every one is agreed that genius is entirely opposed to the spirit of

imitation. Now since learning is nothing but imitation, it follows that the

greatest ability and teachableness (capacity) regarded quâ teachableness,

cannot avail for genius. Even if a man thinks or invents for himself, and does

not merely take in what others have taught, even if he discovers many things

in art and science, this is not the right ground for calling such a (perhaps

great) head, a genius (as opposed to him who because he can only learn and

imitate is called a shallow-pate ). For even these things could be learned, they

lie in the natural path of him who investigates and reflects according to rules;

and they do not differ specifically from what can be acquired by industry

through imitation. Thus we can readily learn all that Newton has set forth in

his immortal work on the Principles of Natural Philosophy, however great a

head was required to discover it; but we cannot learn to write spirited poetry,

however express may be the precepts of the art and however excellent its

models. The reason is that Newton could make all his steps, from the first

elements of geometry to his own great and profound discoveries, intuitively

plain and definite as regards consequence, not only to himself but to every

one else. But a Homer or a Wieland cannot show how his Ideas, so rich in

fancy and yet so full of thought, come together in his head, simply because he

does not know and therefore cannot teach others. In Science then the greatest

discoverer only differs in degree from his laborious imitator and pupil; but he

differs specifically from him whom Nature has gifted for beautiful Art. And

in this there is no depreciation of those great men to whom the human race

owes so much gratitude, as compared with nature’s favourites in respect of

the talent for beautiful art. For in the fact that the former talent is directed to

the ever-advancing greater perfection of knowledge and every advantage

depending on it, and at the same time to the imparting this same knowledge

to others — in this it has a great superiority over [the talent of] those who

deserve the honour of being called geniuses. For art stands still at a certain

point; a boundary is set to it beyond which it cannot go, which presumably

has been reached long ago and cannot be extended further. Again, artistic

skill cannot be communicated; it is imparted to every artist immediately bythe hand of nature; and so it dies with him, until nature endows another in the

same way, so that he only needs an example in order to put in operation in a

similar fashion the talent of which he is conscious.

              If now it is a natural gift which must prescribe its rule to art (as

beautiful art), of what kind is this rule? It cannot be reduced to a formula and

serve as a precept, for then the judgement upon the beautiful would be

determinable according to concepts; but the rule must be abstracted from the

fact, i.e. from the product, on which others may try their own talent by using

it as a model, not to be copied but to be imitated. How this is possible is hard

to explain. The Ideas of the artist excite like Ideas in his pupils if nature has

endowed them with a like proportion of their mental powers. Hence models

of beautiful art are the only means of handing down these Ideas to posterity.

This cannot be done by mere descriptions, especially not in the case of the

arts of speech, and in this latter classical models are only to be had in the old

dead languages, now preserved only as “the learned languages.”

              Although mechanical and beautiful art are very different, the first

being a mere art of industry and learning and the second of genius, yet there

is no beautiful art in which there is not a mechanical element that can be

comprehended by rules and followed accordingly, and in which therefore

there must be something scholastic as an essential condition. For [in every

art] some purpose must be conceived; otherwise we could not ascribe the

product to art at all, and it would be a mere product of chance. But in order to

accomplish a purpose, definite rules from which we cannot dispense

ourselves are requisite. Now since the originality of the talent constitutes an

essential (though not the only) element in the character of genius, shallow

heads believe that they cannot better show themselves to be full-blown

geniuses than by throwing off the constraint of all rules; they believe, in

effect, that one could make a braver show on the back of a wild horse than on

the back of a trained animal. Genius can only furnish rich material for

products of beautiful art; its execution and its form require talent cultivated in

the schools, in order to make such a use of this material as will stand

examination by the Judgement. But it is quite ridiculous for a man to speak

and decide like a genius in things which require the most careful

investigation by Reason. One does not know whether to laugh more at the

impostor who spreads such a mist round him that we cannot clearly use our

Judgement and so use our Imagination the more, or at the public whichnaïvely imagines that his inability to cognise clearly and to comprehend the

masterpiece before him arises from new truths crowding in on him in such

abundance that details (duly weighed definitions and accurate examination of

fundamental propositions) seem but clumsy work.                    § 48. Of the relation of Genius to Taste

 

 

              For judging of beautiful objects as such, taste is requisite; but for

beautiful art, i.e. for the production of such objects, genius is requisite.

              If we consider genius as the talent for beautiful art (which the special

meaning of the word implies) and in this point of view analyse it into the

faculties which must concur to constitute such a talent, it is necessary in the

first instance to determine exactly the difference between natural beauty, the

judging of which requires only Taste, and artificial beauty, whose possibility

(to which reference must be made in judging such an object) requires Genius.

              A natural beauty is a beautiful thing; artificial beauty is a beautiful

representation of a thing.

              In order to judge of a natural beauty as such I need not have

beforehand a concept of what sort of thing the object is to be; i.e. I need not

know its material purposiveness (the purpose), but its mere form pleases by

itself in the act of judging it without any knowledge of the purpose. But if the

object is given as a product of art, and as such is to be declared beautiful,

then, because art always supposes a purpose in the cause (and its causality),

there must be at bottom in the first instance a concept of what the thing is to

be. And as the agreement of the manifold in a thing with its inner destination,

its purpose, constitutes the perfection of the thing, it follows that in judging

of artificial beauty the perfection of the thing must be taken into account; but

in judging of natural beauty (as such ) there is no question at all about this.—

It is true that in judging of objects of nature, especially objects endowed with

life, e.g. a man or a horse, their objective purposiveness also is commonly

taken into consideration in judging of their beauty; but then the judgement is

no longer purely aesthetical, i.e. a mere judgement of taste. Nature is no

longer judged inasmuch as it appears like art, but in so far as it is actual

(although superhuman) art; and the teleological judgement serves as the basis

and condition of the aesthetical, as a condition to which the latter must have

respect. In such a case, e.g. if it is said “that is a beautiful woman,” we think

nothing else than this: nature represents in her figure the purposes in view in

the shape of a woman’s figure. For we must look beyond the mere form to aconcept, if the object is to be thought in such a way by means of a logically

conditioned aesthetical judgement.

              Beautiful art shows its superiority in this, that it describes as

beautiful things which may be in nature ugly or displeasing.1 The Furies,

diseases, the devastations of war, etc., may [even regarded as calamitous],2

be described as very beautiful, and even represented in a picture. There is

only one kind of ugliness which cannot be represented in accordance with

nature, without destroying all aesthetical satisfaction and consequently

artificial beauty; viz. that which excites disgust. For in this peculiar sensation,

which rests on mere imagination, the object is represented as it were

obtruding itself for our enjoyment while we strive against it with all our

might. And the artistic representation of the object is no longer distinguished

from the nature of the object itself in our sensation, and thus it is impossible

that it can be regarded as beautiful. The art of sculpture again, because in its

products art is almost interchangeable with nature, excludes from its creations

the immediate representation of ugly objects; e.g. it represents death by a

beautiful genius, the warlike spirit by Mars, and permits [all such things] to

be represented only by an allegory or attribute3 that has a pleasing effect, and

thus only indirectly by the aid of the interpretation of Reason, and not for the

mere aesthetical Judgement.

              So much for the beautiful representation of an object, which is

properly only the form of the presentation of a concept, and the means by

which the latter is communicated universally.— But to give this form to the

product of beautiful art, mere taste is requisite. By taste, after he has

exercised and corrected it by manifold examples from art or nature, the artist

checks his work; and after many, often toilsome, attempts to content taste he

finds the form which satisfies him. Hence this form is not, as it were, a thing

of inspiration or the result of a free swing of the mental powers, but of a slow

and even painful process of improvement, by which he seeks to render it

adequate to his thought, without detriment to the freedom of the play of his

powers.

              But taste is merely a judging and not a productive faculty; and what

is appropriate to it is not therefore a work of beautiful art. It may be only a

product belonging to useful and mechanical art or even to science, produced

according to definite rules that can be learned and must be exactly followed.

But the pleasing form that is given to it is only the vehicle of communication,and a mode, as it were, of presenting it, in respect of which we remain free to

a certain extent, although it is combined with a definite purpose. Thus we

desire that table appointments, a moral treatise, even a sermon, should have

in themselves this form of beautiful art, without it seeming to be sought: but

we do not therefore call these things works of beautiful art. Under the latter

class are reckoned a poem, a piece of music, a picture gallery, etc.; and in

some wouldbe works of beautiful art we find genius without taste, while in

others we find taste without genius.

        1
               [Cf. Aristotle’s Poetics, c. iv. p. 1448 b: ἃ γὰρ αὐτὰ λυπηρωˆς

ὁρωˆμεν, τούτων τὰς εἰκόνας τὰς μάλιςτα ἠκριβωμένας χαίρομεν

θεωρονˆντες οἱ̂ον θηρίων τε μορϕὰς τωˆν ἀτιμοτάτων καὶ νεκρωˆν. Cf. also

Rhetoric, I. 11, p. 1371 b; and Burke on the Sublime and Beautiful, Part I. §

16 . Boileau (L’art poétique, chant 3), makes a similar observation:

              “Il n’est point de serpent ni de monstre odieux

 

              Qui, par l’art imité, ne puisse plaire aux yeux.

 

              D’un pinceau délicat l’artifice agréable

 

              Du plus affreux objet fait un objet aimable.”]

 

        2
               [Second Edition.]

        3
               [Cf. p. 199, infra. ]          § 49. Of the faculties of the mind that constitute Genius

 

 

              We say of certain products of which we expect that they should at

least in part appear as beautiful art, they are without spirit 1 ; although we

find nothing to blame in them on the score of taste. A poem may be very neat

and elegant, but without spirit. A history may be exact and well arranged, but

without spirit. A festal discourse may be solid and at the same time elaborate,

but without spirit. Conversation is often not devoid of entertainment, but yet

without spirit: even of a woman we say that she is pretty, an agreeable talker,

and courteous, but without spirit. What then do we mean by spirit?

              Spirit, in an aesthetical sense, is the name given to the animating

principle of the mind. But that whereby this principle animates the soul, the

material which it applies to that [purpose], is that which puts the mental

powers purposively into swing, i.e. into such a play as maintains itself and

strengthens the [mental] powers in their exercise.

              Now I maintain that this principle is no other than the faculty of

presenting aesthetical Ideas. And by an aesthetical Idea I understand that

representation of the Imagination which occasions much thought, without,

however, any definite thought, i.e. any concept, being capable of being

adequate to it; it consequently cannot be completely compassed and made

intelligible by language.— We easily see that it is the counterpart (pendant)

of a rational Idea, which conversely is a concept to which no intuition (or

representation of the Imagination) can be adequate.

              The Imagination (as a productive faculty of cognition) is very

powerful in creating another nature, as it were, out of the material that actual

nature gives it. We entertain ourselves with it when experience proves too

commonplace, and by it we remould experience, always indeed in accordance

with analogical laws, but yet also in accordance with principles which occupy

a higher place in Reason (laws too which are just as natural to us as those by

which Understanding comprehends empirical nature). Thus we feel our

freedom from the law of association (which attaches to the empirical

employment of Imagination), so that the material which we borrow from

nature in accordance with this law can be worked up into something differentwhich surpasses nature.

              Such representations of the Imagination we may call Ideas, partly

because they at least strive after something which lies beyond the bounds of

experience, and so seek to approximate to a presentation of concepts of

Reason (intellectual Ideas), thus giving to the latter the appearance of

objective reality,— but especially because no concept can be fully adequate

to them as internal intuitions. The poet ventures to realise to sense, rational

Ideas of invisible beings, the kingdom of the blessed, hell, eternity, creation,

etc.; or even if he deals with things of which there are examples in

experience,— e.g. death, envy and all vices, also love, fame, and the like,—

he tries, by means of Imagination, which emulates the play of Reason in its

quest after a maximum, to go beyond the limits of experience and to present

them to Sense with a completeness of which there is no example in nature. It

is, properly speaking, in the art of the poet, that the faculty of aesthetical

Ideas can manifest itself in its full measure. But this faculty, considered in

itself, is properly only a talent (of the Imagination).

              If now we place under a concept a representation of the Imagination

belonging to its presentation, but which occasions solely by itself more

thought than can ever be comprehended in a definite concept, and which

therefore enlarges aesthetically the concept itself in an unbounded fashion,—

the Imagination is here creative, and it brings the faculty of intellectual Ideas

(the Reason) into movement; i.e. a movement, occasioned by a

representation, towards more thought (though belonging, no doubt, to the

concept of the object) than can be grasped in the representation or made clear.

              Those forms which do not constitute the presentation of a given

concept itself but only, as approximate representations of the Imagination,

express the consequences bound up with it and its relationship to other

concepts, are called (aesthetical) attributes of an object, whose concept as a

rational Idea cannot be adequately presented. Thus Jupiter’s eagle with the

lightning in its claws is an attribute of the mighty king of heaven, as the

peacock is of its magnificent queen. They do not, like logical attributes,

represent what lies in our concepts of the sublimity and majesty of creation,

but something different, which gives occasion to the Imagination to spread

itself over a number of kindred representations, that arouse more thought than

can be expressed in a concept determined by words. They furnish an

aesthetical Idea, which for that rational Idea takes the place of logicalpresentation; and thus as their proper office they enliven the mind by opening

out to it the prospect into an illimitable field of kindred representations. But

beautiful art does this not only in the case of painting or sculpture (in which

the term “attribute” is commonly employed): poetry and rhetoric also get the

spirit that animates their works simply from the aesthetical attributes of the

object, which accompany the logical and stimulate the Imagination, so that it

thinks more by their aid, although in an undeveloped way, than could be

comprehended in a concept and therefore in a definite form of words.— For

the sake of brevity I must limit myself to a few examples only.

              When the great King1 in one of his poems expresses himself as

follows:

              “Oui, finissons sans trouble et mourons sans regrets,

 

              En laissant l’univers comblé de nos bienfaits.

 

              Ainsi l’astre du jour au bout de sa carrière,

 

              Répand sur l’horizon une douce lumière;

 

              Et les derniers rayons qu’il darde dans les airs,

 

              Sont les derniers soupirs qu’il donne à l’univers;”

 

        1
               [In English we would rather say “without soul ”; but I prefer to

translate Geist consistently by spirit, to avoid the confusion of it with Seele. ]

 

        1
               [These lines occur in one of Frederick the Great’s French poems:

Épître au maréchal Keith XVIII., “sur les vaines terreurs de la mort et les

frayeurs d’une autre vie.” Kant here translates them into German.]

               he quickens his rational Idea of a cosmopolitan disposition at the end

of life by an attribute which the Imagination (in remembering all the

pleasures of a beautiful summer day that are recalled at its close by a serene

evening) associates with that representation, and which excites a number of

sensations and secondary representations for which no expression is found.

On the other hand, an intellectual concept may serve conversely as an

attribute for a representation of sense and so can quicken this latter by means

of the Idea of the supersensible; but only by the aesthetical [element], that

subjectively attaches to the concept of the latter, being here employed. Thus,

for example, a certain poet1 says, in his description of a beautiful morning:

              “The sun arose

 

              As calm from virtue springs.”

 

        1
               [Withof, whose “Moral Poems” appeared in 1755. This reference

was supplied by H. Krebs in Notes and Queries 5th January 1895.]

 

              The consciousness of virtue, even if one only places oneself in

thought in the position of a virtuous man, diffuses in the mind a multitude of

sublime and restful feelings and a boundless prospect of a joyful future, to

which no expression measured by a definite concept completely attains.2

              In a word the aesthetical Idea is a representation of the Imagination

associated with a given concept, which is bound up with such a multiplicity

of partial representations in its free employment, that for it no expression

marking a definite concept can be found; and such a representation, therefore,

adds to a concept much ineffable thought, the feeling of which quickens the

cognitive faculties, and with language, which is the mere letter, binds up

spirit also.

              The mental powers, therefore, whose union (in a certain relation)

constitutes genius are Imagination and Understanding. In the employment of

the Imagination for cognition it submits to the constraint of the

Understanding and is subject to the limitation of being conformable to the

concept of the latter. On the other hand, in an aesthetical point of view it isfree to furnish unsought, over and above that agreement with a concept,

abundance of undeveloped material for the Understanding; to which the

Understanding paid no regard in its concept, but which it applies, though not

objectively for cognition, yet subjectively to quicken the cognitive powers

and therefore also indirectly to cognitions. Thus genius properly consists in

the happy relation [between these faculties], which no science can teach and

no industry can learn, by which Ideas are found for a given concept; and on

the other hand, we thus find for these Ideas the expression, by means of

which the subjective state of mind brought about by them, as an

accompaniment of the concept, can be communicated to others. The latter

talent is properly speaking what is called spirit; for to express the ineffable

element in the state of mind implied by a certain representation and to make it

universally communicable — whether the expression be in speech or painting

or statuary — this requires a faculty of seizing the quickly passing play of

Imagination and of unifying it in a concept (which is even on that account

original and discloses a new rule that could not have been inferred from any

preceding principles or examples), that can be communicated without any

constraint [of rules].1

              If after this analysis we look back to the explanation given above of

what is called genius, we find: first, that it is a talent for Art, not for Science,

in which clearly known rules must go beforehand and determine the

procedure. Secondly, as an artistic talent it presupposes a definite concept of

the product, as the purpose, and therefore Understanding; but it also

presupposes a representation (although an indeterminate one) of the material,

i.e. of the intuition, for the presentment of this concept; and, therefore, a

relation between the Imagination and the Understanding. Thirdly, it shows

itself not so much in the accomplishment of the proposed purpose in a

presentment of a definite concept, as in the enunciation or expression of

aesthetical Ideas, which contain abundant material for that very design; and

consequently it represents the Imagination as free from all guidance of rules

and yet as purposive in reference to the presentment of the given concept.

Finally, in the fourth place, the unsought undesigned subjective

purposiveness in the free accordance of the Imagination with the legality of

the Understanding presupposes such a proportion and disposition of these

faculties as no following of rules, whether of science or of mechanical

imitation, can bring about, but which only the nature of the subject can

produce.              In accordance with these suppositions genius is the exemplary

originality of the natural gifts of a subject in the free employment of his

cognitive faculties. In this way the product of a genius (as regards what is to

be ascribed to genius and not to possible learning or schooling) is an

example, not to be imitated (for then that which in it is genius and constitutes

the spirit of the work would be lost), but to be followed, by another genius;

whom it awakens to a feeling of his own originality and whom it stirs so to

exercise his art in freedom from the constraint of rules, that thereby a new

rule is gained for art, and thus his talent shows itself to be exemplary. But

because a genius is a favourite of nature and must be regarded by us as a rare

phenomenon, his example produces for other good heads a school, i.e. a

methodical system of teaching according to rules, so far as these can be

derived from the peculiarities of the products of his spirit. For such persons

beautiful art is so far imitation, to which nature through the medium of a

genius supplied the rule.

              But this imitation becomes a mere aping, if the scholar copies

everything down to the deformities, which the genius must have let pass only

because he could not well remove them without weakening his Idea. This

mental characteristic is meritorious only in the case of a genius. A certain

audacity in expression — and in general many a departure from common

rules — becomes him well, but it is in no way worthy of imitation; it always

remains a fault in itself which we must seek to remove, though the genius is

as it were privileged to commit it, because the inimitable rush of his spirit

would suffer from over-anxious carefulness. Mannerism is another kind of

aping, viz. of mere peculiarity (originality) in general; by which a man

separates himself as far as possible from imitators, without however

possessing the talent to be at the same time exemplary. — There are indeed in

general two ways (modi ) in which such a man may put together his notions

of expressing himself; the one is called a manner (modus aestheticus ), the

other a method (modus logicus ). They differ in this, that the former has no

other standard than the feeling of unity in the presentment, but the latter

follows definite principles; hence the former alone avails for beautiful art.

But an artistic product is said to show mannerism only when the exposition of

the artist’s Idea is founded on its very singularity, and is not made appropriate

to the Idea itself. The ostentatious (précieux ), contorted, and affected

[manner, adopted] to differentiate oneself from ordinary persons (though

devoid of spirit) is like the behaviour of a man of whom we say, that he hearshimself talk, or who stands and moves about as if he were on a stage in order

to be stared at; this always betrays a bungler.

        2
               Perhaps nothing more sublime was ever said and no sublimer

thought ever expressed than the famous inscription on the Temple of Isis

(Mother Nature ): “I am all that is and that was and that shall be, and no

mortal hath lifted my veil.” Segner availed himself of this Idea in a suggestive

vignette prefixed to his Natural Philosophy, in order to inspire beforehand the

pupil whom he was about to lead into that temple with a holy awe, which

should dispose his mind to serious attention. [J. A. de Segner (1704–1777)

was Professor of Natural Philosophy at Göttingen, and the author of several

scientific works of repute.]

        1
               [Second Edition.]    § 50. Of the combination of Taste with Genius in the products of

                                    beautiful Art

 

 

              To ask whether it is more important for the things of beautiful art

that Genius or Taste should be displayed, is the same as to ask whether in it

more depends on Imagination or on Judgement. Now, since in respect of the

first an art is rather said to be full of spirit, but only deserves to be called a

beautiful art on account of the second; this latter is at least, as its

indispensable condition (conditio sine qua non ), the most important thing to

which one has to look in the judging of art as beautiful art. Abundance and

originality of Ideas are less necessary to beauty than the accordance of the

Imagination in its freedom with the conformity to law of the Understanding.

For all the abundance of the former produces in lawless freedom nothing but

nonsense; on the other hand, the Judgement is the faculty by which it is

adjusted to the Understanding.

              Taste, like the Judgement in general, is the discipline (or training) of

Genius; it clips its wings closely, and makes it cultured and polished; but, at

the same time, it gives guidance as to where and how far it may extend itself,

if it is to remain purposive. And while it brings clearness and order into the

multitude of the thoughts, it makes the Ideas susceptible of being

permanently and, at the same time, universally assented to, and capable of

being followed by others, and of an ever-progressive culture. If, then, in the

conflict of these two properties in a product something must be sacrificed, it

should be rather on the side of genius; and the Judgement, which in the things

of beautiful art gives its decision from its own proper principles, will rather

sacrifice the freedom and wealth of the Imagination than permit anything

prejudicial to the Understanding.

              For beautiful art, therefore, Imagination, Understanding, Spirit, and

Taste are requisite.1

        1
               The three former faculties are united in the first instance by means

of the fourth. Hume gives us to understand in his History of England that

although the English are inferior in their productions to no people in the

world as regards the evidences they display of the three former properties,separately considered, yet they must be put after their neighbours the French

as regards that which unites these properties. [In his Observations on the

Beautiful and Sublime, § iv. sub init., Kant remarks that the English have the

keener sense of the sublime, the French of the beautiful. ]                  § 51. Of the division of the beautiful arts

 

 

              We may describe beauty in general (whether natural or artificial) as

the expression of aesthetical Ideas; only that in beautiful Art this Idea must be

occasioned by a concept of the Object; whilst in beautiful Nature the mere

reflection upon a given intuition, without any concept of what the object is to

be, is sufficient for the awakening and communicating of the Idea of which

that Object is regarded as the expression.

              If, then, we wish to make a division of the beautiful arts, we cannot

choose a more convenient principle, at least tentatively, than the analogy of

art with the mode of expression of which men avail themselves in speech, in

order to communicate to one another as perfectly as possible not merely their

concepts but also their sensations.1 — This is done by word, deportment, and

tone (articulation, gesticulation, and modulation). It is only by the

combination of these three kinds of expression that communication between

the speaker [and his hearers] can be complete. For thus thought, intuition, and

sensation are transmitted to others simulataneously and conjointly.

              There are, therefore, only three kinds of beautiful arts; the arts of

speech, the formative arts, and the art of the play of sensations (as external

sensible impressions). We may also arrange a division by dichotomy; thus

beautiful art may be divided into the art of expression of thoughts and of

intuitions; and these further subdivided in accordance with their form or their

matter (sensation). But this would appear to be too abstract, and not so

accordant with ordinary concepts.

              (1) The arts of speech are rhetoric and poetry. Rhetoric is the art of

carrying on a serious business of the Understanding as if it were a free play of

the Imagination; poetry, the art of conducting a free play of the Imagination

as if it were a serious business of the Understanding.

              The orator, then, promises a serious business, and in order to

entertain his audience conducts it as if it were a mere play with Ideas. The

poet merely promises an entertaining play with Ideas, and yet it has the same

effect upon the Understanding as if he had only intended to carry on itsbusiness. The combination and harmony of both cognitive faculties,

Sensibility and Understanding, which cannot dispense with one another, but

which yet cannot well be united without constraint and mutual prejudice,

must appear to be undesigned and so to be brought about by themselves:

otherwise it is not beautiful art. Hence, all that is studied and anxious must be

avoided in it, for beautiful art must be free art in a double sense. It is not a

work like that of a tradesman, the magnitude of which can be judged,

exacted, or paid for, according to a definite standard; and again, though the

mind is occupied, still it feels itself contented and stimulated, without looking

to any other purpose (independently of reward.)

              The orator therefore gives something which he does not promise,

viz. an entertaining play of the Imagination; but he also fails to supply what

he did promise, which is indeed his announced business, viz. the purposive

occupation of the Understanding. On the other hand, the poet promises little

and announces a mere play with Ideas; but he supplies something which is

worth occupying ourselves with, because he provides in this play food for the

Understanding, and by the aid of Imagination gives life to his concepts. [Thus

the orator on the whole gives less, the poet more, than he promises.]1

              (2) The formative arts, or those by which expression is found for

Ideas in sensible intuition (not by representations of mere Imagination that

are aroused by words), are either arts of sensible truth or of sensible illusion.

The former is called Plastic, the latter Painting. Both express Ideas by figures

in space; the former makes figures cognisable by two senses, sight and touch

(although not by the latter as far as beauty is concerned); the latter only by

one, the first of these. The aesthetical Idea (the archetype or original image)

is fundamental for both in the Imagination, but the figure which expresses

this (the ectype or copy) is either given in its bodily extension (as the object

itself exists), or as it paints itself on the eye (according to its appearance

when projected on a flat surface). In the first case1 the condition given to

reflection may be either the reference to an actual purpose or only the

semblance of it.

              To Plastic, the first kind of beautiful formative Art, belong Sculpture

and Architecture. The first presents corporeally concepts of things, as they

might have existed in nature (though as beautiful art it has regard to

aesthetical purposiveness). The second is the art of presenting concepts of

things that are possible only through Art, and whose form has for itsdetermining ground not nature but an arbitrary purpose, with the view of

presenting them with aesthetical purposiveness. In the latter the chief point is

a certain use of the artistic object, by which condition the aesthetical Ideas are

limited. In the former the main design is the mere expression of aesthetical

Ideas. Thus statues of men, gods, animals, etc., are of the first kind; but

temples, splendid buildings for public assemblies, even dwelling-houses,

triumphal arches, columns, mausoleums, and the like, erected in honourable

remembrance, belong to Architecture. Indeed all house furniture

(upholsterer’s work and such like things which are for use) may be reckoned

under this art; because the suitability of a product for a certain use is the

essential thing in an architectural work. On the other hand, a mere piece of

sculpture, which is simply made for show and which is to please in itself, is

as a corporeal presentation a mere imitation of nature, though with a

reference to aesthetical Ideas; in it sensible truth is not to be carried so far

that the product ceases to look like art and looks like a product of the elective

will.

              Painting, as the second kind of formative art, which presents a

sensible illusion artificially combined with Ideas, I would divide into the art

of the beautiful depicting of nature and that of the beautiful arrangement of

its products. The first is painting proper, the second is the art of landscape

gardening. The first gives only the illusory appearance of corporeal

extension; the second gives this in accordance with truth, but only the

appearance of utility and availableness for other purposes than the mere play

of the Imagination in the contemplation of its forms.1 This latter is nothing

else than the ornamentation of the soil with a variety of those things (grasses,

flowers, shrubs, trees, even ponds, hillocks, and dells) which nature presents

to an observer, only arranged differently and in conformity with certain Ideas.

But, again, the beautiful arrangement of corporeal things is only apparent to

the eye, like painting; the sense of touch cannot supply any intuitive

presentation of such a form. Under painting in the wide sense I would reckon

the decoration of rooms by the aid of tapestry, bric-a-brac, and all beautiful

furniture which is merely available to be looked at; and the same may be said

of the art of tasteful dressing (with rings, snuff-boxes, etc.). For a bed of

various flowers, a room filled with various ornaments (including under this

head even ladies’ finery), make at a fête a kind of picture; which, like pictures

properly so-called (that are not intended to teach either history or natural

science), has in view merely the entertainment of the Imagination in free playwith Ideas, and the occupation of the aesthetical Judgement without any

definite purpose. The detailed work in all this decoration may be quite

distinct in the different cases and may require very different artists; but the

judgement of taste upon whatever is beautiful in these various arts is always

determined in the same way: viz. it only judges the forms (without any

reference to a purpose) as they present themselves to the eye either singly or

in combination, according to the effect they produce upon the Imagination.—

But that formative art may be compared (by analogy) with deportment in

speech is justified by the fact that the spirit of the artist supplies by these

figures a bodily expression to his thought and its mode, and makes the thing

itself as it were speak in mimic language. This is a very common play of our

fancy, which attributes to lifeless things a spirit suitable to their form by

which they speak to us.

              (3) The art of the beautiful play of sensations (externally stimulated),

which admits at the same time of universal communication, can be concerned

with nothing else than the proportion of the different degrees of the

disposition (tension) of the sense, to which the sensation belongs, i.e. with its

tone. In this far-reaching signification of the word it may be divided into the

artistic play of the sensations of hearing and sight, i.e. into Music and the Art

of colour. — It is noteworthy that these two senses, besides their

susceptibility for impressions so far as these are needed to gain concepts of

external objects, are also capable of a peculiar sensation bound up therewith,

of which we cannot strictly decide whether it is based on sense or reflection.

This susceptibility may sometimes be wanting, although in other respects the

sense, as regards its use for the cognition of Objects, is not at all deficient but

is peculiarly fine. That is, we cannot say with certainty whether colours or

tones (sounds) are merely pleasant sensations or whether they form in

themselves a beautiful play of sensations, and as such bring with them in

aesthetical judgement a satisfaction in their form. If we think of the velocity

of the vibrations of light, or in the second case of the air, which probably far

surpasses all our faculty of judging immediately in perception the time

interval between them, we must believe that it is only the effect of these

vibrations upon the elastic parts of our body that is felt, but that the time

interval between them is not remarked or brought into judgement; and thus

that only pleasantness and not beauty of composition is bound up with

colours and tones. But on the other hand, first, we think of the mathematical

[element] which enables us to pronounce on the proportion between theseoscillations in music and thus to judge of them; and by analogy with which

we easily may judge of the distinctions between colours. Secondly, we recall

instances (although they are rare) of men who with the best sight in the world

cannot distinguish colours, and with the sharpest hearing cannot distinguish

tones; whilst for those who can do this the perception of an altered quality

(not merely of the degree of sensation) in the different intensities in the scale

of colours and tones is definite; and further, the very number of these is fixed

by intelligible differences. Thus we may be compelled to see that both kinds

of sensations are to be regarded not as mere sensible impressions, but as the

effects of a judgement passed upon the form in the play of divers sensations.

The difference in our definition, according as we adopt the one or the other

opinion in judging of the grounds of Music, would be just this: either, as we

have done, we must explain it as the beautiful play of sensations (of hearing),

or else as a play of pleasant sensations. According to the former mode of

explanation music is represented altogether as a beautiful art; according to the

latter, as a pleasant art (at least in part).

        1
               The reader is not to judge this scheme for a possible division of the

beautiful arts as a deliberate theory. It is only one of various attempts which

we may and ought to devise.

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        1
               [I.e. the case of Plastic art, with its subdivisions of Architecture and

Sculpture, as is explained in the next paragraph.]

        1
               That landscape gardening may be regarded as a species of the art of

painting, although it presents its forms corporeally, seems strange. But since

it actually takes its forms from nature (trees, shrubs, grasses, and flowers

from forest and field — at least in the first instance), and so far is not an art

like Plastic; and since it also has no concept of the object and its purpose (as

in Architecture) conditioning its arrangements, but involves merely the free

play of the Imagination in contemplation,— it so far agrees with mere

aesthetical painting which has no definite theme (which arranges sky, land,

and water, so as to entertain us by means of light and shade only).— In

general the reader is only to judge of this as an attempt to combine the

beautiful arts under one principle, viz. that of the expression of aesthetical

Ideas (according to the analogy of speech), and not to regard it as a definitive

analysis of them.§ 52. Of the combination of beautiful arts in one and the same product

 

 

              Rhetoric may be combined with a pictorial presentation of its

subjects and objects in a theatrical piece; poetry may be combined with

music in a song, and this again with pictorial (theatrical) presentation in an

opera; the play of sensations in music may be combined with the play of

figures in the dance, and so on. Even the presentation of the sublime, so far

as it belongs to beautiful art, may combine with beauty in a tragedy in verse,

in a didactic poem, in an oratorio; and in these combinations beautiful art is

yet more artistic. Whether it is also more beautiful may in some of these

cases be doubted (since so many different kinds of satisfaction cross one

another). Yet in all beautiful art the essential thing is the form, which is

purposive as regards our observation and judgement, where the pleasure is at

the same time cultivation and disposes the spirit to Ideas, and consequently

makes it susceptible of still more of such pleasure and entertainment. The

essential element is not the matter of sensation (charm or emotion), which has

only to do with enjoyment; this leaves behind nothing in the Idea, and it

makes the spirit dull, the object gradually distasteful, and the mind, on

account of its consciousness of a disposition that conflicts with purpose in the

judgement of Reason, discontented with itself and peevish.

              If the beautiful arts are not brought into more or less close

combination with moral Ideas, which alone bring with them a self-sufficing

satisfaction, this latter fate must ultimately be theirs. They then serve only as

a distraction, of which we are the more in need the more we avail ourselves

of them to disperse the discontent of the mind with itself; so that we thus

render ourselves ever more useless and ever more discontented. The beauties

of nature are generally of most benefit in this point of view, if we are early

accustomed to observe, appreciate, and admire them.§ 53. Comparison of the respective aesthetical worth of the beautiful arts

 

 

              Of all the arts poetry (which owes its origin almost entirely to genius

and will least be guided by precept or example) maintains the first rank. It

expands the mind by setting the Imagination at liberty; and by offering within

the limits of a given concept amid the unbounded variety of possible forms

accordant therewith, that which unites the presentment of this concept with a

wealth of thought, to which no verbal expression is completely adequate; and

so rising aesthetically to Ideas. It strengthens the mind by making it feel its

faculty — free, spontaneous and independent of natural determination — of

considering and judging nature as a phenomenon in accordance with aspects

which it does not present in experience either for Sense or Understanding,

and therefore of using it on behalf of, and as a sort of schema for, the

supersensible. It plays with illusion, which it produces at pleasure, but

without deceiving by it; for it declares its exercise to be mere play, which

however can be purposively used by the Understanding.— Rhetoric, in so far

as this means the art of persuasion, i.e. of deceiving by a beautiful show (ars

oratoria ), and not mere elegance of speech (eloquence and style), is a

Dialectic, which borrows from poetry only so much as is needful to win

minds to the side of the orator before they have formed a judgement, and to

deprive them of their freedom; it cannot therefore be recommended either for

the law courts or for the pulpit. For if we are dealing with civil law, with the

rights of individual persons, or with lasting instruction and determination of

people’s minds to an accurate knowledge and a conscientious observance of

their duty, it is unworthy of so important a business to allow a trace of any

exuberance of wit and imagination to appear, and still less any trace of the art

of talking people over and of captivating them for the advantage of any

chance person. For although this art may sometimes be directed to legitimate

and praiseworthy designs, it becomes objectionable, when in this way

maxims and dispositions are spoiled in a subjective point of view, though the

action may objectively be lawful. It is not enough to do what is right; we

should practise it solely on the ground that it is right. Again, the mere concept

of this species of matters of human concern, when clear and combined with a

lively presentation of it in examples, without any offence against the rules ofeuphony of speech or propriety of expression, has by itself for Ideas of

Reason (which collectively constitute eloquence), sufficient influence upon

human minds; so that it is not needful to add the machinery of persuasion,

which, since it can be used equally well to beautify or to hide vice and error,

cannot quite lull the secret suspicion that one is being artfully overreached. In

poetry everything proceeds with honesty and candour. It declares itself to be

a mere entertaining play of the Imagination, which wishes to proceed as

regards form in harmony with the laws of the Understanding; and it does not

desire to steal upon and ensnare the Understanding by the aid of sensible

presentation.1

              After poetry, if we are to deal with charm and mental movement, I

would place that art which comes nearest to the art of speech and can very

naturally be united with it, viz. the art of tone. For although it speaks by

means of mere sensations without concepts, and so does not, like poetry,

leave anything over for reflection, it yet moves the mind in a greater variety

of ways and more intensely, although only transitorily. It is, however, rather

enjoyment than culture (the play of thought that is incidentally excited by its

means is merely the effect of a kind of mechanical association); and in the

judgement of Reason it has less worth than any other of the beautiful arts.

Hence, like all enjoyment, it desires constant change, and does not bear

frequent repetition without producing weariness. Its charm, which admits of

universal communication, appears to rest on this, that every expression of

speech has in its context a tone appropriate to the sense. This tone indicates

more or less an affection of the speaker, and produces it also in the hearer;

which affection excites in its turn in the hearer the Idea that is expressed in

speech by the tone in question. Thus as modulation is as it were a universal

language of sensations intelligible to every man, the art of tone employs it by

itself alone in its full force, viz. as a language of the affections, and thus

communicates universally according to the laws of association the aesthetical

Ideas naturally combined therewith. Now these aesthetical Ideas are not

concepts or determinate thoughts. Hence the form of the composition of these

sensations (harmony and melody) only serves instead of the form of

language, by means of their proportionate accordance, to express the

aesthetical Idea of a connected whole of an unspeakable wealth of thought,

corresponding to a certain theme which produces the dominating affection in

the piece. This can be brought mathematically under certain rules, because it

rests in the case of tones on the relation between the number of vibrations ofthe air in the same time, so far as these tones are combined simultaneously or

successively. To this mathematical form, although not represented by

determinate concepts, alone attaches the satisfaction that unites the mere

reflection upon such a number of concomitant or consecutive sensations with

this their play, as a condition of its beauty valid for every man. It is this alone

which permits Taste to claim in advance a rightful authority over every one’s

judgement.

              But in the charm and mental movement produced by Music,

Mathematic has certainly not the slightest share. It is only the indispensable

condition (conditio sine qua non ) of that proportion of the impressions in

their combination and in their alternation by which it becomes possible to

gather them together and prevent them from destroying one another, and to

harmonise them so as to produce a continual movement and animation of the

mind, by means of affections consonant therewith, and thus a delightful

personal enjoyment.

              If, on the other hand, we estimate the worth of the Beautiful Arts by

the culture they supply to the mind, and take as a standard the expansion of

the faculties which must concur in the Judgement for cognition, Music will

have the lowest place among them (as it has perhaps the highest among those

arts which are valued for their pleasantness), because it merely plays with

sensations. The formative arts are far before it in this point of view; for in

putting the Imagination in a free play, which is also accordant with the

Understanding, they at the same time carry on a serious business. This they

do by producing a product that serves for concepts as a permanent self-

commendatory vehicle for promoting their union with sensibility and thus, as

it were, the urbanity of the higher cognitive powers. These two species of art

take quite different courses; the first proceeds from sensations to

indeterminate Ideas, the second from determinate Ideas to sensations. The

latter produce permanent, the former only transitory impressions. The

Imagination can recall the one and entertain itself pleasantly therewith; but

the other either vanish entirely, or if they are recalled involuntarily by the

Imagination they are rather wearisome than pleasant.1 Besides, there attaches

to Music a certain want of urbanity from the fact that, chiefly from the

character of its instruments, it extends its influence further than is desired (in

the neighbourhood), and so as it were obtrudes itself, and does violence to the

freedom of others who are not of the musical company. The Arts whichappeal to the eyes do not do this; for we need only turn our eyes away, if we

wish to avoid being impressed. The case of music is almost like that of the

delight derived from a smell that diffuses itself widely. The man who pulls

his perfumed handkerchief out of his pocket attracts the attention of all round

him, even against their will, and he forces them, if they are to breathe at all,

to enjoy the scent; hence this habit has gone out of fashion.1

              Among the formative arts I would give the palm to painting; partly

because as the art of delineation it lies at the root of all the other formative

arts, and partly because it can penetrate much further into the region of Ideas,

and can extend the field of intuition in conformity with them further than the

others can.

        1
               I must admit that a beautiful poem has always given me a pure

gratification; whilst the reading of the best discourse, whether of a Roman

orator or of a modern parliamentary speaker or of a preacher, has always been

mingled with an unpleasant feeling of disapprobation of a treacherous art,

which means to move men in important matters like machines to a judgement

that must lose all weight for them on quiet reflection. Readiness and accuracy

in speaking (which taken together constitute Rhetoric) belong to beautiful art;

but the art of the orator (ars oratoria ), the art of availing oneself of the

weaknesses of men for one’s own designs (whether these be well meant or

even actually good does not matter) is worthy of no respect. Again, this art

only reached its highest point, both at Athens and at Rome, at a time when

the state was hastening to its ruin and true patriotic sentiment had

disappeared. The man who along with a clear insight into things has in his

power a wealth of pure speech, and who with a fruitful Imagination capable

of presenting his Ideas unites a lively sympathy with what is truly good, is the

vir bonus dicendi peritus, the orator without art but of great impressiveness,

as Cicero has it; though he may not always remain true to this ideal.

        1
               [From this to the end of the paragraph, and the next note, were

added in the Second Edition.]

        1
               Those who recommend the singing of spiritual songs at family

prayers do not consider that they inflict a great hardship upon the public by

such noisy (and therefore in general pharisaical) devotions; for they force the

neighbours either to sing with them or to abandon their meditations. [Kant

suffered himself from such annoyances, which may account for the asperityof this note. At one period he was disturbed by the devotional exercises of the

prisoners in the adjoining jail. In a letter to the burgomaster “he suggested the

advantage of closing the windows during these hymn-singings, and added

that the warders of the prison might probably be directed to accept less

sonorous and neighbour-annoying chants as evidence of the penitent spirit of

their captives” (Wallace’s Kant, p. 42).]                                    § 54. Remark

 

 

              As we have often shown, there is an essential difference between

what satisfies simply in the act of judging it, and that which gratifies (pleases

in sensation). We cannot ascribe the latter to every one, as we can the former.

Gratification (the causes of which may even be situate in Ideas) appears

always to consist in a feeling of the furtherance of the whole life of the man,

and consequently, also of his bodily well-being, i.e. his health; so that

Epicurus, who gave out that all gratification was at bottom bodily sensation,

may, perhaps, not have been wrong, but only misunderstood himself when he

reckoned intellectual and even practical satisfaction under gratification. If we

have this distinction in view we can explain how a gratification may

dissatisfy the man who sensibly feels it (e.g. the joy of a needy but well-

meaning man at becoming the heir of an affectionate but penurious father); or

how a deep grief may satisfy the person experiencing it (the sorrow of a

widow at the death of her excellent husband); or how a gratification can in

addition satisfy (as in the sciences that we pursue); or how a grief (e.g.

hatred, envy, revenge) can moreover dissatisfy. The satisfaction or

dissatisfaction here depends on Reason, and is the same as approbation or

disapprobation; but gratification and grief can only rest on the feeling or

prospect of a possible (on whatever grounds) well-being or its opposite.

              All changing free play of sensations (that have no design at their

basis) gratifies, because it promotes the feeling of health. In the judgement of

Reason we may or may not have any satisfaction in its object or even in this

gratification; and this latter may rise to the height of an affection, although

we take no interest in the object, at least none that is proportionate to the

degree of the affection. We may subdivide this free play of sensations into

the play of fortune [games of chance], the play of tone [music], and the play

of thought [wit]. The first requires an interest, whether of vanity or of

selfishness; which, however, is not nearly so great as the interest that attaches

to the way in which we are striving to procure it. The second requires merely

the change of sensations, all of which have a relation to affection, though

they have not the degree of affection, and excite aesthetical Ideas. The third

springs merely from the change of representations in the Judgement; by it,indeed, no thought that brings an interest with it is produced, but yet the mind

is animated thereby.

              How much gratification games must afford, without any necessity of

placing at their basis an interested design, all our evening parties show; for

hardly any of them can be carried on without a game. But the affections of

hope, fear, joy, wrath, scorn, are put in play by them, alternating every

moment; and they are so vivid that by them, as by a kind of internal motion,

all the vital processes of the body seem to be promoted, as is shown by the

mental vivacity excited by them, although nothing is gained or learnt thereby.

But as the beautiful does not enter into games of chance, we will here set

them aside. On the other hand, music and that which excites laughter are two

different kinds of play with aesthetical Ideas, or with representations of the

Understanding through which ultimately nothing is thought; and yet they can

give lively gratification merely by their changes. Thus we recognise pretty

clearly that the animation in both cases is merely bodily, although it is

excited by Ideas of the mind; and that the feeling of health produced by a

motion of the intestines corresponding to the play in question makes up that

whole gratification of a gay party, which is regarded as so refined and so

spiritual. It is not the judging the harmony in tones or sallies of wit,— which

serves only in combination with their beauty as a necessary vehicle,— but the

furtherance of the vital bodily processes, the affection that moves the

intestines and the diaphragm, in a word, the feeling of health (which without

such inducements one does not feel) that makes up the gratification felt by us;

so that we can thus reach the body through the soul and use the latter as the

physician of the former.

              In music this play proceeds from bodily sensations to aesthetical

Ideas (the Objects of our affections), and then from these back again to the

body with redoubled force. In the case of jokes (the art of which, just like

music, should rather be reckoned as pleasant than beautiful) the play begins

with the thoughts which together occupy the body, so far as they admit of

sensible expression; and as the Understanding stops suddenly short at this

presentment, in which it does not find what it expected, we feel the effect of

this slackening in the body by the oscillation of the organs, which promotes

the restoration of equilibrium and has a favourable influence upon health.

              In everything that is to excite a lively convulsive laugh there must be

something absurd (in which the Understanding, therefore, can find nosatisfaction). Laughter is an affection arising from the sudden transformation

of a strained expectation into nothing. 1 This transformation, which is

certainly not enjoyable by the Understanding, yet indirectly gives it very

active enjoyment for a moment. Therefore its cause must consist in the

influence of the representation upon the body, and the reflex effect of this

upon the mind; not, indeed, through the representation being objectively an

object of gratification1 (for how could a delusive expectation gratify?), but

simply through it as a mere play of representations bringing about an

equilibrium of the vital powers in the body.

              Suppose this story to be told: An Indian at the table of an

Englishman in Surat, when he saw a bottle of ale opened and all the beer

turned into froth and overflowing, testified his great astonishment with many

exclamations. When the Englishman asked him, “What is there in this to

astonish you so much?” he answered, “I am not at all astonished that it should

flow out, but I do wonder how you ever got it in.” At this story we laugh, and

it gives us hearty pleasure; not because we deem ourselves cleverer than this

ignorant man, or because of anything else in it that we note as satisfactory to

the Understanding, but because our expectation was strained [for a time] and

then was suddenly dissipated into nothing. Again: The heir of a rich relative

wished to arrange for an imposing funeral, but he lamented that he could not

properly succeed; “for” (said he) “the more money I give my mourners to

look sad, the more cheerful they look!”2 When we hear this story we laugh

loud, and the reason is that an expectation is suddenly transformed into

nothing. We must note well that it does not transform itself into the positive

opposite of an expected object — for then there would still be something,

which might even be a cause of grief — but it must be transformed into

nothing. For if a man arouses great expectations in us when telling a story,

and at the end we see its falsehood immediately, it displeases us; e.g. the

story of the people whose hair in consequence of great grief turned gray in

one night. But if a wag, to repair the effect of this story, describes very

circumstantially the grief of the merchant returning from India to Europe with

all his wealth in merchandise who was forced to throw it overboard in a

heavy storm, and who grieved thereat so much that his wig turned gray the

same night — we laugh and it gives us gratification. For we treat our own

mistake in the case of an object otherwise indifferent to us, or rather the Idea

which we are following out, as we treat a ball which we knock to and fro for

a time, though our only serious intention is to seize it and hold it fast. It is notthe mere rebuff of a liar or a simpleton that arouses our gratification; for the

latter story told with assumed seriousness would set a whole company in a

roar of laughter, while the former would ordinarily not be regarded as worth

attending to.

              It is remarkable that in all such cases the jest must contain something

that is capable of deceiving for a moment. Hence, when the illusion is

dissipated, the mind turns back to try it once again, and thus through a rapidly

alternating tension and relaxation it is jerked back and put into a state of

oscillation. This, because the strain on the cord as it were is suddenly (and

not gradually) relaxed, must occasion a mental movement, and an inner

bodily movement harmonising therewith, which continues involuntarily and

fatigues, even while cheering us (the effects of a motion conducive to health).

              For if we admit that with all our thoughts is harmonically combined

a movement in the organs of the body, we shall easily comprehend how to

this sudden transposition of the mind, now to one now to another standpoint

in order to contemplate its object, may correspond an alternating tension and

relaxation of the elastic portions of our intestines, which communicates itself

to the diaphragm (like that which ticklish people feel). In connexion with this

the lungs expel the air at rapidly succeeding intervals, and thus bring about a

movement beneficial to health; which alone, and not what precedes it in the

mind, is the proper cause of the gratification in a thought that at bottom

represents nothing.— Voltaire said that heaven had given us two things to

counterbalance the many miseries of life, hope and sleep. 1 He could have

added laughter, if the means of exciting it in reasonable men were only as

easily attainable, and the requisite wit or originality of humour were not so

rare, as the talent is common of imagining things which break one’s head, as

mystic dreamers do, or which break one’s neck, as your genius does, or

which break one’s heart, as sentimental romance-writers (and even moralists

of the same kidney) do.

              We may therefore, as it seems to me, readily concede to Epicurus

that all gratification, even that which is occasioned through concepts, excited

by aesthetical Ideas, is animal, i.e. bodily sensation; without the least

prejudice to the spiritual feeling of respect for moral Ideas, which is not

gratification at all but an esteem for self (for humanity in us), that raises us

above the need of gratification, and even without the slightest prejudice to the

less noble [feeling] of taste.              We find a combination of these two last in naiveté, which is the

breaking out of the sincerity originally natural to humanity in opposition to

that art of dissimulation which has become a second nature. We laugh at the

simplicity that does not understand how to dissemble; and yet we are

delighted with the simplicity of the nature which thwarts that art. We look for

the commonplace manner of artificial utterance devised with foresight to

make a fair show; and behold! it is the unspoiled innocent nature which we

do not expect to find, and which he who displays it did not think of

disclosing. That the fair but false show which generally has so much

influence upon our judgement is here suddenly transformed into nothing, so

that, as it were, the rogue in us is laid bare, produces a movement of the mind

in two opposite directions, which gives a wholesome shock to the body. But

the fact that something infinitely better than all assumed manner, viz. purity

of disposition (or at least the tendency thereto), is not quite extinguished yet

in human nature, blends seriousness and high esteem with this play of the

Judgement. But because it is only a transitory phenomenon and the veil of

dissimulation is soon drawn over it again, there is mingled therewith a

compassion which is an emotion of tenderness; this, as play, readily admits of

combination with a good-hearted laugh, and ordinarily is actually so

combined, and withal is wont to compensate him who supplies its material

for the embarrassment which results from not yet being wise after the manner

of men.— An art that is to be naive is thus a contradiction; but the

representation of naiveté in a fictitious personage is quite possible, and is a

beautiful though a rare art. Naiveté must not be confounded with open-

hearted simplicity, which does not artificially spoil nature solely because it

does not understand the art of social intercourse.

              The humorous manner again may be classified as that which, as

exhilarating us, is near akin to the gratification that proceeds from laughter;

and belongs to the originality of spirit, but not to the talent of beautiful art.

Humour in the good sense means the talent of being able voluntarily to put

oneself into a certain mental disposition, in which everything is judged quite

differently from the ordinary method (reversed, in fact), and yet in

accordance with certain rational principles in such a frame of mind. He who

is involuntarily subject to such mutations is called a man of humours

[launisch]; but he who can assume them voluntarily and purposively (on

behalf of a lively presentment brought about by the aid of a contrast that

excites a laugh)— he and his manner of speech are called humorous [launigt].This manner, however, belongs rather to pleasant than to beautiful art,

because the object of the latter must always exhibit intrinsic worth, and hence

requires a certain seriousness in the presentation, as taste does in the act of

judgement.

        1
               [Cf. “Parturiunt montes, nascitur ridiculus mus.”]

        1
               [The First Edition adds “as in the case of a man who gets the news

of a great commercial success.”

        2
               [The jest may have been taken from Steele’s play, “The Funeral or

Grief à la mode, ” where it occurs verbatim. This play was published in

1702.]

        1
               [ Henriade, Chant 7, sub init.

              “Du Dieu qui nous créa la clémence infinie,

              Pour adoucir les maux de cette courte vie,

              A placé parmi nous deux êtres bienfaisants,

              De la terre à jamais aimables habitants,

              Soutiens dans les travaux, trésors dans l’indigence:

              L’un est le doux sommeil, et l’autre est l’espérance.”]

 

 

 

           Second Division: Dialectic of the Aesthetical Judgement

 

 

                                          § 55.

 

 

              A faculty of Judgement that is to be dialectical must in the first place

be rationalising, i.e. its judgements must claim universality1 and that a

priori; for it is in the opposition of such judgements that Dialectic consists.

Hence the incompatibility of aesthetical judgements of Sense (about the

pleasant and the unpleasant) is not dialectical. And again, the conflict

between judgements of Taste, so far as each man depends merely on his own

taste, forms no Dialectic of taste; because no one proposes to make his own

judgement a universal rule. There remains therefore no other concept of a

Dialectic which has to do with taste than that of a Dialectic of the Critique of

taste (not of taste itself) in respect of its principles; for here concepts that

contradict one another (as to the ground of the possibility of judgements of

taste in general) naturally and unavoidably present themselves. The

transcendental Critique of taste will therefore contain a part which can bear

the name of a Dialectic of the aesthetical Judgement, only if and so far as

there is found an antinomy of the principles of this faculty which renders its

conformity to law, and consequently also its internal possibility, doubtful.

        1
               We may describe as a rationalising judgement (judicium

ratiocinans ) one which proclaims itself as universal, for as such it can serve

as the major premise of a syllogism. On the other hand, we can only speak of

a judgement as rational (judicium ratiocinatum ) which is thought as the

conclusion of a syllogism, and consequently as grounded a priori.                § 56. Representation of the antinomy of Taste

 

 

              The first commonplace of taste is contained in the proposition, with

which every tasteless person proposes to avoid blame: every one has his own

taste. That is as much as to say that the determining ground of this judgement

is merely subjective (gratification or grief), and that the judgement has no

right to the necessary assent of others.

              The second commonplace invoked even by those who admit for

judgements of taste the right to speak with validity for every one is: there is

no disputing about taste. That is as much as to say that the determining

ground of a judgement of taste may indeed be objective, but that it cannot be

reduced to definite concepts, and that consequently about the judgement itself

nothing can be decided by proofs, although much may rightly be contested.

For contesting [quarrelling] and disputing [controversy] are doubtless the

same in this, that by means of the mutual opposition of judgements they seek

to produce their accordance; but different in that the latter hopes to bring this

about according to definite concepts as determining grounds, and

consequently assumes objective concepts as grounds of the judgement. But

where this is regarded as impracticable, controversy is regarded as alike

impracticable.

              We easily see that between these two commonplaces there is a

proposition wanting, which, though it has not passed into a proverb, is yet

familiar to every one, viz. there may be a quarrel about taste (although there

can be no controversy). But this proposition involves the contradictory of the

former one. For wherever quarrelling is permissible, there must be a hope of

mutual reconciliation; and consequently we can count on grounds of our

judgement that have not merely private validity, and therefore are not merely

subjective. And to this the proposition, every one has his own taste, is

directly opposed.

              There emerges therefore in respect of the principle of taste the

following Antinomy:—

              (1) Thesis. The judgement of taste is not based upon concepts; forotherwise it would admit of controversy (would be determinable by proofs).

              (2) Antithesis. The judgement of taste is based on concepts; for

otherwise, despite its diversity, we could not quarrel about it (we could not

claim for our judgement the necessary assent of others).                    § 57. Solution of the antinomy of Taste

 

 

              There is no possibility of removing the conflict between these

principles that underlie every judgement of taste (which are nothing else than

the two peculiarities of the judgement of taste exhibited above in the

Analytic), except by showing that the concept to which we refer the Object in

this kind of judgement is not taken in the same sense in both maxims of the

aesthetical Judgement. This twofold sense or twofold point of view is

necessary to our transcendental Judgement; but also the illusion which arises

from the confusion of one with the other is natural and unavoidable.

              The judgement of taste must refer to some concept; otherwise it

could make absolutely no claim to be necessarily valid for every one. But it is

not therefore capable of being proved from a concept; because a concept may

be either determinable or in itself undetermined and undeterminable. The

concepts of the Understanding are of the former kind; they are determinable

through predicates of sensible intuition which can correspond to them. But

the transcendental rational concept of the supersensible, which lies at the

basis of all sensible intuition, is of the latter kind, and therefore cannot be

theoretically determined further.

              Now the judgement of taste is applied to objects of Sense, but not

with a view of determining a concept of them for the Understanding; for it is

not a cognitive judgement. It is thus only a private judgement, in which a

singular representation intuitively perceived is referred to the feeling of

pleasure; and so far would be limited as regards its validity to the individual

judging. The object is for me an object of satisfaction; by others it may be

regarded quite differently — every one has his own taste.

              Nevertheless there is undoubtedly contained in the judgement of

taste a wider reference of the representation of the Object (as well as of the

subject), whereon we base an extension of judgements of this kind as

necessary for every one. At the basis of this there must necessarily be a

concept somewhere; though a concept which cannot be determined through

intuition. But through a concept of this sort we know nothing, and

consequently it can supply no proof for the judgement of taste. Such aconcept is the mere pure rational concept of the supersensible which

underlies the object (and also the subject judging it), regarded as an Object of

sense and thus as phenomenon.1 For if we do not admit such a reference, the

claim of the judgement of taste to universal validity would not hold good. If

the concept on which it is based were only a mere confused concept of the

Understanding, like that of perfection, with which we could bring the sensible

intuition of the Beautiful into correspondence, it would be at least possible in

itself to base the judgement of taste on proofs; which contradicts the thesis.

              But all contradiction disappears if I say: the judgement of taste is

based on a concept (viz. the concept of the general ground of the subjective

purposiveness of nature for the Judgement); from which, however, nothing

can be known and proved in respect of the Object, because it is in itself

undeterminable and useless for knowledge. Yet at the same time and on that

very account the judgement has validity for every one (though of course for

each only as a singular judgement immediately accompanying his intuition);

because its determining ground lies perhaps in the concept of that which may

be regarded as the supersensible substrate of humanity.

              The solution of an antinomy only depends on the possibility of

showing that two apparently contradictory propositions do not contradict one

another in fact, but that they may be consistent; although the explanation of

the possibility of their concept may transcend our cognitive faculties. That

this illusion is natural and unavoidable by human Reason, and also why it is

so, and remains so, although it ceases to deceive after the analysis of the

apparent contradiction, may be thus explained.

              In the two contradictory judgements we take the concept, on which

the universal validity of a judgement must be based, in the same sense; and

yet we apply to it two opposite predicates. In the Thesis we mean that the

judgement of taste is not based upon determinate concepts; and in the

Antithesis that the judgement of taste is based upon a concept, but an

indeterminate one (viz. of the supersensible substrate of phenomena).

Between these two there is no contradiction.

              We can do nothing more than remove this conflict between the

claims and counter-claims of taste. It is absolutely impossible to give a

definite objective principle of taste, in accordance with which its judgements

could be derived, examined, and established; for then the judgement wouldnot be one of taste at all. The subjective principle, viz. the indefinite Idea of

the supersensible in us, can only be put forward as the sole key to the puzzle

of this faculty whose sources are hidden from us: it can be made no further

intelligible.

              The proper concept of taste, that is of a merely reflective aesthetical

Judgement, lies at the basis of the antinomy here exhibited and adjusted.

Thus the two apparently contradictory principles are reconciled — both can

be true; which is sufficient. If, on the other hand, we assume, as some do,

pleasantness as the determining ground of taste (on account of the singularity

of the representation which lies at the basis of the judgement of taste), or, as

others will have it, the principle of perfection (on account of the universality

of the same), and settle the definition of taste accordingly; then there arises an

antinomy which it is absolutely impossible to adjust except by showing that

both the contrary (though not contradictory) propositions are false. And this

would prove that the concept on which they are based is self-contradictory.

Hence we see that the removal of the antinomy of the aesthetical Judgement

takes a course similar to that pursued by the Critique in the solution of the

antinomies of pure theoretical Reason. And thus here, as also in the Critique

of practical Reason, the antinomies force us against our will to look beyond

the sensible and to seek in the supersensible the point of union for all our a

priori faculties; because no other expedient is left to make our Reason

harmonious with itself.

        1
               [Cf. p. 241 infra. ]

                                      Remark I.

 

 

              As we so often find occasion in Transcendental Philosophy for

distinguishing Ideas from concepts of the Understanding, it may be of use to

introduce technical terms to correspond to this distinction. I believe that no

one will object if I propose some.— In the most universal signification of the

word, Ideas are representations referred to an object, according to a certain

(subjective or objective) principle, but so that they can never become a

cognition of it. They are either referred to an intuition, according to a merely

subjective principle of the mutual harmony of the cognitive powers (the

Imagination and the Understanding), and they are then called aesthetical; or

they are referred to a concept according to an objective principle, althoughthey can never furnish a cognition of the object and are called rational Ideas.

In the latter case the concept is a transcendent one, which is different from a

concept of the Understanding, to which an adequately corresponding

experience can always be supplied, and which therefore is called immanent.

              An aesthetical Idea cannot become a cognition, because it is an

intuition (of the Imagination) for which an adequate concept can never be

found. A rational Idea can never become a cognition, because it involves a

concept (of the supersensible), corresponding to which an intuition can never

be given.

              Now I believe we might call the aesthetical Idea an inexponible

representation of the Imagination, and a rational Idea an indemonstrable

concept of Reason. It is assumed of both that they are not generated without

grounds, but (according to the above explanation of an Idea in general) in

conformity with certain principles of the cognitive faculties to which they

belong (subjective principles in the one case, objective in the other).

              Concepts of the Understanding must, as such, always be

demonstrable [if by demonstration we understand, as in anatomy, merely

presentation ];1 i.e. the object corresponding to them must always be capable

of being given in intuition (pure or empirical); for thus alone could they

become cognitions. The concept of magnitude can be given a priori in the

intuition of space, e.g. of a right line, etc.; the concept of cause in

impenetrability, in the collision of bodies, etc. Consequently both can be

authenticated by means of an empirical intuition, i.e. the thought of them can

be proved (demonstrated, verified) by an example; and this must be possible,

for otherwise we should not be certain that the concept was not empty, i.e.

devoid of any Object.

              In Logic we ordinarily use the expressions demonstrable or

indemonstrable only in respect of propositions, but these might be better

designated by the titles respectively of mediately and immediately certain

propositions; for pure Philosophy has also propositions of both kinds, i.e. true

propositions, some of which are susceptible of proof and others not. It can, as

philosophy, prove them on a priori grounds, but it cannot demonstrate them;

unless we wish to depart entirely from the proper meaning of this word,

according to which to demonstrate (ostendere, exhibere ) is equivalent to

presenting a concept in intuition (whether in proof or merely in definition). Ifthe intuition is a priori this is called construction; but if it is empirical, then

the Object is displayed by means of which objective reality is assured to the

concept. Thus we say of an anatomist that he demonstrates the human eye, if

by a dissection of this organ he makes intuitively evident the concept which

he has previously treated discursively.

              It hence follows that the rational concept of the supersensible

substrate of all phenomena in general, or even of that which must be placed at

the basis of our arbitrary will in respect of the moral law, viz. of

transcendental freedom, is already, in kind, an indemonstrable concept and a

rational Idea; while virtue is so, in degree. For there can be given in

experience, as regards its quality, absolutely nothing corresponding to the

former; whereas in the latter case no empirical product attains to the degree

of that causality, which the rational Idea prescribes as the rule.

              As in a rational Idea the Imagination with its intuitions does not

attain to the given concept, so in an aesthetical Idea the Understanding by its

concepts never attains completely to that internal intuition which the

Imagination binds up with a given representation. Since, now, to reduce a

representation of the Imagination to concepts is the same thing as to expound

it, the aesthetical Idea may be called an inexponible representation of the

Imagination (in its free play). I shall have occasion in the sequel to say

something more of Ideas of this kind; now I only note that both kinds of

Ideas, rational and aesthetical, must have their principles; and must have

them in Reason — the one in the objective, the other in the subjective

principles of its employment.

              We can consequently explain genius as the faculty of aesthetical

Ideas; by which at the same time is shown the reason why in the products of

genius it is the nature (of the subject) and not a premeditated purpose that

gives the rule to the art (of the production of the beautiful). For since the

beautiful must not be judged by concepts, but by the purposive attuning of

the Imagination to agreement with the faculty of concepts in general, it

cannot be rule and precept which can serve as the subjective standard of that

aesthetical but unconditioned purposiveness in beautiful art, that can rightly

claim to please every one. It can only be that in the subject which is nature

and cannot be brought under rules or concepts, i.e. the supersensible substrate

of all his faculties (to which no concept of the Understanding extends), and

consequently that with respect to which it is the final purpose given by theintelligible [part] of our nature to harmonise all our cognitive faculties. Thus

alone is it possible that there should be a priori at the basis of this

purposiveness, for which we can prescribe no objective principle, a principle

subjective and yet of universal validity.

        1
               [Second Edition.]

                                      Remark II.

 

 

              The following important remark occurs here: There are three kinds

of Antinomies of pure Reason, which, however, all agree in this, that they

compel us to give up the otherwise very natural hypothesis that objects of

sense are things in themselves, and force us to regard them merely as

phenomena, and to supply to them an intelligible substrate (something

supersensible of which the concept is only an Idea, and supplies no proper

knowledge). Without such antinomies Reason could never decide upon

accepting a principle narrowing so much the field of its speculation, and

could never bring itself to sacrifices by which so many otherwise brilliant

hopes must disappear. For even now when, by way of compensation for these

losses, a greater field in a practical aspect opens out before it, it appears not

to be able without grief to part from those hopes, and disengage itself from its

old attachment.

              That there are three kinds of antinomies has its ground in this, that

there are three cognitive faculties,— Understanding, Judgement, and Reason;

of which each (as a superior cognitive faculty) must have its a priori

principles. For Reason, in so far as it judges of these principles and their use,

inexorably requires, in respect of them all, the unconditioned for the given

conditioned; and this can never be found if we consider the sensible as

belonging to things in themselves, and do not rather supply to it, as mere

phenomenon, something supersensible (the intelligible substrate of nature

both external and internal) as the reality in itself [Sache an sich selbst]. There

are then: (1) For the cognitive faculty an antinomy of Reason in respect of the

theoretical employment of the Understanding extended to the unconditioned;

(2) for the feeling of pleasure and pain an antinomy of Reason in respect of

the aesthetical employment of the Judgement; and (3) for the faculty of desire

an antinomy in respect of the practical employment of the self-legislative

Reason; so far as all these faculties have their superior principles a priori,and, in conformity with an inevitable requirement of Reason, must judge and

be able to determine their Object, unconditionally according to those

principles.

              As for the two antinomies of the theoretical and practical

employment of the superior cognitive faculties, we have already shown their

unavoidableness, if judgements of this kind are not referred to a

supersensible substrate of the given Objects, as phenomena; and also the

possibility of their solution, as soon as this is done. And as for the antinomies

in the employment of the Judgement, in conformity with the requirements of

Reason, and their solution which is here given, there are only two ways of

avoiding them. Either: we must deny that any a priori principle lies at the

basis of the aesthetical judgement of taste; we must maintain that all claim to

necessary universal agreement is a groundless and vain fancy, and that a

judgement of taste only deserves to be regarded as correct because it happens

that many people agree about it; and this, not because we assume an a priori

principle behind this agreement, but because (as in the taste of the palate) of

the contingent similar organisation of the different subjects. Or: we must

assume that the judgement of taste is really a disguised judgement of Reason

upon the perfection discovered in a thing and the reference of the manifold in

it to a purpose, and is consequently only called aesthetical on account of the

confusion here attaching to our reflection, although it is at bottom

teleological. In the latter case we could declare the solution of the antinomies

by means of transcendental Ideas to be needless and without point, and thus

could harmonise these laws of taste with Objects of sense, not as mere

phenomena but as things in themselves. But we have shown in several places

in the exposition of judgements of taste how little either of these expedients

will satisfy.

              However, if it be granted that our deduction at least proceeds by the

right method, although it be not yet plain enough in all its parts, three Ideas

manifest themselves. First, there is the Idea of the supersensible in general,

without any further determination of it, as the substrate of nature. Secondly,

there is the Idea of the same as the principle of the subjective purposiveness

of nature for our cognitive faculty. And thirdly, there is the Idea of the same

as the principle of the purposes of freedom, and of the agreement of freedom

with its purposes in the moral sphere.§ 58. Of the Idealism of the purposiveness of both Nature and Art as the

                unique principle of the aesthetical Judgement.

 

 

              To begin with, we can either place the principle of taste in the fact

that it always judges in accordance with grounds which are empirical and

therefore are only given a posteriori by sense, or concede that it judges on a

priori grounds. The former would be the empiricism of the Critique of Taste;

the latter its rationalism. According to the former the Object of our

satisfaction would not differ from the pleasant; according to the latter, if the

judgement rests on definite concepts, it would not differ from the good. Thus

all beauty would be banished from the world, and only a particular name,

expressing perhaps a certain mingling of the two above-named kinds of

satisfaction, would remain in its place. But we have shown that there are also

a priori grounds of satisfaction which can subsist along with the principle of

rationalism, although they cannot be comprehended in definite concepts.

              On the other hand, the rationalism of the principle of taste is either

that of the realism of the purposiveness, or of its idealism. Because a

judgement of taste is not a cognitive judgement, and beauty is not a

characteristic of the Object, considered in itself, the rationalism of the

principle of taste can never be placed in the fact that the purposiveness in this

judgement is thought as objective, i.e. that the judgement theoretically, and

therefore also logically (although only in a confused way), refers to the

perfection of the Object. It only refers aesthetically to the agreement of the

representation of the Object in the Imagination with the essential principles of

Judgement in general in the subject. Consequently, even according to the

principle of rationalism, the judgement of taste and the distinction between its

realism and idealism can only be settled thus. Either in the first case, this

subjective purposiveness is assumed as an actual (designed) purpose of

nature (or art) harmonising with our Judgement; or, in the second case, as a

purposive harmony with the needs of Judgement, in respect of nature and its

forms produced according to particular laws, which shows itself, without

purpose, spontaneously, and contingently.

              The beautiful formations in the kingdom of organised nature speakloudly for the realism of the aesthetical purposiveness of nature; since we

might assume that behind the production of the beautiful there is an Idea of

the beautiful in the producing cause, viz. a purpose in respect of our

Imagination. Flowers, blossoms, even the shapes of entire plants; the

elegance of animal formations of all kinds, unneeded for their proper use, but,

as it were, selected for our taste; especially the charming variety so satisfying

to the eye and the harmonious arrangement of colours (in the pheasant, in

shell-fish, in insects, even in the commonest flowers), which, as it only

concerns the surface and not the figure of these creations (though perhaps

requisite in regard of their internal purposes), seems to be entirely designed

for external inspection; these things give great weight to that mode of

explanation which assumes actual purposes of nature for our aesthetical

Judgement.

              On the other hand, not only is Reason opposed to this assumption in

its maxims, which bid us always avoid as far as possible unnecessary

multiplication of principles; but nature everywhere shows in its free

formations much mechanical tendency to the productions of forms which

seem, as it were, to be made for the aesthetical exercise of our Judgement,

without affording the least ground for the supposition that there is need of

anything more than its mechanism, merely as nature, according to which,

without any Idea lying at their root, they can be purposive for our judgement.

But I understand by free formations of nature those whereby from a fluid at

rest, through the volatilisation or separation of a portion of its constituents

(sometimes merely of caloric), the remainder in becoming solid assumes a

definite shape or tissue (figure or texture), which is different according to the

specific difference of the material, but in the same material is constant. Here

it is always presupposed that we are speaking of a perfect fluid, i.e. that the

material in it is completely dissolved, and that it is not a mere medley of solid

particles in a state of suspension.

              Formation, then, takes place by a shooting together, i.e. by a sudden

solidification, not by a gradual transition from the fluid to the solid state, but

all at once by a saltus; which transition is also called crystallisation. The

commonest example of this kind of formation is the freezing of water, where

first icicles are produced, which combine at angles of 60°, while others attach

themselves to each vertex, until it all becomes ice; and so that, while this is

going on, the water does not gradually become viscous, but is as perfectlyfluid as if its temperature were far higher, although it is absolutely ice-cold.

The matter that disengages itself, which is dissipated suddenly at the moment

of solidification, is a considerable quantum of caloric, the disappearance of

which, as it was only required for preserving fluidity, leaves the new ice not

in the least colder than the water which shortly before was fluid.

              Many salts, and also rocks, of a crystalline figure, are produced thus

from a species of earth dissolved in water, we do not exactly know how. Thus

are formed the glandular configurations of many minerals, the cubical

sulphide of lead, the ruby silver ore, etc., in all probability in water and by the

shooting together of particles, as they become forced by some cause to

dispense with this vehicle and to unite in definite external shapes.

              But also all kinds of matter, which have been kept in a fluid state by

heat, and have become solid by cooling, show internally, when fractured, a

definite texture. This makes us judge that if their own weight or the

disturbance of the air had not prevented it, they would also have exhibited on

the outer surface their specifically peculiar shapes. This has been observed in

some metals on their inner surface, which have been hardened externally by

fusion but are fluid in the interior, by the drawing off the internal fluid and

the consequent undisturbed crystallisation of the remainder. Many of these

mineral crystallisations, such as spars, hematite, arragonite, etc., often present

beautiful shapes, the like of which art can only conceive; and the halo in the

cavern of Antiparos1 is merely produced by water trickling down strata of

gypsum.

              The fluid state is, to all appearance, older than the solid state, and

plants as well as animal bodies are fashioned out of fluid nutritive matter, so

far as this forms itself in a state of rest. This last of course primarily combines

and forms itself in freedom according to a certain original disposition

directed towards purposes (which, as will be shown in Part II., must not be

judged aesthetically but teleologically according to the principle of realism),

but also perhaps in conformity with the universal law of the affinity of

materials. Again, the watery fluids dissolved in an atmosphere that is a

mixture of different gases, if they separate from the latter on account of

cooling, produce snow figures, which in correspondence with the character of

the special mixture of gases, often seem very artistic and are extremely

beautiful. So, without detracting from the teleological principle by which we

judge of organisation, we may well think that the beauty of flowers, of theplumage of birds, or of shell-fish, both in shape and colour, may be ascribed

to nature and its faculty of producing forms in an aesthetically purposive

way, in its freedom, without particular purposes adapted thereto, according to

chemical laws by the arrangement of the material requisite for the

organisation in question.

              But what shows the principle of the Ideality of the purposiveness in

the beauty of nature, as that which we always place at the basis of an

aesthetical judgement, and which allows us to employ, as a ground of

explanation for our representative faculty, no realism of purpose, is the fact

that in judging beauty we invariably seek its gauge in ourselves a priori, and

that our aesthetical Judgement is itself legislative in respect of the judgement

whether anything is beautiful or not. This could not be, on the assumption of

the Realism of the purposiveness of nature; because in that case we must

have learned from nature what we ought to find beautiful, and the aesthetical

judgement would be subjected to empirical principles. For in such an act of

judging the important point is not, what nature is, or even, as a purpose, is in

relation to us, but how we take it. There would be an objective purposiveness

in nature if it had fashioned its forms for our satisfaction; and not a subjective

purposiveness which depended upon the play of the Imagination in its

freedom, where it is we who receive nature with favour, not nature which

shows us favour. The property of nature that gives us occasion to perceive the

inner purposiveness in the relation of our mental faculties in judging certain

of its products — a purposiveness which is to be explained on supersensible

grounds as necessary and universal — cannot be a natural purpose or be

judged by us as such; for otherwise the judgement hereby determined would

not be free, and would have at its basis heteronomy, and not, as beseems a

judgement of taste, autonomy.

              In beautiful Art the principle of the Idealism of purposiveness is still

clearer. As in the case of the beautiful in Nature, an aesthetical Realism of

this purposiveness cannot be perceived by sensations (for then the art would

be only pleasant, not beautiful). But that the satisfaction produced by

aesthetical Ideas must not depend on the attainment of definite purposes (as

in mechanically designed art), and that consequently, in the very rationalism

of the principle, the ideality of the purposes and not their reality must be

fundamental, appears from the fact that beautiful Art, as such, must not be

considered as a product of Understanding and Science, but of Genius, andtherefore must get its rule through aesthetical Ideas, which are essentially

different from rational Ideas of definite purposes.

              Just as the ideality of the objects of sense as phenomena is the only

way of explaining the possibility of their forms being susceptible of a priori

determination, so the idealism of purposiveness, in judging the beautiful in

nature and art, is the only hypothesis under which Criticism can explain the

possibility of a judgement of taste which demands a priori validity for every

one (without grounding on concepts the purposiveness that is represented in

the Object).

        1
               [Antiparos is a small island in the Cyclades, remarkable for a

splendid stalactite cavern near the southern coast.]                  § 59. Of Beauty as the symbol of Morality

 

 

              Intuitions are always required to establish the reality of our concepts.

If the concepts are empirical, the intuitions are called examples. If they are

pure concepts of Understanding, the intuitions are called schemata. If we

desire to establish the objective reality of rational concepts, i.e. of Ideas, on

behalf of theoretical cognition, then we are asking for something impossible,

because absolutely no intuition can be given which shall be adequate to them.

              All hypotyposis (presentation, subjectio sub adspectum ), or sensible

illustration, is twofold. It is either schematical, when to a concept

comprehended by the Understanding the corresponding intuition is given a

priori; or it is symbolical. In the latter case to a concept only thinkable by the

Reason, to which no sensible intuition can be adequate, an intuition is

supplied with which accords a procedure of the Judgement analogous to what

it observes in schematism: it accords with it, that is, in respect of the rule of

this procedure merely, not of the intuition itself; consequently in respect of

the form of reflection merely, and not of its content.

              There is a use of the word symbolical that has been adopted by

modern logicians, which is misleading and incorrect, i.e. to speak of the

symbolical mode of representation as if it were opposed to the intuitive; for

the symbolical is only a mode of the intuitive. The latter (the intuitive), that

is, may be divided into the schematical and the symbolical modes of

representation. Both are hypotyposes, i.e. presentations (exhibitiones ); not

mere characterisations, or designations of concepts by accompanying

sensible signs which contain nothing belonging to the intuition of the Object,

and only serve as a means for reproducing the concepts, according to the law

of association of the Imagination, and consequently in a subjective point of

view. These are either words, or visible (algebraical, even mimetical) signs,

as mere expressions for concepts.1

              All intuitions, which we supply to concepts a priori, are therefore

either schemata or symbols, of which the former contain direct, the latter

indirect, presentations of the concept. The former do this demonstratively; the

latter by means of an analogy (for which we avail ourselves even of empiricalintuitions) in which the Judgement exercises a double function; first applying

the concept to the object of a sensible intuition, and then applying the mere

rule of the reflection made upon that intuition to a quite different object of

which the first is only the symbol. Thus a monarchical state is represented by

a living body, if it is governed by national laws, and by a mere machine (like

a hand-mill) if governed by an individual absolute will; but in both cases only

symbolically. For between a despotic state and a hand-mill there is, to be

sure, no similarity; but there is a similarity in the rules according to which we

reflect upon these two things and their causality. This matter has not been

sufficiently analysed hitherto, for it deserves a deeper investigation; but this

is not the place to linger over it. Our language [i.e. German] is full of indirect

presentations of this sort, in which the expression does not contain the proper

schema for the concept, but merely a symbol for reflection. Thus the words

ground (support, basis), to depend (to be held up from above), to flow from

something (instead of, to follow), substance (as Locke expresses it, the

support of accidents), and countless others, are not schematical but

symbolical hypotyposes and expressions for concepts, not by means of a

direct intuition, but only by analogy with it, i.e. by the transference of

reflection upon an object of intuition to a quite different concept to which

perhaps an intuition can never directly correspond. If we are to give the name

of cognition to a mere mode of representation (which is quite permissible if

the latter is not a principle of the theoretical determination of what an object

is in itself, but of the practical determination of what the Idea of it should be

for us and for its purposive use), then all our knowledge of God is merely

symbolical; and he who regards it as schematical, along with the properties of

Understanding, Will, etc., which only establish their objective reality in

beings of this world, falls into Anthropomorphism, just as he who gives up

every intuitive element falls into Deism, by which nothing at all is cognised,

not even in a practical point of view.

              Now I say the Beautiful is the symbol of the morally Good, and that

it is only in this respect (a reference which is natural to every man and which

every man postulates in others as a duty) that it gives pleasure with a claim

for the agreement of every one else. By this the mind is made conscious of a

certain ennoblement and elevation above the mere sensibility to pleasure

received through sense, and the worth of others is estimated in accordance

with a like maxim of their Judgement. That is the intelligible, to which, as

pointed out in the preceding paragraph, Taste looks; with which our highercognitive faculties are in accord; and without which a downright

contradiction would arise between their nature and the claims made by taste.

In this faculty the Judgement does not see itself, as in empirical judging,

subjected to a heteronomy of empirical laws; it gives the law to itself in

respect of the objects of so pure a satisfaction, just as the Reason does in

respect of the faculty of desire. Hence, both on account of this inner

possibility in the subject and of the external possibility of a nature that agrees

with it, it finds itself to be referred to something within the subject as well as

without him, something which is neither nature nor freedom, but which yet is

connected with the supersensible ground of the latter. In this supersensible

ground, therefore, the theoretical faculty is bound together in unity with the

practical, in a way which though common is yet unknown. We shall indicate

some points of this analogy, while at the same time we shall note the

differences.

              (1) The beautiful pleases immediately (but only in reflective

intuition, not, like morality, in its concept). (2) It pleases apart from any

interest (the morally good is indeed necessarily bound up with an interest,

though not with one which precedes the judgement upon the satisfaction, but

with one which is first of all produced by it). (3) The freedom of the

Imagination (and therefore of the sensibility of our faculty) is represented in

judging the beautiful as harmonious with the conformity to law of the

Understanding (in the moral judgement the freedom of the will is thought as

the harmony of the latter with itself according to universal laws of Reason).

(4) The subjective principle in judging the beautiful is represented as

universal, i.e. as valid for every man, though not cognisable through any

universal concept. (The objective principle of morality is also expounded as

universal, i.e. for every subject and for every action of the same subject, and

thus as cognisable by means of a universal concept). Hence the moral

judgement is not only susceptible of definite constitutive principles, but is

possible only by grounding its maxims on these in their universality.

              A reference to this analogy is usual even with the common

Understanding [of men], and we often describe beautiful objects of nature or

art by names that seem to put a moral appreciation at their basis. We call

buildings or trees majestic and magnificent, landscapes laughing and gay;

even colours are called innocent, modest, tender, because they excite

sensations which have something analogous to the consciousness of the stateof mind brought about by moral judgements. Taste makes possible the

transition, without any violent leap, from the charm of Sense to habitual

moral interest; for it represents the Imagination in its freedom as capable of

purposive determination for the Understanding, and so teaches us to find

even in objects of sense a free satisfaction apart from any charm of sense.

        1
               The intuitive in cognition must be opposed to the discursive (not to

the symbolical). The former is either schematical, by demonstration; or

symbolical as a representation in accordance with a mere analogy.

 

 

                                       Appendix

 

 

                          § 60. Of the method of Taste

 

 

              The division of a Critique into Elementology and Methodology, as

preparatory to science, is not applicable to the Critique of taste, because there

neither is nor can be a science of the Beautiful, and the judgement of taste is

not determinable by means of principles. As for the scientific element in

every art, which regards truth in the presentation of its Object, this is indeed

the indispensable condition (conditio sine qua non ) of beautiful art, but not

beautiful art itself. There is therefore for beautiful art only a manner (modus

), not a method of teaching (methodus ). The master must show what the

pupil is to do and how he is to do it; and the universal rules, under which at

last he brings his procedure, serve rather for bringing the main points back to

his remembrance when occasion requires, than for prescribing them to him.

Nevertheless regard must be had here to a certain ideal, which art must have

before its eyes, although it cannot be completely attained in practice. It is

only through exciting the Imagination of the pupil to accordance with a given

concept, by making him note the inadequacy of the expression for the Idea, to

which the concept itself does not attain because it is an aesthetical Idea, and

by severe criticism, that he can be prevented from taking the examples set

before him as types and models for imitation, to be subjected to no higher

standard or independent judgement. Iit is thus that genius, and with it the

freedom of the Imagination, is stifled by its very conformity to law; and

without these no beautiful art, and not even an accurately judging individual

taste, is possible.

              The propaedeutic to all beautiful art, regarded in the highest degree

of its perfection, seems to lie, not in precepts, but in the culture of the mental

powers by means of those elements of knowledge called humaniora,

probably because humanity on the one side indicates the universal feeling of

sympathy, and on the other the faculty of being able to communicate

universally our inmost [feelings]. For these properties taken togetherconstitute the characteristic social spirit1 of humanity by which it is

distinguished from the limitations of animal life. The age and peoples, in

which the impulse towards a law-abiding social life, by which a people

becomes a permanent community, contended with the great difficulties

presented by the difficult problem of uniting freedom (and therefore equality

also) with compulsion (rather of respect and submission from a sense of duty

than of fear)— such an age and such a people naturally first found out the art

of reciprocal communication of Ideas between the cultivated and uncultivated

classes and thus discovered how to harmonise the large-mindedness and

refinement of the former with the natural simplicity and originality of the

latter. In this way they first found that mean between the higher culture and

simple nature which furnishes that true standard for taste as a sense common

to all men which no universal rules can supply.

              With difficulty will a later age dispense with those models, because

it will be always farther from nature; and in fine, without having permanent

examples before it, a concept will hardly be possible, in one and the same

people, of the happy union of the law-abiding constraint of the highest culture

with the force and truth of free nature which feels its own proper worth.

              Now taste is at bottom a faculty for judging of the sensible

illustration of moral Ideas (by means of a certain analogy involved in our

reflection upon both these); and it is from this faculty also and from the

greater susceptibility grounded thereon for the feeling arising from the latter

(called moral feeling), that the pleasure is derived which taste regards as valid

for mankind in general and not merely for the private feeling of each. Hence

it appears plain that the true propaedeutic for the foundation of taste is the

development of moral Ideas and the culture of the moral feeling; because it is

only when sensibility is brought into agreement with this that genuine taste

can assume a definite invariable form.

        1
               [I read Geselligkeit with Rosenkranz and Windelband; Hartenstein

and Kirchmann have Gluckseligkeit. ]

 

 

           Part II: Critique of the Teleological Judgement

 

                 § 61. Of the objective purposiveness of Nature

 

 

              We have on transcendental principles good ground to assume a

subjective purposiveness in nature, in its particular laws, in reference to its

comprehensibility by human Judgement and to the possibility of the

connexion of particular experiences in a system. This may be expected as

possible in many products of nature, which, as if they were devised quite

specially for our Judgement, contain a specific form conformable thereto;

which through their manifoldness and unity serve at once to strengthen and to

sustain the mental powers (that come into play in the employment of this

faculty); and to which therefore we give the name of beautiful forms.

              But that the things of nature serve one another as means to purposes,

and that their possibility is only completely intelligible through this kind of

causality — for this we have absolutely no ground in the universal Idea of

nature, as the complex of the objects of sense. In the above-mentioned case,

the representation of things, because it is something in ourselves, can be quite

well thought a priori as suitable and useful for the internally purposive

determination of our cognitive faculties; but that purposes, which neither are

our own nor belong to nature (for we do not regard nature as an intelligent

being), could or should constitute a particular kind of causality, at least a

quite special conformity to law,— this we have absolutely no a priori reason

for presuming. Yet more, experience itself cannot prove to us the actuality of

this; there must then have preceded a rationalising subtlety which only

sportively introduces the concept of purpose into the nature of things, but

which does not derive it from Objects or from their empirical cognition. To

this latter it is of more service to make nature comprehensible according to

analogy with the subjective ground of the connexion of our representations,

than to cognise it from objective grounds.

              Further, objective purposiveness, as a principle of the possibility of

things of nature, is so far removed from necessary connexion with the

concept of nature, that it is much oftener precisely that upon which one relies

to prove the contingency of nature and of its form. When, e.g. we adduce the

structure of a bird, the hollowness of its bones, the disposition of its wings formotion and of its tail for steering, etc., we say that all this is contingent in the

highest degree according to the mere nexus effectivus of nature, without

calling in the aid of a particular kind of causality, namely that of purpose

(nexus finalis ). In other words, nature, considered as mere mechanism, could

have produced its forms in a thousand other ways without stumbling upon the

unity which is in accordance with such a principle. It is not in the concept of

nature but quite apart from it that we can hope to find the least ground a

priori for this.

              Nevertheless the teleological act of judgement is rightly brought to

bear, at least problematically, upon the investigation of nature; but only in

order to bring it under principles of observation and inquiry according to the

analogy with the causality of purpose, without any pretence to explain it

thereby. It belongs therefore to the reflective and not to the determinant

judgement. The concept of combinations and forms of nature in accordance

with purposes is then at least one principle more for bringing its phenomena

under rules where the laws of simply mechanical causality do not suffice. For

we bring in a teleological ground, where we attribute causality in respect of

an Object to the concept of an Object, as if it were to be found in nature (not

in ourselves); or rather when we represent to ourselves the possibility of the

Object after the analogy of that causality which we experience in ourselves,

and consequently think nature technically as through a special faculty. If we

did not ascribe to it such a method of action, its causality would have to be

represented as blind mechanism. If, on the contrary, we supply to nature

causes acting designedly, and consequently place at its basis teleology, not

merely as a regulative principle for the mere judging of phenomena, to which

nature can be thought as subject in its particular laws, but as a constitutive

principle of the derivation of its products from their causes; then would the

concept of a natural purpose no longer belong to the reflective but to the

determinant Judgement. Then, in fact, it would not belong specially to the

Judgement (like the concept of beauty regarded as formal subjective

purposiveness), but as a rational concept it would introduce into natural

science a new causality, which we only borrow from ourselves and ascribe to

other beings, without meaning to assume them to be of the same kind with

ourselves.

 

            First Division – Analytic of the Teleological Judgement

 

 

    § 62. Of the objective purposiveness which is merely formal as

                    distinguished from that which is material

 

 

              All geometrical figures drawn on a principle display a manifold, oft

admired, objective purposiveness; i.e. in reference to their usefulness for the

solution of several problems by a single principle, or of the same problem in

an infinite variety of ways. The purposiveness is here obviously objective and

intellectual, not merely subjective and aesthetical. For it expresses the

suitability of the figure for the production of many intended figures, and is

cognised through Reason. But this purposiveness does not make the concept

of the object itself possible, i.e. it is not regarded as possible merely with

reference to this use.

              In so simple a figure as the circle lies the key to the solution of a

multitude of problems, each of which would demand various appliances;

whereas the solution results of itself, as it were, as one of the infinite number

of elegant properties of this figure. Are we, for example, asked to construct a

triangle, being given the base and vertical angle? The problem is

indeterminate, i.e. it can be solved in an infinite number of ways. But the

circle embraces them altogether as the geometrical locus of the vertices of

triangles satisfying the given conditions. Again, suppose that two lines are to

cut one another so that the rectangle under the segments of the one should be

equal to the rectangle under the segments of the other; the solution of the

problem from this point of view presents much difficulty. But all chords

intersecting inside a circle divide one another in this proportion. Other

curved lines suggest other purposive solutions of which nothing was thought

in the rule that furnished their construction. All conic sections in themselves

and when compared with one another are fruitful in principles for the solution

of a number of possible problems, however simple is the definition which

determines their concept.— It is a true joy to see the zeal with which the old

geometers investigated the properties of lines of this class, without allowingthemselves to be led astray by the questions of narrow-minded persons, as to

what use this knowledge would be. Thus they worked out the properties of

the parabola without knowing the law of gravitation, which would have

suggested to them its application to the trajectory of heavy bodies (for the

motion of a heavy body can be seen to be parallel to the curve of a parabola).

Again, they found out the properties of an ellipse without surmising that any

of the heavenly bodies had weight, and without knowing the law of force at

different distances from the point of attraction, which causes it to describe

this curve in free motion. While they thus unconsciously worked for the

science of the future, they delighted themselves with a purposiveness in the

[essential] being of things which yet they were able to present completely a

priori in its necessity. Plato, himself master of this science, hinted at such an

original constitution of things in the discovery of which we can dispense with

all experience, and at the power of the mind to produce from its supersensible

principle the harmony of beings (where the properties of number come in,

with which the mind plays in music). This [he touches upon] in the

inspiration that raised him above the concepts of experience to Ideas, which

seem to him to be explicable only through an intellectual affinity with the

origin of all beings. No wonder that he banished from his school the man who

was ignorant of geometry, since he thought he could derive from pure

intuition, which has its home in the human spirit, that which Anaxagoras

drew from empirical objects and their purposive combination. For in the very

necessity of that which is purposive, and is constituted just as if it were

designedly intended for our use,— but at the same time seems to belong

originally to the being of things without any reference to our use — lies the

ground of our great admiration of nature, and that not so much external as in

our own Reason. It is surely excusable that this admiration should through

misunderstanding gradually rise to the height of fanaticism.

              But this intellectual purposiveness, although no doubt objective (not

subjective like aesthetical purposiveness), is in reference to its possibility

merely formal (not real). It can only be conceived as purposiveness in general

without any [definite] purpose being assumed as its basis, and consequently

without teleology being needed for it. The figure of a circle is an intuition

which is determined by means of the Understanding according to a principle.

The unity of this principle which I arbitrarily assume and use as fundamental

concept, applied to a form of intuition (space) which is met with in myself as

a representation and yet a priori, renders intelligible the unity of many rulesresulting from the construction of that concept, which are purposive for many

possible designs. But this purposiveness does not imply a purpose or any

other ground whatever. It is quite different if I meet with order and regularity

in complexes of things, external to myself, enclosed within certain

boundaries; as, e.g. in a garden, the order and regularity of the trees, flower-

beds, and walks. These I cannot expect to derive a priori from my bounding

of space made after a rule of my own; for this order and regularity are

existing things which must be given empirically in order to be known, and

not a mere representation in myself determined a priori according to a

principle. So then the latter (empirical) purposiveness, as real, is dependent

on the concept of a purpose.

              But the ground of admiration for a perceived purposiveness,

although it be in the being of things (so far as their concepts can be

constructed), may very well be seen, and seen to be legitimate. The manifold

rules whose unity (derived from a principle) excites admiration, are all

synthetical and do not follow from the concept of the Object, e.g. of a circle;

but require this Object to be given in intuition. Hence this unity gets the

appearance of having empirically an external basis of rules distinct from our

representative faculty; as if therefore the correspondence of the Object to that

need of rules which is proper to the Understanding were contingent in itself,

and therefore only possible by means of a purpose expressly directed thereto.

Now because this harmony, notwithstanding all this purposiveness, is not

cognised empirically but a priori, it should bring us of itself to this point —

that space, through whose determination (by means of the Imagination, in

accordance with a concept) the Object is alone possible, is not a characteristic

of things external to me, but a mere mode of representation in myself. Hence,

in the figure which I draw in conformity with a concept, i.e. in my own mode

of representing that which is given to me externally, whatever it may be in

itself, it is I that introduce the purposiveness; I get no empirical instruction

from the Object about the purposiveness, and so I require in it no particular

purpose external to myself. But because this consideration already calls for a

critical employment of Reason, and consequently cannot be involved in the

judging of the Object according to its properties; so this latter [judging]

suggests to me immediately nothing but the unification of heterogeneous

rules (even according to their very diversity) in a principle. This principle,

without requiring any particular a priori basis external to my concept, or

indeed, generally speaking, to my representation, is yet cognised a priori byme as true. Now wonder is a shock of the mind arising from the

incompatibility of a representation, and the rule given by its means, with the

principles already lying at its basis; which provokes a doubt as to whether we

have rightly seen or rightly judged. Admiration, however, is wonder which

ever recurs, despite the disappearance of this doubt. Consequently the latter is

a quite natural effect of that observed purposiveness in the being of things (as

phenomena). It cannot indeed be censured, whilst the unification of the form

of sensible intuition (space)— with the faculty of concepts (the

Understanding)— is inexplicable to us; and that not only on account of the

union being just of the kind that it is, but because it is enlarging for the mind

to surmise [the existence of] something lying outside our sensible

representations in which, although unknown to us, the ultimate ground of that

agreement may be met with. We are, it is true, not necessitated to cognise this

if we have only to do a priori with the formal purposiveness of our

representations; but the fact that we are compelled to look out beyond it

inspires at the same time an admiration for the object that impels us thereto.

              We are accustomed to speak of the above mentioned properties of

geometrical figures or of numbers as beautiful, on account of a certain a

priori purposiveness they have for all kinds of cognitive uses, this

purposiveness being quite unexpected on account of the simplicity of the

construction. We speak, e.g. of this or that beautiful property of the circle,

which was discovered in this or that way. But there is no aesthetical act of

judgement through which we find it purposive, no act of judgement without a

concept which renders noticeable a mere subjective purposiveness in the free

play of our cognitive faculties; but an intellectual act according to concepts

which enables us clearly to cognise an objective purposiveness, i.e.

availableness for all kinds of (infinitely manifold) purposes. We must rather

call this relative perfection than a beauty of the mathematical figure. To

speak thus of an intellectual beauty cannot in general be permissible; for

otherwise the word beauty would lose all determinate significance, or the

intellectual satisfaction all superiority over the sensible. We should rather call

a demonstration of such properties beautiful, because through it the

Understanding as the faculty of concepts, and the Imagination as the faculty

of presenting them, feel themselves strengthened a priori. (This, when

viewed in connexion with the precision introduced by Reason, is spoken of as

elegant.) Here, however, the satisfaction, although it is based on concepts, is

subjective; while perfection brings with itself an objective satisfaction.§ 63. Of the relative, as distinguished from the inner, purposiveness of

                                        nature

 

 

              Experience leads our Judgement to the concept of an objective and

material purposiveness, i.e. to the concept of a purpose of nature, only when1

we have to judge of a relation of cause to effect which we find ourselves able

to apprehend as legitimate only by presupposing the Idea of the effect of the

causality of the cause as the fundamental condition, in the cause, of the

possibility of the effect. This can take place in two ways. We may regard the

effect directly as an art product, or only as material for the art of other

possible natural beings; in other words, either as a purpose or as a means

towards the purposive employment of other causes. This latter purposiveness

is called utility (for man) or mere advantage (for other creatures), and is

merely relative; while the former is an inner purposiveness of the natural

being.

              For example, rivers bring down with them all kinds of earth

serviceable for the growth of plants which sometimes is deposited inland,

often also at their mouths. The tide brings this mud to many coasts over the

land or deposits it on the shore; and so, more especially if men give their aid

so that the ebb shall not carry it back again, the fruit-bearing land increases in

area, and the vegetable kingdom gains the place which formerly was the

habitation of fish and shells. In this way has nature itself brought about most

of the extensions of the land, and still continues to do so, although very

slowly.— Now the question is whether this is to be judged a purpose of

nature, because it contains utility for men. We cannot put it down to the

account of the vegetable kingdom, because just as much is subtracted from

sea-life as is added to land-life.

              Or, to give an example of the advantageousness of certain natural

things as means for other creatures (if we suppose them to be means), no soil

is more suitable to pine trees than a sandy soil. Now the deep sea, before it

withdrew from the land, left behind large tracts of sand in our northern

regions, so that on this soil, so unfavourable for all cultivation, widely

extended pine forests were enabled to grow, for the unreasoning destructionof which we frequently blame our ancestors. We may ask if this original

deposit of tracts of sand was a purpose of nature for the benefit of the

possible pine forests? So much is clear, that if we regard this as a purpose of

nature, we must also regard the sand as a relative purpose, in reference to

which the ocean strand and its withdrawal were means: for in the series of the

mutually subordinated members of a purposive combination, every member

must be regarded as a purpose (though not as a final purpose), to which its

proximate cause is the means. So too if cattle, sheep, horses, etc., are to exist,

there must be grass on the earth, but there must also be saline plants in the

desert if camels are to thrive; and again these and other herbivorous animals

must be met with in numbers if there are to be wolves, tigers, and lions.

Consequently the objective purposiveness, which is based upon advantage, is

not an objective purposiveness of things in themselves; as if the sand could

not be conceived for itself as an effect of a cause, viz. the sea, without

attributing to the latter a purpose, and regarding the effect, namely, the sand,

as a work of art. It is a merely relative purposiveness contingent upon the

thing to which it is ascribed; and although in the examples we have cited, the

different kinds of grass are to be judged as in themselves organised products

of nature, and consequently as artificial, yet are they to be regarded, in

reference to the beasts which feed upon them, as mere raw material.

              But above all, though man, through the freedom of his causality,

finds certain natural things of advantage for his designs — designs often

foolish, such as using the variegated plumage of birds to adorn his clothes, or

coloured earths and the juices of plants for painting his face; often again

reasonable as when the horse is used for riding, the ox or (as in Minorca) the

ass or pig for ploughing — yet we cannot even here assume a relative natural

purpose. For his Reason knows how to give things a conformity with his own

arbitrary fancies for which he was not at all predestined by nature. Only, if we

assume that men are to live upon the earth, then the means must be there

without which they could not exist as animals, and even as rational animals

(in however low a degree of rationality); and thereupon those natural things,

which are indispensable in this regard, must be considered as natural

purposes.

              We can hence easily see that external purposiveness (advantage of

one thing in respect of others) can be regarded as an external natural purpose

only under the condition, that the existence of that [being], to which it isimmediately or distantly advantageous, is in itself a purpose of nature. Since

that can never be completely determined by mere contemplation of nature, it

follows that relative purposiveness, although it hypothetically gives

indications of natural purposes, yet justifies no absolute teleological

judgement.

              Snow in cold countries protects the crops from the frost; it makes

human intercourse easier (by means of sleighs). The Laplander finds in his

country animals by whose aid this intercourse is brought about, i.e. reindeer,

who find sufficient sustenance in a dry moss which they have to scratch out

for themselves from under the snow, and who are easily tamed and readily

permit themselves to be deprived of that freedom in which they could have

remained if they chose. For other people in the same frozen regions marine

animals afford rich stores; in addition to the food and clothing which are thus

supplied, and the wood which is floated in by the sea to their dwellings, these

marine animals provide material for fuel by which their huts are warmed.

Here is a wonderful concurrence of many references of nature to one purpose;

and all this applies to the cases of the Greenlander, the Lapp, the Samoyede,

the inhabitant of Yakutsk, etc. But then we do not see why, generally, men

must live there at all. Therefore to say that vapour falls out of the atmosphere

in the form of snow, that the sea has its currents which float down wood that

has grown in warmer lands, and that there are in it great sea monsters filled

with oil, because the idea of advantage for certain poor creatures is

fundamental for the cause which collects all these natural products, would be

a very venturesome and arbitrary judgement. For even if there were none of

this natural utility, we should miss nothing as regards the adequateness of

natural causes to nature’s constitution; much more even to desire such a

tendency in, and to attribute such a purpose to, nature would be the part of a

presumptuous and inconsiderate fancy. For indeed it might be observed that it

could only have been the greatest unsociability among men which thus

scattered them into such inhospitable regions.

        1
               As in pure mathematics we can never talk of the existence, but only

of the possibility of things, viz. of an intuition corresponding to a concept,

and so never of cause and effect, it follows that all purposiveness observed

there must be considered merely as formal and never as a natural purpose.      § 64. Of the peculiar character of things as natural purposes

 

 

              In order to see that a thing is only possible as a purpose, that is, to be

forced to seek the causality of its origin not in the mechanism of nature but in

a cause whose faculty of action is determined through concepts, it is requisite

that its form be not possible according to mere natural laws, i.e. laws which

can be cognised by us through the Understanding alone when applied to

objects of Sense; but that even the empirical knowledge of it as regards its

cause and effect presupposes concepts of Reason. This contingency of its

form in all empirical natural laws in reference to Reason affords a ground for

regarding its causality as possible only through Reason. For Reason, which

must cognise the necessity of every form of a natural product in order to

comprehend even the conditions of its genesis, cannot assume such [natural]

necessity in that particular given form. The causality of its origin is then

referred to the faculty of acting in accordance with purposes (a will); and the

Object which can only thus be represented as possible is represented as a

purpose.

              If in a seemingly uninhabited country a man perceived a geometrical

figure, say a regular hexagon, inscribed on the sand, his reflection busied

with such a concept would attribute, although obscurely, the unity in the

principle of its genesis to Reason, and consequently would not regard as a

ground of the possibility of such a shape the sand, or the neighbouring sea, or

the winds, or beasts with familiar footprints, or any other irrational cause. For

the chance against meeting with such a concept, which is only possible

through Reason, would seem so infinitely great, that it would be just as if

there were no natural law, no cause in the mere mechanical working of nature

capable of producing it; but as if only the concept of such an Object, as a

concept which Reason alone can supply and with which it can compare the

thing, could contain the causality for such an effect. This then would be

regarded as a purpose, but as a product of art, not as a natural purpose

(vestigium hominis video ).1

              But in order to regard a thing cognised as a natural product as a

purpose also — consequently as a natural purpose, if this is not acontradiction — something more is required. I would say provisionally: a

thing exists as a natural purpose, if it is [although in a double sense]1 both

cause and effect of itself. For herein lies a causality the like of which cannot

be combined with the mere concept of a nature without attributing to it a

purpose; it can certainly be thought without contradiction, but cannot be

comprehended. We shall elucidate the determination of this Idea of a natural

purpose by an example, before we analyse it completely.

              In the first place, a tree generates another tree according to a known

natural law. But the tree produced is of the same genus; and so it produces

itself generically. On the one hand, as effect it is continually self-produced;

on the other hand, as cause it continually produces itself, and so perpetuates

itself generically.

              Secondly, a tree produces itself as an individual. This kind of effect

no doubt we call growth; but it is quite different from any increase according

to mechanical laws, and is to be reckoned as generation, though under

another name. The matter that the tree incorporates it previously works up

into a specifically peculiar quality, which natural mechanism external to it

cannot supply; and thus it develops itself by aid of a material which, as

compounded, is its own product. No doubt, as regards the constituents got

from nature without, it must only be regarded as an educt; but yet in the

separation and recombination of this raw material we see such an originality

in the separating and formative faculty of this kind of natural being, as is

infinitely beyond the reach of art, if the attempt is made to reconstruct such

vegetable products out of elements obtained by their dissection or material

supplied by nature for their sustenance.

              Thirdly, each part of a tree generates itself in such a way that the

maintenance of any one part depends reciprocally on the maintenance of the

rest. A bud of one tree engrafted on the twig of another produces in the alien

stock a plant of its own kind, and so also a scion engrafted on a foreign stem.

Hence we may regard each twig or leaf of the same tree as merely engrafted

or inoculated into it, and so as an independent tree attached to another and

parasitically nourished by it. At the same time, while the leaves are products

of the tree they also in turn give support to it; for the repeated defoliation of a

tree kills it, and its growth thus depends on the action of the leaves upon the

stem. The self-help of nature in case of injury in the vegetable creation, when

the want of a part that is necessary for the maintenance of its neighbours issupplied by the remaining parts; and the abortions or malformations in

growth, in which certain parts, on account of casual defects or hindrances,

form themselves in a new way to maintain what exists, and so produce an

anomalous creature, I shall only mention in passing, though they are among

the most wonderful properties of organised creatures.

        1
               [The allusion is to Vitruvius de Architectura, Bk. vi. Praef.

“Aristippus philosophus Socraticus, naufragio cum eiectus ad Rhodiensium

litus animadvertisset geometrica schemata descripta, exclamavisse ad comites

ita dicitur, Bene speremus, hominum enim vestigia video.”]

        1
               [Second Edition.]    § 65. Things regarded as natural purposes are organised beings

 

 

              According to the character alleged in the preceding section, a thing,

which, though a natural product, is to be cognised as only possible as a

natural purpose, must bear itself alternately as cause and as effect. This,

however, is a somewhat inexact and indeterminate expression which needs

derivation from a determinate concept.

              Causal combination as thought merely by the Understanding is a

connexion constituting an ever-progressive series (of causes and effects); and

things which as effects presuppose others as causes cannot be reciprocally at

the same time causes of these. This sort of causal combination we call that of

effective causes (nexus effectivus ). But on the other hand, a causal

combination according to a concept of Reason (of purposes) can also be

thought, which regarded as a series would lead either forwards or backwards;

in this the thing that has been called the effect may with equal propriety be

termed the cause of that of which it is the effect. In the practical department

of human art we easily find connexions such as this; e.g. a house, no doubt, is

the cause of the money received for rent, but also conversely the

representation of this possible income was the cause of building the house.

Such a causal connexion we call that of final causes (nexus finalis ). We may

perhaps suitably name the first the connexion of real causes, the second of

those which are ideal; because from this nomenclature it is at once

comprehended that there can be no more than these two kinds of causality.

              For a thing to be a natural purpose in the first place it is requisite that

its parts (as regards their being and their form) are only possible through their

reference to the whole. For the thing itself is a purpose and so is

comprehended under a concept or an Idea which must determine a priori all

that is to be contained in it. But so far as a thing is only thought as possible in

this way, it is a mere work of art; i.e. a product of one rational cause distinct

from the matter (of the parts), whose causality (in the collection and

combination of the parts) is determined through its Idea of a whole possible

by their means (and consequently not through external nature).

              But if a thing as a natural product is to involve in itself and in itsinternal possibility a reference to purposes,— i.e. to be possible only as a

natural purpose, and without the causality of the concepts of rational beings

external to itself,— then it is requisite secondly that its parts should so

combine in the unity of a whole that they are reciprocally cause and effect of

each other’s form. Only in this way can the Idea of the whole conversely

(reciprocally) determine the form and combination of all the parts; not indeed

as cause — for then it would be an artificial product — but as the ground of

cognition, for him who is judging it, of the systematic unity and combination

of all the manifold contained in the given material.

              For a body then which is to be judged in itself and its internal

possibility as a natural purpose, it is requisite that its parts mutually depend

upon each other both as to their form and their combination, and so produce a

whole by their own causality; while conversely the concept of the whole may

be regarded as its cause according to a principle (in a being possessing a

causality according to concepts adequate to such a product). In this case then

the connexion of effective causes may be judged as an effect through final

causes.

              In such a product of nature every part not only exists by means of the

other parts, but is thought as existing for the sake of the others and the whole,

that is as an (organic) instrument. Thus, however, it might be an artificial

instrument, and so might be represented only as a purpose that is possible in

general; but also its parts are all organs reciprocally producing each other.

This can never be the case with artificial instruments, but only with nature

which supplies all the material for instruments (even for those of art). Only a

product of such a kind can be called a natural purpose, and this because it is

an organised and self-organising being.

              In a watch one part is the instrument for moving the other parts, but

the wheel is not the effective cause of the production of the others; no doubt

one part is for the sake of the others, but it does not exist by their means. In

this case the producing cause of the parts and of their form is not contained in

the nature (of the material), but is external to it in a being which can produce

effects according to Ideas of a whole possible by means of its causality.

Hence a watch wheel does not produce other wheels, still less does one watch

produce other watches, utilising (organising) foreign material for that

purpose; hence it does not replace of itself parts of which it has been

deprived, nor does it make good what is lacking in a first formation by theaddition of the missing parts, nor if it has gone out of order does it repair

itself — all of which, on the contrary, we may expect from organised nature.

— An organised being is then not a mere machine, for that has merely

moving power, but it possesses in itself formative power of a self-propagating

kind which it communicates to its materials though they have it not of

themselves; it organises them, in fact, and this cannot be explained by the

mere mechanical faculty of motion.

              We say of nature and its faculty in organised products far too little if

we describe it as an analogon of art; for this suggests an artificer (a rational

being) external to it. Much rather does it organise itself and its organised

products in every species, no doubt after one general pattern but yet with

suitable deviations, which self-preservation demands according to

circumstances. We perhaps approach nearer to this inscrutable property, if we

describe it as an analogon of life; but then we must either endow matter, as

mere matter, with a property which contradicts its very being (hylozoism), or

associate therewith an alien principle standing in communion with it (a soul).

But in the latter case we must, if such a product is to be a natural product,

either presuppose organised matter as the instrument of that soul, which does

not make the soul a whit more comprehensible; or regard the soul as artificer

of this structure and so remove the product from (corporeal) nature. To speak

strictly, then, the organisation of nature has in it nothing analogous to any

causality we know.1 Beauty in nature can be rightly described as an analogon

of art, because it is ascribed to objects only in reference to reflection upon

their external aspect, and consequently only on account of the form of their

external surface. But internal natural perfection, as it belongs to those things

which are only possible as natural purposes, and are therefore called

organised beings, is not analogous to any physical, i.e. natural, faculty known

to us; nay even, regarding ourselves as, in the widest sense, belonging to

nature, it is not even thinkable or explicable by means of any exactly fitting

analogy to human art.

              The concept of a thing as in itself a natural purpose is therefore no

constitutive concept of Understanding or of Reason, but it can serve as a

regulative concept for the reflective Judgement, to guide our investigation

about objects of this kind by a distant analogy with our own causality

according to purposes generally, and in our meditations upon their ultimate

ground. This latter use, however, is not in reference to the knowledge ofnature or of its original ground, but rather to our own practical faculty of

Reason, in analogy with which we considered the cause of that

purposiveness.

              Organised beings are then the only beings in nature which,

considered in themselves and apart from any relation to other things, can be

thought as possible only as purposes of nature. Hence they first afford

objective reality to the concept of a purpose of nature, as distinguished from

a practical purpose; and so they give to the science of nature the basis for a

teleology, i.e. a mode of judgement about natural Objects according to a

special principle which otherwise we should in no way be justified in

introducing (because we cannot see a priori the possibility of this kind of

causality).

        1
               We can conversely throw light upon a certain combination, much

more often met with in Idea than in actuality, by means of an analogy to the

so-called immediate natural purposes. In a recent complete transformation of

a great people into a state the word organisation for the regulation of

magistracies, etc., and even of the whole body politic, has often been fitly

used. For in such a whole every member should surely be purpose as well as

means, and, whilst all work together towards the possibility of the whole,

each should be determined as regards place and function by means of the Idea

of the whole. [Kant probably alludes here to the organisation of the United

States of America.]§ 66. Of the principle of judging of internal purposiveness in organised

                                        beings

 

 

              This principle, which is at the same time a definition, is as follows:

An organised product of nature is one in which every part is reciprocally

purpose, [end ] and means. In it nothing is vain, without purpose, or to be

ascribed to a blind mechanism of nature.

              This principle, as regards its occasion, is doubtless derived from

experience, viz. from that methodised experience called observation; but on

account of the universality and necessity which it ascribes to such

purposiveness it cannot rest solely on empirical grounds, but must have at its

basis an a priori principle, although it be merely regulative and these

purposes lie only in the idea of the judging [subject] and not in an effective

cause. We may therefore describe the aforesaid principle as a maxim for

judging of the internal purposiveness of organised beings.

              It is an acknowledged fact that the dissectors of plants and animals,

in order to investigate their structure and to find out the reasons, why and for

what end such parts, such a disposition and combination of parts, and just

such an internal form have been given them, assume as indisputably

necessary the maxim that nothing in such a creature is vain; just as they lay

down as the fundamental proposition of the universal science of nature, that

nothing happens by chance. In fact, they can as little free themselves from

this teleological proposition as from the universal physical proposition; for as

without the latter we should have no experience at all, so without the former

we should have no guiding thread for the observation of a species of natural

things which we have thought teleologically under the concept of natural

purposes.

              Now this concept brings the Reason into a quite different order of

things from that of a mere mechanism of nature, which is no longer satisfying

here. An Idea is to be the ground of the possibility of the natural product. But

because this is an absolute unity of representation, instead of the material

being a plurality of things that can supply by itself no definite unity of

composition,— if that unity of the Idea is to serve at all as the a priori groundof determination of a natural law of the causality of such a form of

composition,— the purpose of nature must be extended to everything

included in its product. For if we once refer action of this sort on the whole to

any supersensible ground of determination beyond the blind mechanism of

nature, we must judge of it altogether according to this principle; and we

have then no reason to regard the form of such a thing as partly dependent on

mechanism — for by such mixing up of disparate principles no certain rule of

judging would be left.

              For example, it may be that in an animal body many parts can be

conceived as concretions according to mere mechanical laws (as the hide, the

bones, the hair). And yet the cause which brings together the required matter,

modifies it, forms it, and puts it in its appropriate place, must always be

judged of teleologically; so that here everything must be considered as

organised, and everything again in a certain relation to the thing itself is an

organ.§ 67. Of the principle of the teleological judging of nature in general as a

                                  system of purposes

 

 

              We have already said above that the external purposiveness of

natural things affords no sufficient warrant for using them as purposes of

nature in order to explain their presence, and for regarding their contingently

purposive effects as the grounds of their presence according to the principle

of final causes. Thus we cannot take for natural purposes, rivers because they

promote intercourse among inland peoples, mountains because they contain

the sources of the rivers and for their maintenance in rainless seasons have a

store of snow, or the slope of the land which carries away the water and

leaves the country dry; because although this shape of the earth’s surface be

very necessary for the origin and maintenance of the vegetable and animal

kingdoms, it has nothing in itself for the possibility of which we are forced to

assume a causality according to purposes. The same is true of plants which

man uses for his needs or his pleasures; of beasts, the camel, the ox, the

horse, dog, etc., which are indispensable to him as well for food as because

they are used in his service in many different ways. In the case of things

which we have no reason for regarding in themselves as purposes, such

external relation can only be hypothetically judged as purposive.

              To judge of a thing as a natural purpose on account of its internal

form is something very different from taking the existence of that thing to be

a purpose of nature. For the latter assertion we require not merely the concept

of a possible purpose, but the knowledge of the final purpose (scopus ) of

nature. But this requires a reference of such knowledge to something

supersensible far transcending all our teleological knowledge of nature, for

the purpose of [the existence of]1 nature must itself be sought beyond nature.

The internal form of a mere blade of grass is sufficient to show that for our

human faculty of judgement its origin is possible only according to the rule of

purposes. But if we change our point of view and look to the use which other

natural beings make of it, abandon the consideration of its internal

organisation and only look to its externally purposive references, we shall

arrive at no categorical purpose; all this purposive reference rests on an ever

more distant condition, which, as unconditioned (the presence of a thing asfinal purpose), lies quite outside the physico-teleological view of the world.

For example, grass is needful for the ox, which again is needful for man as a

means of existence, but then we do not see why it is necessary that men

should exist (a question this, which we shall not find so easy to answer if we

sometimes cast our thoughts on the New Hollanders or the inhabitants of

Tierra del Fuego). So conceived, the thing is not even a natural purpose, for

neither it (nor its whole genus) is to be regarded as a natural product.

              Hence it is only so far as matter is organised that it necessarily

carries with it the concept of a natural purpose, because this its specific form

is at the same time a product of nature. But this concept leads necessarily to

the Idea of collective nature as a system in accordance with the rule of

purposes, to which Idea all the mechanism of nature must be subordinated

according to principles of Reason (at least in order to investigate natural

phenomena therein). The principle of Reason belongs to it only as a

subjective principle or a maxim: viz. everything in the world is some way

good for something; nothing is vain in it. By the example that nature gives us

in its organic products we are justified, nay called upon, to expect of it and of

its laws nothing that is not purposive on the whole.

              It is plain that this is not a principle for the determinant but only for

the reflective Judgement; that it is regulative and not constitutive; and that we

derive from it a clue by which we consider natural things in reference to an

already given ground of determination according to a new law-abiding order;

and extend our natural science according to a different principle, viz. that of

final causes, but yet without prejudice to the principle of mechanical

causality. Furthermore, it is in no wise thus decided, whether anything of

which we judge by this principle, is a designed purpose of nature; whether

the grass is for the ox or the sheep, or whether these and the other things of

nature are here for men. It is well also from this side to consider the things

which are unpleasant to us and are contrary to purpose in particular

references. Thus, for example, we can say: The vermin that torment men in

their clothes, their hair, or their beds, may be, according to a wise

appointment of nature, a motive to cleanliness which is in itself an important

means for the preservation of health. Or again the mosquitoes and other

stinging insects that make the wildernesses of America so oppressive to the

savages, may be so many goads to activity for these primitive men, [inducing

them] to drain the marshes and bring light into the forests which interceptevery breath of air, and in this way, as well as by cultivating the soil, to make

their habitations more healthy. The same thing, which appears to men

contradictory to nature in its inner organisation, if viewed in this light gives

an entertaining, sometimes an instructive, outlook into a teleological order of

things, to which, without such a principle, mere physical observation would

not lead us by itself. Thus some persons regard the tapeworm as given to the

men or animals in whom it resides, as a kind of set-off for some defect in

their vital organs; now I would ask if dreams (without which we never sleep,

though we seldom remember them) may not be a purposive ordinance of

nature? For during the relaxation of all the moving powers of the body, they

serve to excite internally the vital organs by the medium of the Imagination

and its great activity (which in this state generally rises to the height of

affection). During sleep the Imagination commonly is more actively at play

when the stomach is overloaded, in which case this excitement is the more

necessary. Consequently, then, without this internal power of motion and this

fatiguing unrest, on account of which we complain about our dreams (though

in fact they are rather remedial), sleep even in a sound state of health would

be a complete extinction of life.

              Also the beauty of nature, i.e. its connexion with the free play of our

cognitive faculties in apprehending and judging of its appearance, can be

regarded as a kind of objective purposiveness of nature in its whole [content]

as a system of which man is a member; if once the teleological judging of the

same by means of the natural purposes which organised beings suggest to us,

has justified for us the Idea of a great system of purposes of nature. We can

regard it as a favour1 which nature has felt for us, that in addition to what is

useful it has so profusely dispensed beauty and charm; and we can therefore

love it, as well as regard it with respect on account of its immensity, and feel

ourselves ennobled by such regard; just as if nature had established and

adorned its splendid theatre precisely with this view.

              We shall say only one thing more in this paragraph. If we have once

discovered in nature a faculty of bringing forth products that can only be

thought by us in accordance with the concept of final causes, we go further

still. We venture to judge that things belong to a system of purposes, which

yet do not (either in themselves or in their purposive relations) necessitate our

seeking for any principle of their possibility beyond the mechanism of causes

working blindly. For the first Idea, as concerns its ground, already brings usbeyond the world of sense; since the unity of the supersensible principle must

be regarded as valid in this way not merely for certain species of natural

beings, but for the whole of nature as a system.

        1
               [These words are inserted by Rosenkranz and Windelband, but

omitted by Hartenstein and Kirchmann.]

        1
               In the aesthetical part [§ 58 , p. 247] it was said: We view beautiful

nature with favour, whilst we have a quite free (disinterested) satisfaction in

its form. For in this mere judgement of taste no consideration is given to the

purpose for which these natural beauties exist; whether to excite pleasure in

us, or as purposes without any reference to us at all. But in a teleological

judgement we pay attention to this reference, and here we can regard it as a

favour of nature that it has been willing to minister to our culture by the

exhibition of so many beautiful figures.§ 68. Of the principle of Teleology as internal principle of natural science

 

 

              The principles of a science are either internal to it and are then called

domestic (principia domestica ), or are based on concepts that can only find

their place outside it and so are foreign principles (peregrina ). Sciences that

contain the latter, place at the basis of their doctrines auxiliary propositions

(lemmata ), i.e. they borrow some concept, and with it a ground of

arrangement, from another science.

              Every science is in itself a system, and it is not enough in it to build

in accordance with principles and thus to employ a technical procedure, but

we must go to work with it architectonically, as a building subsisting for

itself; we must not treat it as an additional wing or part of another building,

but as a whole in itself, although we may subsequently make a passage from

it into that other or conversely.

              If then we introduce into the context of natural science the concept

of God in order to explain the purposiveness in nature, and subsequently use

this purposiveness to prove that there is a God, there is no internal

consistency in either science [i.e. either in natural science or theology]; and a

delusive circle brings them both into uncertainty, because they have allowed

their boundaries to overlap.

              The expression, a purpose of nature, already sufficiently prevents the

confusion of mixing up natural science and the occasion that it gives for

judging teleologically of its objects, with the consideration of God, and so of

a theological derivation of them. We must not regard it as insignificant, if one

interchanges this expression with that of a divine purpose in the ordering of

nature, or gives out the latter as more suitable and proper for a pious soul,

because it must come in the end to deriving these purposive forms in nature

from a wise author of the world. On the contrary, we must carefully and

modestly limit ourselves to the expression, a purpose of nature, which asserts

exactly as much as we know. Before we ask after the cause of nature itself,

we find in nature, and in the course of its development, products of the same

kind which are developed in it according to known empirical laws, in

accordance with which natural science must judge of its objects, and,consequently, must seek in nature their causality according to the rule of

purposes. So then it must not transgress its bounds in order to introduce into

itself as a domestic principle that, to whose concept no experience can be

commensurate, upon which we are only entitled to venture after the

completion of natural science.

              Natural characteristics which demonstrate themselves a priori, and

consequently admit of insight into their possibility from universal principles

without any admixture of experience, although they carry with them a

technical purposiveness, yet cannot, because they are absolutely necessary,

be referred to the Teleology of nature, as to a method belonging to Physic for

solving its problems. Arithmetical or geometrical analogies, as well as

universal mechanical laws,— however strange and admirable may seem to us

the union of different rules, quite independent of one another according to all

appearance, in a single principle,— possess on that account no claim to be

teleological grounds of explanation in Physic. Even if they deserve to be

brought into consideration in the universal theory of the purposiveness of

things of nature, yet they belong to another [science], i.e. Metaphysic, and

constitute no internal principle of natural science; as with the empirical laws

of natural purposes in organised beings, it is not only permissible but

unavoidable to use the teleological mode of judging as a principle of the

doctrine of nature in regard to a particular class of its objects.

              So to the end that Physic may keep within its own bounds, it

abstracts itself entirely from the question, whether natural purposes are

designed or undesigned; for that would be to meddle in an extraneous

business, in Metaphysic. It is enough that there are objects, alone explicable

according to natural laws which we can only think by means of the Idea of

purposes as principle, and also alone internally cognisable as concerns their

internal form, in this way. In order, therefore, to remove the suspicion of the

slightest assumption,— as if we wished to mix with our grounds of cognition

something not belonging to Physic at all, viz. a supernatural cause,— we

speak in Teleology, indeed, of nature as if the purposiveness therein were

designed, but in such a way that this design is ascribed to nature, i.e. to

matter. Now in this way there can be no misunderstanding, because no design

in the proper meaning of the word can possibly be ascribed to inanimate

matter; we thus give notice that this word here only expresses a principle of

the reflective not of the determinant Judgement, and so is to introduce noparticular ground of causality; but only adds for the use of the Reason a

different kind of investigation from that according to mechanical laws, in

order to supplement the inadequacy of the latter even for empirical research

into all particular laws of nature. Hence we speak quite correctly in

Teleology, so far as it is referred to Physic, of the wisdom, the economy, the

forethought, the beneficence of Nature, without either making an intelligent

being of it, for that would be preposterous; or even without presuming to

place another intelligent Being above it as its Architect, for that would be

presumptuous.1 But there should be only signified thereby a kind of causality

of nature after the analogy of our own in the technical use of Reason, in order

to have before us the rule according to which certain products of nature must

be investigated.

              But now why is it that Teleology usually forms no proper part of

theoretical natural science, but is regarded as a propaedeutic or transition to

Theology? This is done in order to restrict the study of nature, mechanically

considered, to that which we can so subject to observation or experiment that

we are able to produce it ourselves as nature does, or at least by similar laws.

For we see into a thing completely only so far as we can make it in

accordance with our concepts and bring it to completion. But organisation, as

an inner purpose of nature, infinitely surpasses all our faculty of presenting

the like by means of art. And as concerns the external contrivances of nature

regarded as purposive (wind, rain, etc.), Physic, indeed, considers their

mechanism, but it cannot at all present their reference to purposes, so far as

this is a condition necessarily belonging to cause; for this necessity of

connexion has to do altogether with the combination of our concepts and not

with the constitution of things.

        1
               The German word vermessen is a good word and full of meaning.

A judgement in which we forget to consider the extent of our powers (our

Understanding) may sometimes sound very humble, and yet make great

pretensions, and so be very presumptuous. Of this kind are most of those by

which we pretend to extol the divine wisdom by ascribing to it designs in the

works of creation and preservation which are really meant to do honour to the

private wisdom of the reasoner.

 

          Second Division – Dialectic of the Teleological Judgement

 

 

                § 69. What is an antinomy of the Judgement?

 

 

              The determinant Judgement has for itself no principles which are the

foundation of concepts of Objects. It has no autonomy, for it subsumes only

under given laws or concepts as principles. Hence it is exposed to no danger

of an antinomy of its own or to a conflict of its principles. So [we saw that]

the transcendental Judgement which contains the conditions of subsuming

under categories was for itself not nomothetic, but that it only indicated the

conditions of sensuous intuition, under which reality (application) can be

supplied to a given concept, as law of the Understanding, whereby the

Judgement could never fall into discord with itself (at least as far as its

principles are concerned).

              But the reflective Judgement must subsume under a law, which is

not yet given, and is therefore in fact only a principle of reflection upon

objects, for which we are objectively quite in want of a law or of a concept of

an Object that would be adequate as a principle for the cases that occur. Since

now no use of the cognitive faculties can be permitted without principles, the

reflective Judgement must in such cases serve as a principle for itself. This,

because it is not objective and can supply no ground of cognition of the

Object adequate for design, must serve as a mere subjective principle, for the

purposive employment of our cognitive faculties, i.e. for reflecting upon a

class of objects. Therefore in reference to such cases the reflective Judgement

has its maxims — necessary maxims — on behalf of the cognition of natural

laws in experience, in order to attain by their means to concepts, even

concepts of Reason; since it has absolute need of such in order to learn

merely to cognise nature according to its empirical laws.— Between these

necessary maxims of the reflective Judgement there may be a conflict and

consequently an antinomy, upon which a Dialectic bases itself. If each of two

conflicting maxims has its ground in the nature of the cognitive faculties, this

may be called a natural Dialectic, and an unavoidable illusion which we mustexpose and resolve in our Critique, to the end that it may not deceive us.                    § 70. Representation of this antinomy

 

 

              So far as Reason has to do with nature, as the complex of objects of

external sense, it can base itself partly upon laws which the Understanding

itself prescribes a priori to nature, partly upon laws which it can extend

indefinitely by means of the empirical determinations occurring in

experience. To apply the former kind of laws, i.e. the universal laws of

material nature in general, the Judgement needs no special principle of

reflection, since it is there determinant because an objective principle is given

to it through Understanding. But as regards the particular laws that can only

be made known to us through experience, there can be under them such great

manifoldness and diversity, that the Judgement must serve as its own

principle in order to investigate and search into the phenomena of nature in

accordance with a law. Such a guiding thread is needed, if we are only to

hope for a connected empirical cognition according to a thoroughgoing

conformity of nature to law, even its unity according to empirical laws. In

this contingent unity of particular laws it may very well happen that the

Judgement in its reflection proceeds from two maxims. One of these is

suggested to it a priori by the mere Understanding; but the other is prompted

by particular experiences, which bring the Reason into play in order to form a

judgement upon corporeal nature and its laws in accordance with a particular

principle. Hence it comes about that these two kinds of maxims seem to be

incapable of existing together, and consequently a Dialectic arises which

leads the Judgement into error in the principle of its reflection.

              The first maxim of Judgement is the proposition: all production of

material things and their forms must be judged to be possible according to

merely mechanical laws.

              The second maxim is the counter-proposition: some products of

material nature cannot be judged to be possible according to merely

mechanical laws. (To judge them requires quite a different law of causality,

namely, that of final causes.)

              If these regulative principles of investigation be converted into

constitutive principles of the possibility of Objects, they will run thus:              Proposition: All production of material things is possible according

to merely mechanical laws.

              Counter-proposition: Some production of material things is not

possible according to merely mechanical laws.

              In this latter aspect, as objective principles for the determinant

Judgement, they would contradict each other; and consequently one of the

two propositions must necessarily be false. We shall then, it is true, have an

antinomy, but not of Judgement; there will be a conflict in the legislation of

Reason. Reason, however, can prove neither the one nor the other of these

fundamental propositions, because we can have a priori no determinant

principle of the possibility of things according to mere empirical laws of

nature.

              On the other hand, as regards the first-mentioned maxims of a

reflective Judgement, they involve no contradiction in fact. For if I say, I

must judge, according to merely mechanical laws, of the possibility of all

events in material nature, and consequently of all forms regarded as its

products, I do not therefore say: They are possible in this way alone (apart

from any other kind of causality). All that is implied is: I must always reflect

upon them according to the principle of the mere mechanism of nature, and

consequently investigate this as far as I can; because unless this lies at the

basis of investigation, there can be no proper knowledge of nature at all. But

this does not prevent us, if occasion offers, from following out the second

maxim in the case of certain natural forms (and even by occasion of these in

the whole of nature), in order to reflect upon them according to the principle

of final causes, which is quite a different thing from explaining them

according to the mechanism of nature. Reflection in accordance with the first

maxim is thus not abrogated; on the contrary, we are told to follow it as far as

we can. Nor is it said that these forms would not be possible in accordance

with the mechanism of nature. It is only asserted that human Reason in

following up this maxim and in this way could never find the least ground for

that which constitutes the specific [character] of a natural purpose, although it

would increase its knowledge of natural laws. Thus it is left undecided

whether or not in the unknown inner ground of nature, physico-mechanical

and purposive combination may be united in the same things in one principle.

We only say that our Reason is not in a position so to unite them; and that

therefore the Judgement (as reflective — from subjective grounds, not asdeterminant, in consequence of an objective principle of the possibility of

things in themselves) is compelled to think a different principle from that of

natural mechanism as the ground of the possibility of certain forms in nature.          § 71. Preliminary to the solution of the above antinomy

 

 

              We can in no way prove the impossibility of the production of

organised natural products by the mere mechanism of nature, because we

cannot see into the first inner ground of the infinite multiplicity of the

particular laws of nature, which are contingent for us since they are only

empirically known; and so we cannot arrive at the inner all-sufficient

principle of the possibility of a nature (a principle which lies in the

supersensible). Whether therefore the productive faculty of nature is

sufficient for that which we judge to be formed or combined in accordance

with the Idea of purposes, as well as for that which we believe to require

merely a mechanical system [Maschinenwesen] of nature; or whether there

lies at the basis of things which we must necessarily judge as properly natural

purposes, a quite different kind of original causality, which cannot be

contained in material nature or in its intelligible substrate, viz. an

architectonic Understanding — this is a question to which our Reason, very

narrowly limited in respect of the concept of causality if it is to be specified a

priori, can give no answer whatever.— But it is just as certain and beyond

doubt that, in regard to our cognitive faculties, the mere mechanism of nature

can furnish no ground of explanation of the production of organised beings.

For the reflective Judgement it is therefore a quite correct fundamental

proposition, that for that connexion of things according to final causes which

is so plain, there must be thought a causality distinct from that of mechanism,

viz. that of an (intelligent) cause of the world acting in accordance with

purposes; but for the determinant Judgement this would be a hasty and

unprovable proposition. In the first case it is a mere maxim of the Judgement,

wherein the concept of that causality is a mere Idea, to which we by no

means undertake to concede reality, but which we use as a guide to reflection,

which remains thereby always open to all mechanical grounds of explanation

and does not withdraw out of the world of Sense. In the second case the

proposition would be an objective principle prescribed by Reason, to which

the determinant Judgement must subject itself, whereby however it

withdraws beyond the world of Sense into the transcendent and perhaps is led

into error.              All appearance of an antinomy between the maxims of the proper

physical (mechanical) and the teleological (technical) methods of explanation

rests therefore on this; that we confuse a fundamental proposition of the

reflective with one of the determinant Judgement, and the autonomy of the

first (which has mere subjective validity for our use of Reason in respect of

particular empirical laws) with the heteronomy of the second, which must

regulate itself according to laws (universal or particular) given to it by the

Understanding.  § 72. Of the different systems which deal with the purposiveness of

                                        nature

 

 

              No one has ever doubted the correctness of the proposition that

judgement must be passed upon certain things of nature (organised beings)

and their possibility in accordance with the concept of final causes, even if

we only desire a guiding thread to learn how to cognise their constitution

through observation, without aspiring to an investigation into their first

origin. The question therefore can only be: whether this fundamental

proposition is merely subjectively valid, i.e. is a mere maxim of our

Judgement; or whether it is an objective principle of nature, in accordance

with which, apart from its mechanism (according to the mere laws of

motion), quite a different kind of causality attaches to it, viz. that of final

causes, under which these laws (of moving forces) stand only as intermediate

causes.

              We could leave this question or problem quite undecided and

unsolved speculatively; because if we content ourselves with speculation

within the bounds of mere natural knowledge, we have enough in these

maxims for the study of nature and for the tracking out of its hidden secrets,

as far as human powers reach. There is then indeed a certain presentiment of

our Reason or a hint as it were given us by nature, that, by means of this

concept of final causes, we go beyond nature, and could unite it to the highest

point in the series of causes, if we were to abandon or at least to lay aside for

a time the investigation of nature (although we may not have advanced far in

it), and seek thenceforth to find out whither this stranger in natural science,

viz. the concept of natural purposes, would lead us.

              But here these undisputed maxims pass over into problems opening

out a wide field for difficulties. Does purposive connexion in nature prove a

particular kind of causality? Or is it not rather, considered in itself and in

accordance with objective principles, similar to the mechanism of nature,

resting on one and the same ground? Only, as this ground in many natural

products is often hidden too deep for our investigation, we make trial of a

subjective principle, that of art, i.e. of causality according to Ideas, and weascribe it to nature by analogy. This expedient succeeds in many cases, but

seems in some to mislead, and in no case does it justify us in introducing into

natural science a particular kind of operation quite distinct from the causality

according to the mere mechanical laws of nature. We give the name of

Technic to the procedure (the causality) of nature, on account of the

appearance of purpose that we find in its products; and we shall divide this

into designed (technica intentionalis ) and undesigned (technica naturalis ).

The first is meant to signify that the productive faculty of nature according to

final causes must be taken for a particular kind of causality; the second that it

is at bottom quite similar to the mechanism of nature, and that its contingent

agreement with our artistic concepts and their rules should be explained as a

mere subjective condition of judging it, and not, falsely, as a particular kind

of natural production.

              If we now speak of systems explanatory of nature in regard of final

causes, it must be remarked that they all controvert each other dogmatically,

i.e. as to objective principles of the possibility of things, whether there are

causes which act designedly or whether they are quite without design. They

do not dispute as to the subjective maxims, by which we merely judge of the

causes of such purposive products. In this latter case disparate principles

could very well be unified; but in the former, contradictorily opposed laws

annul each other and cannot subsist together.

              There are two sorts of systems as to the Technic of nature, i.e. its

productive power in accordance with the rule of purposes; viz. Idealism or

Realism of natural purposes. The first maintains that all purposiveness of

nature is undesigned; the second that some (in organised beings) is designed.

From this latter the hypothetical consequence can be deduced that the

Technic of Nature, as concerns all its other products in reference to the whole

of nature, is also designed, i.e. is a purpose.

              (1) The Idealism of purposiveness (I always understand here by this,

objective purposiveness) is either that of the casuality or the fatality of the

determination of nature in the purposive form of its products. The former

principle treats of the reference of matter to the physical basis of its form, viz.

the laws of motion; the second, its reference to the hyperphysical basis of

itself and of the whole of nature. The system of casuality that is ascribed to

Epicurus or Democritus is, taken literally, so plainly absurd that it need not

detain us. Opposed to this is the system of fatality, of which Spinoza is takenas the author, although it is much older according to all appearance. This, as

it appeals to something supersensible to which our insight does not extend, is

not so easy to controvert; but that is because its concept of the original Being

is not possible to understand. But so much is clear, that on this theory the

purposive combination in the world must be taken as undesigned; for

although derived from an original Being, it is not derived from its

Understanding or from any design on its part, but rather from the necessity of

its nature and of the world-unity which emanates therefrom. Consequently

the Fatalism of purposiveness is at the same time an Idealism.

              (2) The Realism of the purposiveness of nature is also either physical

or hyperphysical. The former bases the purposes in nature, by the analogy of

a faculty acting with design, on the life of matter (either its own or the life of

an inner principle in it, a world-soul) and is called Hylozoism. The latter

derives them from the original ground of the universe, as from an intelligent

Being (originally living), who produces them with design, and is Theism. 1

        1
               We thus see that in most speculative things of pure Reason, as

regards dogmatic assertions, the philosophical schools have commonly tried

all possible solutions of a given question. To explain the purposiveness of

nature men have tried either lifeless matter or a lifeless God, or again, living

matter or a living God. It only remains for us, if the need should arise, to

abandon all these objective assertions and to examine critically our

judgement merely in reference to our cognitive faculties, in order to supply to

their principle a validity which, if not dogmatic, shall at least be that of a

maxim sufficient for the sure employment of Reason.          § 73. None of the above systems give what they pretend

 

 

              What do all these systems desire? They desire to explain our

teleological judgements about nature, and they go so to work therewith that

some deny their truth and, consequently, explain them as an Idealism of

Nature (represented as Art); others recognise them as true, and promise to

establish the possibility of a nature in accordance with the Idea of final

causes.

              (1) The systems which defend the Idealism of final causes in nature

grant, it is true, on the one hand to their principle a causality in accordance

with the laws of motion (through which [causality] natural things exist

purposively); but they deny to it intentionality, i.e. that it designedly

determines itself to this its purposive production; in other words, they deny

that the cause is a purpose. This is Epicurus’s method of explanation,

according to which the distinction between a Technic of nature and mere

mechanism is altogether denied. Blind chance is taken as the explanatory

ground not only of the agreement of the developed products with our

concepts of the purpose, and consequently of [nature’s] Technic; but also of

the determination of the causes of this production in accordance with the laws

of motion, and consequently of their mechanism. Thus nothing is explained,

not even the illusion in our teleological judgements, and consequently, the

would-be Idealism of these in no way established.

              On the other hand, Spinoza wishes to dispense with all inquiries into

the ground of the possibility of purposes of nature, and to take away all

reality from this Idea. He allows their validity in general not as products but

as accidents inhering in an original Being; and to this Being, as substrate of

those natural things, he ascribes not causality in regard to them but mere

subsistence. On account of its unconditioned necessity, and also that of all

natural things as accidents inhering in it, he secures, it is true, to the forms of

nature that unity of ground which is requisite for all purposiveness; but at the

same time he tears away their contingence, without which no unity of purpose

can be thought, and with it all design, inasmuch as he takes away all

intelligence from the original ground of natural things.              But Spinozism does not furnish what it desires. It desires to afford an

explanatory ground of the purposive connexion (which it does not deny) of

the things of nature, and it merely speaks of the unity of the subject in which

they all inhere. But even if we concede to it that the beings of the world exist

in this way, such ontological unity is not therefore a unity of purpose, and

does not make this in any way comprehensible. For this latter is a quite

particular kind of unity which does not follow from the connexion of things

(the beings of the world) in a subject (the original Being), but implies in itself

reference to a cause which has Understanding; and even if we unite all these

things in a simple subject, this never exhibits a purposive reference. For we

do not think of them, first, as the inner effects of the substance, as if it were a

cause; nor, secondly, of this cause as a cause producing effects by means of

its Understanding. Without these formal conditions all unity is mere natural

necessity; and, if it is ascribed as well to things which we represent as

external to one another, blind necessity. But if we wish to give the name of

purposiveness of nature to that which the schoolmen call the transcendental

perfection of things (in reference to their proper being), according to which

everything has in itself that which is requisite to make it one thing and not

another, then we are only like children playing with words instead of

concepts. For if all things must be thought as purposes, then to be a thing is

the same as to be a purpose, and there is at bottom nothing which specially

deserves to be represented as a purpose.

              We hence see at once that Spinoza by his reducing our concepts of

the purposive in nature to our own consciousness of existing in an all-

embracing (though simple) Being, and by his seeking that form merely in the

unity of this Being, must have intended to maintain not the realism, but the

idealism of its purposiveness. Even this he was not able to accomplish,

because the mere representation of the unity of the substrate cannot bring

about the Idea of a purposiveness, even that which is only undesigned.

              (2) Those who not only maintain the Realism of natural purposes,

but also set about explaining it, believe that they can comprehend, at least as

regards its possibility, a practical kind of causality, viz. that of causes

working designedly; otherwise they could not undertake to supply this

explanation. For to authorise even the most daring of hypotheses, at least the

possibility of what we assume as basis must be certain, and we must be able

to assure objective reality to its concept.              But the possibility of living matter cannot even be thought; its

concept involves a contradiction because lifelessness, inertia, constitutes the

essential character of matter. The possibility of matter endowed with life, and

of collective nature regarded as an animal, can only be used in an inadequate

way (in the interests of the hypothesis of purposiveness in the whole of

nature), so far as it is manifested by experience in the organisation of nature

on a small scale; but in no way can we have insight into its possibility a

priori. There must then be a circle in the explanation, if we wish to derive the

purposiveness of nature in organised beings from the life of matter, and yet

only know this life in organised beings, and can form no concept of its

possibility without experience of this kind. Hylozoism, therefore, does not

furnish what it promises.

              Finally, Theism can just as little establish dogmatically the

possibility of natural purposes as a key to Teleology; although it certainly is

superior to all other grounds of explanation in that, through the

Understanding which it ascribes to the original Being, it rescues in the best

way the purposiveness of nature from Idealism, and introduces a causality

acting with design for its production.

              But we must first prove satisfactorily to the determinant Judgement

the impossibility of the unity of purpose in matter resulting from its mere

mechanism, before we are justified in placing the ground of this beyond

nature in a determinate way. We can, however, advance no further than this.

In accordance with the constitution and limits of our cognitive faculties

(whilst we do not comprehend even the first inner ground of this mechanism)

we must in no wise seek in matter a principle of determinate purposive

references; but no other way of judging of the origination of its products as

natural purposes remains to us than that by means of a supreme

Understanding as cause of the world. But this is only a ground for the

reflective, not for the determinant Judgement, and can justify absolutely no

objective assertion.§ 74. The reason that we cannot treat the concept of a Technic of nature

        dogmatically is the fact that a natural purpose is inexplicable

 

 

              We deal with a concept dogmatically (even though it should be

empirically conditioned) if we consider it as contained under another concept

of the Object which constitutes a principle1 of Reason, and determine it in

conformity with this. But we deal with it merely critically, if we consider it

only in reference to our cognitive faculties and consequently to the subjective

conditions of thinking it, without undertaking to decide anything about its

Object. Dogmatic procedure with a concept is then that which is conformable

to law for the determinant Judgement, critical procedure for the reflective

Judgement.

              Now the concept of a thing as a natural purpose is a concept which

subsumes nature under a causality only thinkable through Reason, in order to

judge in accordance with this principle about that which is given of the

Object in experience. But in order to use it dogmatically for the determinant

Judgement, we must be assured first of the objective reality of this concept,

because otherwise we could subsume no natural thing under it. Again, the

concept of a thing as a natural purpose is, no doubt, empirically conditioned,

i.e. only possible under certain conditions given in experience, though not to

be abstracted therefrom; but it is a concept only possible in accordance with a

rational principle in the judgement about the object. Its objective reality,

therefore (i.e. that an object in conformity with it is possible), cannot be

comprehended and dogmatically established as such a principle; and we do

not know whether it is merely a sophistical and objectively empty concept

(conceptus ratiocinans ), or a rational concept, establishing a cognition and

confirmed by Reason (conceptus ratiocinatus ).1 Therefore it cannot be

dogmatically treated for the determinant Judgement, i.e. it is not only

impossible to decide whether or not things of nature considered as natural

purposes require for their production a causality of a quite peculiar kind (that

acting on design); but the question cannot even be put, because the concept of

a natural purpose is simply not susceptible of proof through Reason as

regards its objective reality. That is, it is not constitutive for the determinant

Judgement, but merely regulative for the reflective.              That it is not susceptible of proof is clear because (as concept of a

natural product ) it embraces in itself natural necessity, and at the same time

(as purpose) a contingency of the form of the Object (in reference to the mere

laws of nature) in the very same thing. Hence, if there is to be no

contradiction here it must contain a ground for the possibility of the thing in

nature, and also a ground of the possibility of this nature itself and of its

reference to something which, not being empirically cognisable nature

(supersensible), is therefore for us not cognisable at all. [This is requisite] if it

is to be judged according to a different kind of causality from that of natural

mechanism when we wish to establish its possibility. The concept of a thing,

then, as a natural purpose, is transcendent for the determinant Judgement, if

we consider the Object through Reason (although for the reflective

Judgement it certainly may be immanent in respect of the objects of

experience). Hence for determinant judgements objective reality cannot be

supplied to it; and so it is intelligible how all systems that one may project for

the dogmatic treatment of the concept of natural purposes and of nature itself

[considered] as a whole connected together by means of final causes, can

decide nothing either by objective affirmation or by objective denial. For if

things be subsumed under a concept that is merely problematical, its

synthetical predicates (e.g. in the question whether the purpose of nature

which we conceive for the production of things is designed or undesigned)

can furnish only problematical judgements of the Object, whether affirmative

or negative; and we do not know whether we are judging about something or

about nothing. The concept of a causality through purposes (of art) has at all

events objective reality, and also the concept of a causality according to the

mechanism of nature. But the concept of a causality of nature according to

the rule of purposes,— still more of a Being such as cannot be given us in

experience, a Being who is the original cause of nature,— though it can be

thought without contradiction, yet is of no avail for dogmatic determinations.

For, since it cannot be derived from experience, and also is not requisite for

the possibility thereof, its objective reality can in no way be assured. But

even if this could be done, how can I number among the products of nature

things which are definitely accounted products of divine art, when it is just

the incapacity of nature to produce such things according to its own laws that

made it necessary to invoke a cause different from it?

        1
               [That is, the wider concept serves as a universal, under which the

particular may be brought; cognition from principles, in Kant’s phrase, is theprocess of knowing the particular in the universal by means of concepts.]

        1
               [This distinction will be familiar to the student of the Critique of

Pure Reason. See Dialectic, bk. i., Of the Concepts of Pure Reason. ]§ 75. The concept of an objective purposiveness of nature is a critical

              principle of Reason for the reflective Judgement

 

 

              It is then one thing to say, “the production of certain things of nature

or that of collective nature is only possible through a cause which determines

itself to action according to design”; and quite another to say, “I can

according to the peculiar constitution of my cognitive faculties judge

concerning the possibility of these things and their production, in no other

fashion than by conceiving for this a cause working according to design, i.e. a

Being which is productive in a way analogous to the causality of an

intelligence.” In the former case I wish to establish something concerning the

Object, and am bound to establish the objective reality of an assumed

concept; in the latter, Reason only determines the use of my cognitive

faculties, conformably to their peculiarities and to the essential conditions of

their range and their limits. Thus the former principle is an objective

proposition for the determinant Judgement, the latter merely a subjective

proposition for the reflective Judgement, i.e. a maxim which Reason

prescribes to it.

              We are in fact indispensably obliged to ascribe the concept of design

to nature if we wish to investigate it, though only in its organised products,

by continuous observation; and this concept is therefore an absolutely

necessary maxim for the empirical use of our Reason. It is plain that once

such a guiding thread for the study of nature is admitted and verified, we

must at least try the said maxim of Judgement in nature as a whole; because

thereby many of nature’s laws might discover themselves, which otherwise,

on account of the limitation of our insight into its inner mechanism, would

remain hidden. But though in regard to this latter employment that maxim of

Judgement is certainly useful, it is not indispensable, for nature as a whole is

not given as organised (in the narrow sense of the word above indicated). On

the other hand, in regard to those natural products, which must be judged of

as designed and not formed otherwise (if we are to have empirical knowledge

of their inner constitution), this maxim of the reflective Judgement is

essentially necessary; because the very thought of them as organised beings is

impossible without combining therewith the thought of their designedproduction.

              Now the concept of a thing whose existence or form we represent to

ourselves as possible under the condition of a purpose is inseparably bound

up with the concept of its contingency (according to natural laws). Hence the

natural things that we find possible only as purposes supply the best proof of

the contingency of the world-whole; to the common Understanding and to the

philosopher alike they are the only valid ground of proof for its dependence

on and origin from a Being existing outside the world — a Being who must

also be intelligent on account of that purposive form. Teleology then finds the

consummation of its investigations only in Theology.

              But what now in the end does the most complete Teleology prove?

Does it prove that there is such an intelligent Being? No. It only proves that

according to the constitution of our cognitive faculties and in the consequent

combination of experience with the highest principles of Reason, we can

form absolutely no concept of the possibility of such a world [as this] save by

thinking a designedly-working supreme cause thereof. Objectively we cannot

therefore lay down the proposition, there is an intelligent original Being; but

only subjectively, for the use of our Judgement in its reflection upon the

purposes in nature, which can be thought according to no other principle than

that of a designing causality of a highest cause.

              If we wished to establish on teleological grounds the above

proposition dogmatically we should be beset with difficulties from which we

could not extricate ourselves. For then the proposition must at bottom be

reduced to the conclusion, that the organised beings in the world are no

otherwise possible than by a designedly-working cause. And we should

unavoidably have to assert that, because we can follow up these things in

their causal combination only under the Idea of purposes, and cognise them

only according to their conformity to law, we are thereby justified in

assuming this as a condition necessary for every thinking and cognising being

— a condition consequently attaching to the Object and not merely to our

subject. But such an assertion we do not succeed in sustaining. For, since we

do not, properly speaking, observe the purposes in nature as designed, but

only in our reflection upon its products think this concept as a guiding thread

for our Judgement, they are not given to us through the Object. It is quite

impossible for us a priori to vindicate, as capable of assumption, such a

concept according to its objective reality. It remains therefore a propositionabsolutely resting upon subjective conditions alone, viz. of the Judgement

reflecting in conformity with our cognitive faculties. If we expressed this

proposition dogmatically as objectively valid, it would be: “There is a God.”

But for us men there is only permissible the limited formula: “We cannot

otherwise think and make comprehensible the purposiveness which must lie

at the bottom of our cognition of the internal possibility of many natural

things, than by representing it and the world in general as a product of an

intelligent cause, [a God].”1

              Now if this proposition, based on an inevitably necessary maxim of

our Judgement, is completely satisfactory from every human point of view

for both the speculative and practical use of our Reason, I should like to

know what we lose by not being able to prove it as also valid for higher

beings, from objective grounds (which unfortunately are beyond our

faculties). It is indeed quite certain that we cannot adequately cognise, much

less explain, organised beings and their internal possibility, according to mere

mechanical principles of nature; and we can say boldly it is alike certain that

it is absurd for men to make any such attempt or to hope that another Newton

will arise in the future, who shall make comprehensible by us the production

of a blade of grass according to natural laws which no design has ordered.1

We must absolutely deny this insight to men. But then how do we know that

in nature, if we could penetrate to the principle by which it specifies the

universal laws known to us, there cannot lie hidden (in its mere mechanism)

a sufficient ground of the possibility of organised beings without supposing

any design in their production? would it not be judged by us presumptuous to

say this? Probabilities here are of no account when we have to do with

judgements of pure Reason.— We cannot therefore judge objectively, either

affirmatively or negatively, concerning the proposition: “Does a Being acting

according to design lie at the basis of what we rightly call natural purposes,

as the cause of the world (and consequently as its author)?” So much only is

sure, that if we are to judge according to what is permitted us to see by our

own proper nature (the conditions and limitations of our Reason), we can

place at the basis of the possibility of these natural purposes nothing else than

an intelligent Being. This alone is in conformity with the maxim of our

reflective Judgement and therefore with a ground which, though subjective, is

inseparably attached to the human race.

        1
               [Second Edition.]        1
               [This principle, that for our intellect, the conception of an organised

body is impossible except by the aid of the Idea of design, is frequently

insisted on by Kant. Professor Wallace points out (Kant, p. 110) that as far

back as 1755, in his General Physiogony and Theory of the Heavens, Kant

classed the origin of animals and plants with the secrets of Providence and

the mystical number 666 “as one of the topics on which ingenuity and

thought are occasionally wasted.”]                                    § 76. Remark

 

 

              This consideration, which very well deserves to be worked out in

detail in Transcendental Philosophy, can come in here only in passing, by

way of elucidation (not as a proof of what is here proposed).

              Reason is a faculty of principles and proceeds in its extremest

advance to the unconditioned; on the other hand, the Understanding stands at

its service always only under a certain condition which must be given. But

without concepts of Understanding, to which objective reality must be given,

the Reason cannot form any objective (synthetical) judgement; and contains

in itself, as theoretical Reason, absolutely no constitutive but merely

regulative principles. We soon see that where the Understanding cannot

follow, the Reason is transcendent, and shows itself in Ideas formerly

established (as regulative principles), but not in objectively valid concepts.

But the Understanding which cannot keep pace with Reason but yet is

requisite for the validity of Objects, limits the validity of these Ideas to the

subject, although [extending it] generally to all [subjects] of this kind. That is,

the Understanding limits their validity to the condition, that according to the

nature of our (human) cognitive faculties, or, generally, according to the

concept which we ourselves can make of the faculty of a finite intelligent

being, nothing else can or must be thought; though this is not to assert that

the ground of such a judgement lies in the Object. We shall adduce some

examples which, though they are too important and difficult to impose them

on the reader as proved propositions, yet will give him material for thought

and may serve to elucidate what we are here specially concerned with.

              It is indispensably necessary for the human Understanding to

distinguish between the possibility and the actuality of things. The ground for

this lies in the subject and in the nature of our cognitive faculties. Such a

distinction (between the possible and the actual) would not be given were

there not requisite for knowledge two quite different elements, Understanding

for concepts and sensible intuition for Objects corresponding to them. If our

Understanding were intuitive it would have no objects but those which are

actual. Concepts (which merely extend to the possibility of an object) andsensible intuitions (which give us something without allowing us to cognise it

thus as an object) would both disappear. But now the whole of our distinction

between the merely possible and the actual rests on this, that the former only

signifies the positing of the representation of a thing in respect of our

concept, and, in general, in respect of the faculty of thought; while the latter

signifies the positing of the thing in itself [outside this concept].1 The

distinction, then, of possible things from actual is one which has merely

subjective validity for the human Understanding, because we can always

have a thing in our thoughts although it is [really] nothing, or we can

represent a thing as given although we have no concept of it. The

propositions therefore — that things can be possible without being actual,

and that consequently no conclusion can be drawn as to actuality from mere

possibility — are quite valid for human Reason, without thereby proving that

this distinction lies in things themselves. That this does not follow, and that

consequently these propositions, though valid of Objects (in so far as our

cognitive faculty, as sensuously conditioned, busies itself with Objects of

sense), do not hold for things in general, appears from the irrepressible

demand of Reason to assume something (the original ground) necessarily

existing as unconditioned, in which possibility and actuality should no longer

be distinguished, and for which Idea our Understanding has absolutely no

concept; i.e. it can find no way of representing such a thing and its manner of

existence. For if the Understanding thinks such a thing (which it may do at

pleasure), the thing is merely represented as possible. If it is conscious of it as

given in intuition, then is it actual; but nothing as to its possibility is thus

thought. Hence the concept of an absolutely necessary Being is no doubt an

indispensable Idea of Reason, but yet it is a problematical concept

unattainable by the human Understanding. It is indeed valid for the

employment of our cognitive faculties in accordance with their peculiar

constitution, but not valid of the Object. Nor is it valid for every knowing

being, because I cannot presuppose in every such being thought and intuition

as two distinct conditions of the exercise of its cognitive faculties, and

consequently as conditions of the possibility and actuality of things. An

Understanding into which this distinction did not enter, might say: All

Objects that I know are, i.e. exist; and the possibility of some, which yet do

not exist (i.e. the contingency or the contrasted necessity of those which do

exist), might never come into the representation of such a being at all. But

what makes it difficult for our Understanding to treat its concepts here asReason does, is merely that for it, as human Understanding, that is

transcendent (i.e. impossible for the subjective conditions of its cognition)

which Reason makes into a principle appertaining to the Object.— Here the

maxim always holds, that all Objects whose cognition surpasses the faculty

of the Understanding are thought by us according to the subjective conditions

of the exercise of that faculty which necessarily attach to our (human) nature.

If judgements laid down in this way (and there is no other alternative in

regard to transcendent concepts) cannot be constitutive principles

determining the Object as it is, they will remain regulative principles adapted

to the human point of view, immanent in their exercise and sure.

              Just as Reason in the theoretical consideration of nature must assume

the Idea of an unconditioned necessity of its original ground, so also it

presupposes in the practical [sphere] its own (in respect of nature)

unconditioned causality, or freedom, in that it is conscious of its own moral

command. Here the objective necessity of the act, as a duty, is opposed to

that necessity which it would have as an event, if its ground lay in nature and

not in freedom (i.e. in the causality of Reason). The morally absolutely

necessary act is regarded as physically quite contingent, since that which

ought necessarily to happen often does not happen. It is clear then that it is

owing to the subjective constitution of our practical faculty that the moral

laws must be represented as commands, and the actions conforming to them

as duties; and that Reason expresses this necessity not by an “is ” (happens),

but by an “ought to be.” This would not be the case were Reason considered

as in its causality independent of sensibility (as the subjective condition of its

application to objects of nature), and so as cause in an intelligible world

entirely in agreement with the moral law. For in such a world there would be

no distinction between “ought to do” and “does,” between a practical law of

that which is possible through us, and the theoretical law of that which is

actual through us. Though, therefore, an intelligible world in which

everything would be actual merely because (as something good) it is

possible, together with freedom as its formal condition, is for us a

transcendent concept, not available as a constitutive principle to determine an

Object and its objective reality; yet, because of the constitution of our (in part

sensuous) nature and faculty it is, so far as we can represent it in accordance

with the constitution of our Reason, for us and for all rational beings that

have a connexion with the world of sense, a universal regulative principle.

This principle does not objectively determine the constitution of freedom, asa form of causality, but it makes the rule of actions according to that Idea a

command for every one, with no less validity than if it did so determine it.

              In the same way we may concede thus much as regards the case in

hand. Between natural mechanism and the Technic of nature, i.e. its

purposive connexion, we should find no distinction, were it not that our

Understanding is of the kind that must proceed from the universal to the

particular. The Judgement then in respect of the particular can cognise no

purposiveness and, consequently, can form no determinant judgements,

without having a universal law under which to subsume that particular. Now

the particular, as such, contains something contingent in respect of the

universal, while yet Reason requires unity and conformity to law in the

combination of particular laws of nature. This conformity of the contingent to

law is called purposiveness; and the derivation of particular laws from the

universal, as regards their contingent element, is impossible a priori through

a determination of the concept of the Object. Hence, the concept of the

purposiveness of nature in its products is necessary for human Judgement in

respect of nature, but has not to do with the determination of Objects. It is,

therefore, a subjective principle of Reason for the Judgement, which as

regulative (not constitutive) is just as necessarily valid for our human

Judgement as if it were an objective principle.

        1
               [Second Edition.]§ 77. Of the peculiarity of the human Understanding, by means of which

                  the concept of a natural purpose is possible

 

 

              We have brought forward in the Remark peculiarities of our

cognitive faculties (even the higher ones) which we are easily led to transfer

as objective predicates to the things themselves. But they concern Ideas, no

object adequate to which can be given in experience, and they could only

serve as regulative principles in the pursuit of experience. This is the case

with the concept of a natural purpose, which concerns the cause of the

possibility of such a predicate, which cause can only lie in the Idea. But the

result corresponding to it (i.e. the product) is given in nature; and the concept

of a causality of nature as of a being acting according to purposes seems to

make the Idea of a natural purpose into a constitutive principle, which Idea

has thus something different from all other Ideas.

              This difference consists, however, in the fact that the Idea in

question is not a rational principle for the Understanding but for the

Judgement. It is, therefore, merely the application of an Understanding in

general to possible objects of experience, in cases where the judgement can

only be reflective, not determinant, and where, consequently, the object,

although given in experience, cannot be determinately judged in conformity

with the Idea (not to say with complete adequacy), but can only be reflected

on.

              There emerges, therefore, a peculiarity of our (human)

Understanding in respect of the Judgement in its reflection upon things of

nature. But if this be so, the Idea of a possible Understanding different from

the human must be fundamental here. (Just so in the Critique of Pure Reason

we must have in our thoughts another possible [kind of] intuition, if ours is to

be regarded as a particular species for which objects are only valid as

phenomena.) And so we are able to say: Certain natural products, from the

special constitution of our Understanding, must be considered by us, in regard

to their possibility, as if produced designedly and as purposes. But we do not,

therefore, demand that there should be actually given a particular cause which

has the representation of a purpose as its determining ground; and we do notdeny that an Understanding, different from (i.e. higher than) the human,

might find the ground of the possibility of such products of nature in the

mechanism of nature, i.e. in a causal combination for which an

Understanding is not explicitly assumed as cause.

              We have now to do with the relation of our Understanding to the

Judgement; viz. we seek for a certain contingency in the constitution of our

Understanding, to which we may point as a peculiarity distinguishing it from

other possible Understandings.

              This contingency is found, naturally enough, in the particular, which

the Judgement is to bring under the universal of the concepts of

Understanding. For the universal of our (human) Understanding does not

determine the particular, and it is contingent in how many ways different

things which agree in a common characteristic may come before our

perception. Our Understanding is a faculty of concepts, i.e. a discursive

Understanding, for which it obviously must be contingent of what kind and

how very different the particular may be that can be given to it in nature and

brought under its concepts. But now intuition also belongs to knowledge, and

a faculty of a complete spontaneity of intuition would be a cognitive faculty

distinct from sensibility, and quite independent of it, in other words, an

Understanding in the most general sense. Thus we can think an intuitive

Understanding [negatively, merely as not discursive1 ], which does not

proceed from the universal to the particular, and so to the individual (through

concepts). For it that contingency of the accordance of nature in its products

according to particular laws with the Understanding would not be met with;

and it is this contingency that makes it so hard for our Understanding to

reduce the manifold of nature to the unity of knowledge. This reduction our

Understanding can only accomplish by bringing natural characteristics into a

very contingent correspondence with our faculty of concepts, of which an

intuitive Understanding would have no need.

              Our Understanding has then this peculiarity as concerns the

Judgement, that in cognition by it the particular is not determined by the

universal and cannot therefore be derived from it; but at the same time this

particular in the manifold of nature must accord with the universal (by means

of concepts and laws) so that it may be capable of being subsumed under it.

This accordance under such circumstances must be very contingent and

without definite principle as concerns the Judgement.              In order now to be able at least to think the possibility of such an

accordance of things of nature with our Judgement (which accordance we

represent as contingent and consequently as only possible by means of a

purpose directed thereto), we must at the same time think of another

Understanding, by reference to which and apart from any purpose ascribed to

it, we may represent as necessary that accordance of natural laws with our

Judgement, which for our Understanding is only thinkable through the

medium of purposes.

              In fact our Understanding has the property of proceeding in its

cognition, e.g. of the cause of a product, from the analytical-universal

(concepts) to the particular (the given empirical intuition). Thus as regards

the manifold of the latter it determines nothing, but must await this

determination by the Judgement, which subsumes the empirical intuition (if

the object is a natural product) under the concept. We can however think an

Understanding which, being, not like ours, discursive, but intuitive, proceeds

from the synthetical-universal (the intuition of a whole as such) to the

particular, i.e. from the whole to the parts. The contingency of the

combination of the parts, in order that a definite form of the whole shall be

possible, is not implied by such an Understanding and its representation of

the whole. Our Understanding requires this because it must proceed from the

parts as universally conceived grounds to different forms possible to be

subsumed under them, as consequences. According to the constitution of our

Understanding a real whole of nature is regarded only as the effect of the

concurrent motive powers of the parts. Suppose then that we wish not to

represent the possibility of the whole as dependent on that of the parts (after

the manner of our discursive Understanding), but according to the standard of

the intuitive (original) Understanding to represent the possibility of the parts

(according to their constitution and combination) as dependent on that of the

whole. In accordance with the above peculiarity of our Understanding it

cannot happen that the whole shall contain the ground of the possibility of the

connexion of the parts (which would be a contradiction in discursive

cognition), but only that the representation of a whole may contain the

ground of the possibility of its form and the connexion of the parts belonging

to it. Now such a whole would be an effect (product ) the representation of

which is regarded as the cause of its possibility; but the product of a cause

whose determining ground is merely the representation of its effect is called a

purpose. Hence it is merely a consequence of the particular constitution ofour Understanding, that it represents products of nature as possible, according

to a different kind of causality from that of the natural laws of matter,

namely, that of purposes and final causes. Hence also this principle has not to

do with the possibility of such things themselves (even when considered as

phenomena) according to the manner of their production, but merely with the

judgement upon them which is possible to our Understanding. Here we see at

once why it is that in natural science we are not long contented with an

explanation of the products of nature by a causality according to purposes.

For there we desire to judge of natural production merely in a manner

conformable to our faculty of judging, i.e. to the reflective Judgement, and

not in reference to things themselves on behalf of the determinant Judgement.

It is here not at all requisite to prove that such an intellectus archetypus is

possible, but only that we are led to the Idea of it,— which contains no

contradiction,— in contrast to our discursive Understanding which has need

of images (intellectus ectypus ) and to the contingency of its constitution.

              If we consider a material whole, according to its form, as a product

of the parts with their powers and faculties of combining with one another (as

well as of bringing in foreign materials), we represent to ourselves a

mechanical mode of producing it. But in this way no concept emerges of a

whole as purpose, whose internal possibility presupposes throughout the Idea

of a whole on which depend the constitution and mode of action of the parts,

as we must represent to ourselves an organised body. It does not follow

indeed, as has been shown, that the mechanical production of such a body is

impossible; for to say so would be to say that it would be impossible

(contradictory) for any Understanding to represent to itself such a unity in the

connexion of the manifold, without the Idea of the unity being at the same

time its producing cause, i.e. without designed production. This, however,

would follow in fact if we were justified in regarding material beings as

things in themselves. For then the unity that constitutes the ground of the

possibility of natural formations would be simply the unity of space. But

space is no real ground of the products, but only their formal condition,

although it has this similarity to the real ground which we seek that in it no

part can be determined except in relation to the whole (the representation of

which therefore lies at the ground of the possibility of the parts). But now it is

at least possible to consider the material world as mere phenomenon, and to

think as its substrate something like a thing in itself (which is not

phenomenon), and to attach to this a corresponding intellectual intuition(even though it is not ours). Thus there would be, although incognisable by

us, a supersensible real ground for nature, to which we ourselves belong. In

this we consider according to mechanical laws what is necessary in nature

regarded as an object of Sense; but we consider according to teleological laws

the agreement and unity of its particular laws and its forms — which in

regard to mechanism we must judge contingent — regarded as objects of

Reason (in fact the whole of nature as a system). Thus we should judge

nature according to two different kinds of principles without the mechanical

way of explanation being shut out by the teleological, as if they contradicted

one another.

              From this we are enabled to see what otherwise, though we could

easily surmise it, could with difficulty be maintained with certainty and

proved, viz. that the principle of a mechanical derivation of purposive natural

products is consistent with the teleological, but in no way enables us to

dispense with it. In a thing that we must judge as a natural purpose (an

organised being) we can no doubt try all the known and yet to be discovered

laws of mechanical production, and even hope to make good progress

therewith; but we can never get rid of the call for a quite different ground of

production for the possibility of such a product, viz. causality by means of

purposes. Absolutely no human Reason (in fact no finite Reason like ours in

quality, however much it may surpass it in degree) can hope to understand

the production of even a blade of grass by mere mechanical causes. As

regards the possibility of such an object, the teleological connexion of causes

and effects is quite indispensable for the Judgement, even for studying it by

the clue of experience. For external objects as phenomena an adequate

ground related to purposes cannot be met with; this, although it lies in nature,

must only be sought in the supersensible substrate of nature, from all possible

insight into which we are cut off. Hence it is absolutely impossible for us to

produce from nature itself grounds of explanation for purposive

combinations; and it is necessary by the constitution of the human cognitive

faculties to seek the supreme ground of these purposive combinations in an

original Understanding as the cause of the world.

        1
               [Second Edition.]§ 78. Of the union of the principle of the universal mechanism of matter

          with the teleological principle in the Technic of nature.

 

 

              It is infinitely important for Reason not to let slip the mechanism of

nature in its products, and in their explanation not to pass it by, because

without it no insight into the nature of things can be attained. Suppose it

admitted that a supreme Architect immediately created the forms of nature as

they have been from the beginning, or that He predetermined those which in

the course of nature continually form themselves on the same model. Our

knowledge of nature is not thus in the least furthered, because we cannot

know the mode of action of that Being and the Ideas which are to contain the

principles of the possibility of natural beings, and we cannot by them explain

nature as from above downwards (a priori ). And if, starting from the forms

of the objects of experience, from below upwards (a posteriori ), we wish to

explain the purposiveness, which we believe is met with in experience, by

appealing to a cause working in accordance with purposes, then is our

explanation quite tautological and we are only mocking Reason with words.

Indeed when we lose ourselves with this way of explanation in the

transcendent, whither natural knowledge cannot follow, Reason is seduced

into poetical extravagance, which it is its peculiar destination to avoid.

              On the other hand, it is just as necessary a maxim of Reason not to

pass by the principle of purposes in the products of nature. For, although it

does not make their mode of origination any more comprehensible, yet it is a

heuristic principle for investigating the particular laws of nature; supposing

even that we wish to make no use of it for explaining nature itself,— in

which we still always speak only of natural purposes, although it apparently

exhibits a designed unity of purpose,— i.e. without seeking beyond nature

the ground of the possibility of these particular laws. But since we must come

in the end to this latter question, it is just as necessary to think for nature a

particular kind of causality which does not present itself in it, as the

mechanism of natural causes which does. To the receptivity of several forms,

different from those of which matter is susceptible by mechanism, must be

added a spontaneity of a cause (which therefore cannot be matter), without

which no ground can be assigned for those forms. No doubt Reason, before ittakes this step, must proceed with caution, and not try to explain

teleologically every Technic of nature, i.e. every productive faculty of nature

which displays in itself (as in regular bodies) purposiveness of figure to our

mere apprehension; but must always regard such as so far mechanically

possible. But on that account to wish entirely to exclude the teleological

principle, and to follow simple mechanism only — in cases where, in the

rational investigation of the possibility of natural forms through their causes,

purposiveness shows itself quite undeniably as the reference to a different

kind of causality — to do this must make Reason fantastic, and send it

wandering among chimeras of unthinkable natural faculties; just as a mere

teleological mode of explanation which takes no account of natural

mechanism makes it visionary.

              In the same natural thing both principles cannot be connected as

fundamental propositions of explanation (deduction) of one by the other, i.e.

they do not unite for the determinant Judgement as dogmatical and

constitutive principles of insight into nature. If I choose, e.g. to regard a

maggot as the product of the mere mechanism of nature (of the new

formation that it produces of itself, when its elements are set free by

corruption), I cannot derive the same product from the same matter as from a

causality that acts according to purposes. Conversely, if I regard the same

product as a natural purpose, I cannot count on any mechanical mode of its

production and regard this as the constitutive principle of my judgement upon

its possibility, and so unite both principles. One method of explanation

excludes the other; even supposing that objectively both grounds of the

possibility of such a product rested on a single ground, to which we did not

pay attention. The principle which should render possible the compatibility of

both in judging of nature must be placed in that which lies outside both (and

consequently outside the possible empirical representation of nature), but yet

contains their ground, i.e. in the supersensible; and each of the two methods

of explanation must be referred thereto. Now of this we can have no concept

but the indeterminate concept of a ground, which makes the judging of nature

by empirical laws possible, but which we cannot determine more nearly by

any predicate. Hence the union of both principles cannot rest upon a ground

of explanation of the possibility of a product according to given laws, for the

determinant Judgement, but only upon a ground of its exposition for the

reflective Judgement.— To explain is to derive from a principle, which

therefore we must clearly know and of which we can give an account. Nodoubt the principle of the mechanism of nature and that of its causality in one

and the same natural product must coalesce in a single higher principle,

which is their common source, because otherwise they could not subsist side

by side in the observation of nature. But if this principle, objectively common

to the two, which therefore warrants the association of the maxims of natural

investigation depending on both, be such that, though it can be pointed to, it

cannot be determinately known nor clearly put forward for use in cases which

arise, then from such a principle we can draw no explanation, i.e. no clear

and determinate derivation of the possibility of a natural product in

accordance with those two heterogeneous principles. But now the principle

common to the mechanical and teleological derivations is the supersensible,

which we must place at the basis of nature, regarded as phenomenon. And of

this, in a theoretical point of view, we cannot form the smallest positive

determinate concept. It cannot, therefore, in any way be explained how,

according to it as principle, nature (in its particular laws) constitutes for us

one system, which can be cognised as possible either by the principle of

physical development or by that of final causes. If it happens that objects of

nature present themselves which cannot be thought by us, as regards their

possibility, according to the principle of mechanism (which always has a

claim on a natural being), without relying on teleological propositions, we

can only make an hypothesis. Namely, we suppose that we may hopefully

investigate natural laws with reference to both (according as the possibility of

its product is cognisable by our Understanding by one or the other principle),

without stumbling at the apparent contradiction which comes into view

between the principles by which they are judged. For at least the possibility is

assured that both may be united objectively in one principle, since they

concern phenomena that presuppose a supersensible ground.

              Mechanism, then, and the teleological (designed) Technic of nature,

in respect of the same product and its possibility, may stand under a common

supreme principle of nature in particular laws. But since this principle is

transcendent we cannot, because of the limitation of our Understanding, unite

both principles in the explanation of the same production of nature even if the

inner possibility of this product is only intelligible [verständlich] through a

causality according to purposes (as is the case with organised matter). We

revert then to the above fundamental proposition of Teleology. According to

the constitution of the human Understanding, no other than designedly

working causes can be assumed for the possibility of organised beings innature; and the mere mechanism of nature cannot be adequate to the

explanation of these its products. But we do not attempt to decide anything

by this fundamental proposition as to the possibility of such things

themselves.

              This is only a maxim of the reflective, not of the determinant

Judgement; consequently only subjectively valid for us, not objectively for

the possibility of things themselves of this kind (in which both kinds of

production may well cohere in one and the same ground). Further, without

any concept,— besides the teleologically conceived method of production,—

of a simultaneously presented mechanism of nature, no judgement can be

passed on this kind of production as a natural product. Hence the above

maxim leads to the necessity of an unification of both principles in judging of

things as natural purposes in themselves, but does not lead us to substitute

one for the other either altogether or in certain parts. For in the place of what

is thought (at least by us) as possible only by design we cannot set

mechanism, and in the place of what is cognised as mechanically necessary

we cannot set contingency, which would need a purpose as its determining

ground; but we can only subordinate the one (Mechanism) to the other

(designed Technic), which may quite well be the case according to the

transcendental principle of the purposiveness of nature.

              For where purposes are thought as grounds of the possibility of

certain things, we must assume also means, whose law of working requires

for itself nothing presupposing a purpose,— a mechanical law — and yet can

be a subordinate cause of designed effects. Thus — in the organic products of

nature, and specially when prompted by their infinite number, we assume (at

least as a permissible hypothesis) design in the combination of natural causes

by particular laws as a universal principle of the reflective Judgement for the

whole of nature (the world),— we can think a great and indeed universal

combination of mechanical with teleological laws in the productions of

nature, without interchanging the principles by which they are judged or

putting one in the place of the other. For, in a teleological judgement, the

matter, even if the form that it assumes be judged possible only by design,

can also, conformably to the mechanical laws of its nature, be subordinated

as a means to the represented purpose. But, since the ground of this

compatibility lies in that which is neither one nor the other (neither

mechanism nor purposive combination), but is the supersensible substrate ofnature of which we know nothing, the two ways of representing the

possibility of such Objects are not to be blended together by our (human)

Reason. However, we cannot judge of their possibility otherwise than by

judging them as ultimately resting on a supreme Understanding by the

connexion of final causes; and thus the teleological method of explanation is

not eliminated.

              Now it is quite indeterminate, and for our Understanding always

indeterminable, how much the mechanism of nature does as a means towards

each final design in nature. However, on account of the above-mentioned

intelligible principle of the possibility of a nature in general, it may be

assumed that it is possible throughout according to the two kinds of

universally accordant laws (the physical and those of final causes), although

we cannot see into the way how this takes place. Hence we do not know how

far the mechanical method of explanation which is possible for us may

extend. So much only is certain that, so far as we can go in this direction, it

must always be inadequate for things that we once recognise as natural

purposes; and therefore we must, by the constitution of our Understanding,

subordinate these grounds collectively to a teleological principle.

              Hereon is based a privilege, and on account of the importance which

the study of nature by the principle of mechanism has for the theoretical use

of our Reason, also an appeal. We should explain all products and

occurrences in nature, even the most purposive, by mechanism as far as is in

our power (the limits of which we cannot specify in this kind of

investigation). But at the same time we are not to lose sight of the fact that

those things which we cannot even state for investigation except under the

concept of a purpose of Reason, must, in conformity with the essential

constitution of our Reason, mechanical causes notwithstanding, be

subordinated by us finally to causality in accordance with purposes.

 

 

                 Methodology of the Teleological Judgement.1

 

 

§ 79. Whether teleology must be treated as if it belonged to the doctrine

                                      of nature

 

 

              Every science must have its definite position in the encyclopaedia of

all the sciences. If it is a philosophical science its position must be either in

the theoretical or practical part. If again it has its place in the former of these,

it must be either in the doctrine of nature, so far as it concerns that which can

be an object of experience (in the doctrine of bodies, the doctrine of the soul,

or the universal science of the world), or in the doctrine of God (the original

ground of the world as the complex of all objects of experience).

              Now the question is, what place is due to Teleology? Does it belong

to Natural Science (properly so called) or to Theology? One of the two it

must be; for no science belongs to the transition from one to the other,

because this transition only marks the articulation or organisation of the

system, and not a place in it.

              That it does not belong to Theology as a part thereof, although it

may be made of the most important use therein, is self-evident. For it has as

its objects, natural productions, and their cause, and although it refers at the

same time to the latter as to a ground lying outside of and beyond nature (a

Divine Author), yet it does not do this for the determinant but only for the

reflective Judgement in the consideration of nature (in order to guide our

judgement on things in the world by means of such an Idea as a regulative

principle, in conformity with the human Understanding).

              But it appears to belong just as little to Natural Science, which needs

determinant and not merely reflective principles in order to supply objective

grounds for natural effects. In fact, nothing is gained for the theory of nature

or the mechanical explanation of its phenomena by means of its effective

causes, by considering them as connected according to the relation of

purposes. The exhibition of the purposes of nature in its products, so far asthey constitute a system according to teleological concepts, properly belongs

only to a description of nature which is drawn up in accordance with a

particular guiding thread. Here Reason, no doubt, accomplishes a noble work,

instructive and practically purposive in many points of view; but it gives no

information as to the origin and the inner possibility of these forms, which is

the special business of theoretical Natural Science. Teleology, therefore, as

science, belongs to no Doctrine, but only to Criticism; and to the criticism of

a special cognitive faculty, viz. Judgement. But so far as it contains principles

a priori, it can and must furnish the method by which nature must be judged

according to the principle of final causes. Hence its Methodology has at least

negative influence upon the procedure in theoretical Natural Science, and

also upon the relation which this can have in Metaphysic to Theology as its

propaedeutic.

        1
               [This is marked as an Appendix in the Second Edition.]§ 80. Of the necessary subordination of the mechanical to the teleological

        principle in the explanation of a thing as a natural purpose.

 

 

              The privilege of aiming at a merely mechanical method of

explanation of all natural products is in itself quite unlimited; but the faculty

of attaining thereto is by the constitution of our Understanding, so far as it

has to do with things as natural purposes, not only very much limited but also

clearly bounded. For, according to a principle of the Judgement, by this

process alone nothing can be accomplished towards an explanation of these

things; and consequently the judgement upon such products must always be

at the same time subordinated by us to a teleological principle.

              It is therefore rational, even meritorious, to pursue natural

mechanism, in respect of the explanation of natural products, so far as can be

done with probability; and if we give up the attempt it is not because it is

impossible in itself to meet in this path with the purposiveness of nature, but

only because it is impossible for us as men. For there would be required for

that an intuition other than sensuous, and a determinate knowledge of the

intelligible substrate of nature from which a ground could be assigned for the

mechanism of phenomena according to particular laws, which quite surpasses

our faculties.

              Hence if the naturalist would not waste his labour he must in judging

of things, the concept of any of which is indubitably established as a natural

purpose (organised beings), always lay down as basis an original

organisation, which uses that very mechanism in order to produce fresh

organised forms or to develop the existing ones into new shapes (which,

however, always result from that purpose and conformably to it).

              It is praiseworthy by the aid of comparative anatomy to go through

the great creation of organised natures, in order to see whether there may not

be in it something similar to a system and also in accordance with the

principle of production. For otherwise we should have to be content with the

mere principle of judgement (which gives no insight into their production)

and, discouraged, to give up all claim to natural insight in this field. The

agreement of so many genera of animals in a certain common schema, whichappears to be fundamental not only in the structure of their bones but also in

the disposition of their remaining parts,— so that with an admirable

simplicity of original outline, a great variety of species has been produced by

the shortening of one member and the lengthening of another, the involution

of this part and the evolution of that,— allows a ray of hope, however faint,

to penetrate into our minds, that here something may be accomplished by the

aid of the principle of the mechanism of nature (without which there can be

no natural science in general). This analogy of forms, which with all their

differences seem to have been produced according to a common original

type, strengthens our suspicions of an actual relationship between them in

their production from a common parent, through the gradual approximation

of one animal-genus to another — from those in which the principle of

purposes seems to be best authenticated, i.e. from man, down to the polype,

and again from this down to mosses and lichens, and finally to the lowest

stage of nature noticeable by us, viz. to crude matter. And so the whole

Technic of nature, which is so incomprehensible to us in organised beings

that we believe ourselves compelled to think a different principle for it, seems

to be derived from matter and its powers according to mechanical laws (like

those by which it works in the formation of crystals).

              Here it is permissible for the archaeologist of nature to derive from

the surviving traces of its oldest revolutions, according to all its mechanism

known or supposed by him, that great family of creatures (for so we must

represent them if the said thoroughgoing relationship is to have any ground).

He can suppose the bosom of mother earth, as she passed out of her chaotic

state (like a great animal), to have given birth in the beginning to creatures of

less purposive form, that these again gave birth to others which formed

themselves with greater adaptation to their place of birth and their relations to

each other; until this womb becoming torpid and ossified, limited its births to

definite species not further modifiable, and the manifoldness remained as it

was at the end of the operation of that fruitful formative power.— Only he

must still in the end ascribe to this universal mother an organisation

purposive in respect of all these creatures; otherwise it would not be possible

to think the possibility of the purposive form of the products of the animal

and vegetable kingdoms.1 He has then only pushed further back the ground

of explanation and cannot pretend to have made the development of those

two kingdoms independent of the condition of final causes.              Even as concerns the variation to which certain individuals of

organised genera are accidentally subjected, if we find that the character so

changed is hereditary and is taken up into the generative power, then we

cannot pertinently judge the variation to be anything else than an occasional

development of purposive capacities originally present in the species with a

view to the preservation of the race. For in the complete inner purposiveness

of an organised being, the generation of its like is closely bound up with the

condition of taking nothing up into the generative power which does not

belong, in such a system of purposes, to one of its undeveloped original

capacities. Indeed, if we depart from this principle, we cannot know with

certainty whether several parts of the form which is now apparent in a species

have not a contingent and unpurposive origin; and the principle of Teleology,

to judge nothing in an organised being as unpurposive which maintains it in

its propagation, would be very unreliable in its application and would be

valid solely for the original stock (of which we have no further knowledge).

              Hume 1 takes exception to those who find it requisite to assume for

all such natural purposes a teleological principle of judgement, i.e. an

architectonic Understanding. He says that it may fairly be asked: how is such

an Understanding possible? How can the manifold faculties and properties

that constitute the possibility of an Understanding, which has at the same

time executive force, be found so purposively together in one Being? But this

objection is without weight. For the whole difficulty which surrounds the

question concerning the first production of a thing containing in itself

purposes and only comprehensible by means of them, rests on the further

question as to the unity of the ground of the combination in this product of

the various elements [des Mannichfaltigen] which are external to one

another. For if this ground be placed in the Understanding of a producing

cause as simple substance, the question, so far as it is teleological, is

sufficiently answered; but if the cause be sought merely in matter as an

aggregate of many substances external to one another, the unity of the

principle is quite wanting for the internally purposive form of its formation,

and the autocracy of matter in productions which can only be conceived by

our Understanding as purposes is a word without meaning.

              Hence it comes to pass that those who seek a supreme ground of

possibility for the objectively-purposive forms of matter, without attributing

to it Understanding, either make the world-whole into a single all-embracingsubstance (Pantheism), or (which is only a more determinate explanation of

the former) into a complex of many determinations inhering in a single

simple substance (Spinozism); merely in order to satisfy that condition of all

purposiveness — the unity of ground. Thus they do justice indeed to one

condition of the problem, viz. the unity in the purposive combination, by

means of the mere ontological concept of a simple substance; but they adduce

nothing for the other condition, viz. the relation of this substance to its result

as purpose, through which relation that ontological ground is to be more

closely determined in respect of the question at issue. Hence they answer the

whole question in no way. It remains absolutely unanswerable (for our

Reason) if we do not represent that original ground of things, as simple

substance; its property which has reference to the specific constitution of the

forms of nature grounded thereon, viz. its purposive unity, as the property of

an intelligent substance; and the relation of these forms to this intelligence

(on account of the contingency which we ascribe to everything that we think

possible only as a purpose) as that of causality.

        1
               We may call a hypothesis of this kind a daring venture of reason,

and there may be few even of the most acute naturalists through whose head

it has not sometimes passed. For it is not absurd, like that generatio

aequivoca by which is understood the production of an organised being

through the mechanics of crude unorganised matter. It would always remain

generatio univoca in the most universal sense of the word, for it only

considers one organic being as derived from another organic being, although

from one which is specifically different; e.g. certain water-animals transform

themselves gradually into marsh-animals and from these, after some

generations, into land-animals. A priori, in the judgement of Reason alone,

there is no contradiction here. Only experience gives no example of it;

according to experience all generation that we know is generatio homonyma.

This is not merely univoca in contrast to the generation out of unorganised

material, but in the organisation the product is of like kind to that which

produced it; and generatio heteronyma, so far as our empirical knowledge of

nature extends, is nowhere found.

        1
               [It is probable that Kant alludes here to Hume’s Essay On a

Providence and a Future State, § xi of the Inquiry. Hume argues that though

the inference from an effect to an intelligent cause may be valid in the case of

human contrivance, it is not legitimate to rise by a like argument to SupremeIntelligence. “In human nature there is a certain experienced coherence of

designs and inclinations; so that when from any fact we have discovered one

intention of any man, it may often be reasonable from experience to infer

another, and draw a long chain of conclusions concerning his past or future

conduct. But this method of reasoning can never have place with regard to a

being so remote and incomprehensible, who bears much less analogy to any

other being in the universe than the sun to a waxen taper, and who discovers

himself only by some faint traces or outlines, beyond which we have no

authority to ascribe to him any attribute or perfection.”]§ 81. Of the association of mechanism with the teleological principle in

        the explanation of a natural purpose as a natural product.

 

 

              According to the preceding paragraphs the mechanism of nature

alone does not enable us to think the possibility of an organised being; but (at

least according to the constitution of our cognitive faculty) it must be

originally subordinated to a cause working designedly. But, just as little is the

mere teleological ground of such a being sufficient for considering it and

judging it as a product of nature, if the mechanism of the latter be not

associated with the former, like the instrument of a cause working

designedly, to whose purposes nature is subordinated in its mechanical laws.

The possibility of such a unification of two quite different kinds of causality,

— of nature in its universal conformity to law with an Idea which limits it to

a particular form, for which it contains no ground in itself — is not

comprehended by our Reason. It lies in the supersensible substrate of nature,

of which we can determine nothing positively, except that it is the being in

itself of which we merely know the phenomenon. But the principle, “all that

we assume as belonging to this nature (phenomenon ) and as its product, must

be thought as connected therewith according to mechanical laws,” has none

the less force, because without this kind of causality organised beings (as

purposes of nature) would not be natural products.

              Now if the teleological principle of the production of these beings be

assumed (as is inevitable), we can place at the basis of the cause of their

internally purposive form either Occasionalism or Pre-established Harmony.

According to the former the Supreme Cause of the world would, conformably

to its Idea, furnish immediately the organic formation on the occasion of

every union of intermingling materials. According to the latter it would, in

the original products of its wisdom, only have supplied the capacity by means

of which an organic being produces another of like kind, and the species

perpetually maintains itself; whilst the loss of individuals is continually

replaced by that nature which at the same time works towards their

destruction. If we assume the Occasionalism of the production of organised

beings, all nature is quite lost, and with it all employment of Reason in

judging of the possibility of such products; hence we may suppose that noone will adopt this system, who has anything to do with philosophy.

              [The theory of] Pre-established Harmony may proceed in two

different ways. It regards every organised being as generated by one of like

kind, either as an educt or a product. The system which regards generations

as mere educts is called the theory of individual preformation or the theory of

evolution: that which regards them as products is entitled the system of

epigenesis. This latter may also be entitled the system of generic

preformation, because the productive faculty of the generator and

consequently the specific form would be virtually performed according to the

inner purposive capacities which are part of its stock. In correspondence with

this the opposite theory of individual preformations would be better entitled

the theory of involution.

              The advocates of the theory of evolution, who remove every

individual from the formative power of nature, in order to make it come

immediately from the hand of the Creator, would, however, not venture to

regard this as happening according to the hypothesis of Occasionalism. For

according to this the copulation is a mere formality, à propos of which a

supreme intelligent Cause of the world has concluded to form a fruit

immediately by his hand, and only to leave to the mother its development and

nourishment. They declare themselves for preformation; as if it were not all

the same, whether a supernatural origin is assigned to these forms in the

beginning or in the course of the world. On the contrary, a great number of

supernatural arrangements would be spared by occasional creation, which

would be requisite, in order that the embryo formed in the beginning of the

world might not be injured throughout the long period of its development by

the destructive powers of nature, and might keep itself unharmed; and there

would also be requisite an incalculably greater number of such preformed

beings than would ever be developed, and with them many creations would

be made without need and without purpose. They would, however, be willing

to leave at least something to nature, so as not to fall into a complete

Hyperphysic which can dispense with all natural explanations. It is true, they

hold so fast by their Hyperphysic that they find even in abortions (which it is

quite impossible to take for purposes of nature) an admirable purposiveness;

though it be only directed to the fact that an anatomist would take exception

to it as a purposeless purposiveness, and would feel a disheartened wonder

thereat. But the production of hybrids could absolutely not be accommodatedwith the system of preformation; and to the seeds of the male creature, to

which they had attributed nothing but the mechanical property of serving as

the first means of nourishment for the embryo, they must attribute in addition

a purposive formative power, which in the case of the product of two

creatures of the same genus they would concede to neither parent.

              On the other hand, even if we do not recognise the great superiority

which the theory of Epigenesis has over the former as regards the empirical

grounds of its proof, still prior to proof Reason views this way of explanation

with peculiar favour. For in respect of the things which we can only represent

as possible originally according to the causality of purposes, at least as

concerns their propagation, this theory regards nature as self-producing, not

merely as self-evolving: and so with the least expenditure of the supernatural

leaves to nature all that follows after the first beginning (though without

determining anything about this first beginning by which Physic generally is

thwarted, however it may essay its explanation by a chain of causes).

              As regards this theory of Epigenesis, no one has contributed more

either to its proof or to the establishment of the legitimate principles of its

application,— partly by the limitation of a too presumptuous employment of

it,— than Herr Hofr. Blumenbach. 1 In all physical explanations of these

formations he starts from organised matter. That crude matter should have

originally formed itself according to mechanical laws, that life should have

sprung from the nature of what is lifeless, that matter should have been able

to dispose itself into the form of a self-maintaining purposiveness — this he

rightly declares to be contradictory to Reason. But at the same time he leaves

to natural mechanism under this to us indispensable principle of an original

organisation, an undeterminable but yet unmistakeable element, in reference

to which the faculty of matter in an organised body is called by him a

formative impulse (in contrast to, and yet standing under the higher guidance

and direction of, that merely mechanical formative power universally resident

in matter).

        1
               [J. F. Blumenbach (1752–1840), a German naturalist and professor

at Göttingen; the author of Institutiones Physiologicae (1787) and other

works. An interesting account of him is given in Lever’s novel Adventures of

Arthur O’Leary, ch. xix.]§ 82. Of the teleological system in the external relations of organised

                                        beings

 

 

              By external purposiveness I mean that by which one thing of nature

serves another as means to a purpose. Now things which have no internal

purposiveness and which presuppose none for their possibility, e.g. earth, air,

water, etc., may at the same time be very purposive externally, i.e. in relation

to other beings. But these latter must be organised beings, i.e. natural

purposes, for otherwise the former could not be judged as means to them.

Thus water, air, and earth cannot be regarded as means to the raising of

mountains, because mountains contain nothing in themselves that requires a

ground of their possibility according to purposes, in reference to which

therefore their cause can never be represented under the predicate of a means

(as useful therefor).

              External purposiveness is a quite different concept from that of

internal purposiveness, which is bound up with the possibility of an object

irrespective of its actuality being itself a purpose. We can ask about an

organised being the question: What is it for? But we cannot easily ask this

about things in which we recognise merely the working of nature’s

mechanism. For in the former, as regards their internal possibility, we

represent a causality according to purposes, a creative Understanding, and we

refer this active faculty to its determining ground, viz. design. There is only

one external purposiveness which is connected with the internal

purposiveness of organisation, and yet serves in the external relation of a

means to a purpose, without the question necessarily arising, as to what end

this being so organised must have existed for. This is the organisation of both

sexes in their mutual relation for the propagation of their kind; since here we

can always ask, as in the case of an individual, why must such a pair exist?

The answer is: This pair first constitutes an organising whole, though not an

organised whole in a single body.

              If we now ask, wherefore anything is, the answer is either: Its

presence and its production have no reference at all to a cause working

according to design, and so we always refer its origin to the mechanism ofnature, or: There is somewhere a designed ground of its presence (as a

contingent natural being). This thought we can hardly separate from the

concept of an organised thing; for, since we must place at the basis of its

internal possibility a causality of final causes and an Idea lying at the ground

of this, we cannot think the existence of this product except as a purpose. For

the represented effect, the representation of which is at the same time the

determining ground of the intelligent cause working towards its production, is

called a purpose. In this case therefore we can either say: The purpose of the

existence of such a natural being is in itself; i.e. it is not merely a purpose but

a final purpose, or: This is external to it in another natural being, i.e. it exists

purposively not as a final purpose, but necessarily as a means.

              But if we go through the whole of nature we find in it, as nature, no

being which could make claim to the eminence of being the final purpose of

creation; and we can even prove a priori that what might be for nature an

ultimate purpose, according to all the thinkable determinations and properties

wherewith one could endow it, could yet as a natural thing never be a final

purpose.

              If we consider the vegetable kingdom we might at first sight, on

account of the immeasurable fertility with which it spreads itself almost on

every soil, be led to take it for a mere product of that mechanism which

nature displays in the formations of the mineral kingdom. But a more

intimate knowledge of its indescribably wise organisation does not permit us

to hold to this thought, but prompts the question: What are these things

created for? If it is answered: For the animal kingdom, which is thereby

nourished and has thus been able to spread over the earth in genera so

various, then the further question comes: What are these plant-devouring

animals for? The answer would be something like this: For beasts of prey,

which can only be nourished by that which has life. Finally we have the

question: What are these last, as well as the first-mentioned natural

kingdoms, good for? For man, in reference to the manifold use which his

Understanding teaches him to make of all these creatures. He is the ultimate

purpose of creation here on earth, because he is the only being upon it who

can form a concept of purposes, and who can by his Reason make out of an

aggregate of purposively formed things a system of purposes.

              We might also with the chevalier Linnaeus 1 go the apparently

opposite way and say: The herbivorous animals are there to moderate theluxurious growth of the vegetable kingdom, by which many of its species are

choked. The carnivora are to set bounds to the voracity of the herbivora.

Finally man, by his pursuit of these and his diminution of their numbers,

preserves a certain equilibrium between the producing and the destructive

powers of nature. And so man, although in a certain reference he might be

esteemed a purpose, yet in another has only the rank of a means.

              If an objective purposiveness in the variety of the genera of creatures

and their external relations to one another, as purposively constructed beings,

be made a principle, then it is conformable to Reason to conceive in these

relations a certain organisation and a system of all natural kingdoms

according to final causes. Only here experience seems flatly to contradict the

maxims of Reason, especially as concerns an ultimate purpose of nature,

which is indispensable for the possibility of such a system and which we can

put nowhere else but in man. For regarding him as one of the many animal

genera, nature has not in the least excepted him from its destructive or its

productive powers, but has subjected everything to a mechanism thereof

without any purpose.

              The first thing that must be designedly prepared in an arrangement

for a purposive complex of natural beings on the earth would be their place of

habitation, the soil and the element on and in which they are to thrive. But a

more exact knowledge of the constitution of this basis of all organic

production indicates no other causes than those working quite undesignedly,

causes which rather destroy than favour production, order, and purposes.

Land and sea not only contain in themselves memorials of ancient mighty

desolations which have confounded them and all creatures that are in them;

but their whole structure, the strata of the one and the boundaries of the other,

have quite the appearance of being the product of the wild and violent forces

of a nature working in a state of chaos. Although the figure, the structure, and

the slope of the land might seem to be purposively ordered for the reception

of water from the air, for the welling up of streams between strata of different

kinds (for many kinds of products), and for the course of rivers — yet a

closer investigation shows that they are merely the effects of volcanic

eruptions or of inundations of the ocean, as regards not only the first

production of this figure, but, above all, its subsequent transformation, as

well as the disappearance of its first organic productions.1 Now if the place

of habitation of all these creatures, the soil (of the land) or the bosom (of thesea), indicates nothing but a quite undesigned mechanism of its production,

how and with what right can we demand and maintain a different origin for

these latter products? The closest examination, indeed (in Camper’s 1

judgement), of the remains of the aforesaid devastations of nature seems to

show that man was not comprehended in these revolutions; but yet he is so

dependent on the remaining creatures that, if a universally directing

mechanism of nature be admitted in the case of the others, he must also be

regarded as comprehended under it; even though his Understanding (for the

most part at least) has been able to deliver him from these devastations.

              But this argument seems to prove more than was intended by it. It

seems to prove not merely that man cannot be the ultimate purpose of nature,

and that on the same grounds the aggregate of the organised things of nature

on the earth cannot be a system of purposes; but also that the natural products

formerly held to be natural purposes have no other origin than the mechanism

of nature.

              But in the solution given above of the Antinomy of the principles of

the mechanical and teleological methods of production of organic beings of

nature, we have seen that they are merely principles of the reflective

Judgement in respect of nature as it produces forms in accordance with

particular laws (for the systematic connexion of which we have no key). They

do not determine the origin of these beings in themselves; but only say that

we, by the constitution of our Understanding and our Reason, cannot

conceive it in this kind of being except according to final causes. The greatest

possible effort, even audacity, in the attempt to explain them mechanically is

not only permitted, but we are invited to it by Reason; notwithstanding that

we know from the subjective grounds of the particular species and limitations

of our Understanding (not e.g. because the mechanism of production would

contradict in itself an origin according to purposes) that we can never attain

thereto. Finally, the compatibility of both ways of representing the possibility

of nature may lie in the supersensible principle of nature (external to us, as

well as in us); whilst the method of representation according to final causes

may be only a subjective condition of the use of our Reason, when it not

merely wishes to form a judgement upon objects as phenomena, but desires

to refer these phenomena together with their principles to their supersensible

substrate, in order to find certain laws of their unity possible, which it cannot

represent to itself except through purposes (of which the Reason also hassuch as are supersensible).

        1
               [Carl von Linné (1707–1778), Knight of the Polar Star, the

celebrated Swedish botanist.]

        1
               If the once adopted name Natural history is to continue for the

description of nature, we may in contrast with art, give the title of

Archaeology of nature to that which the former literally indicates, viz. a

representation of the old condition of the earth, about which, although we

cannot hope for certainty, we have good ground for conjecture. As sculptured

stones, etc., belong to the province of art, so petrefactions belong to the

archaeology of nature. And since work is actually being done in this [science]

(under the name of the Theory of the Earth), constantly, although of course

slowly, this name is not given to a merely imaginary investigation of nature,

but to one to which nature itself leads and invites us.

        1
               [See p. 184 above.]    § 83. Of the ultimate purpose of nature as a teleological system

 

 

              We have shown in the preceding that, though not for the determinant

but for the reflective Judgement, we have sufficient cause for judging man to

be, not merely like all organised beings a natural purpose, but also the

ultimate purpose of nature here on earth; in reference to whom all other

natural things constitute a system of purposes according to fundamental

propositions of Reason. If now that must be found in man himself, which is

to be furthered as a purpose by means of his connexion with nature, this

purpose must either be of a kind that can be satisfied by nature in its

beneficence; or it is the aptitude and skill for all kinds of purposes for which

nature (external and internal) can be used by him. The first purpose of nature

would be man’s happiness, the second his culture.

              The concept of happiness is not one that man derives by abstraction

from his instincts and so deduces from his animal nature; but it is a mere Idea

of a state, that he wishes to make adequate to the Idea under merely empirical

conditions (which is impossible). This Idea he projects in such different ways

on account of the complication of his Understanding with Imagination and

Sense, and changes so often, that nature, even if it were entirely subjected to

his elective will, could receive absolutely no determinate, universal and fixed

law, so as to harmonise with this vacillating concept and thus with the

purpose which each man arbitrarily sets before himself. And even if we

reduce this to the true natural wants as to which our race is thoroughly

agreed, or on the other hand, raise ever so high man’s skill to accomplish his

imagined purposes; yet, even thus, what man understands by happiness, and

what is in fact his proper, ultimate, natural purpose (not purpose of freedom),

would never be attained by him. For it is not his nature to rest and be

contented with the possession and enjoyment of anything whatever. On the

other side, too, there is something wanting. Nature has not taken him for her

special darling and favoured him with benefit above all animals. Rather, in

her destructive operations,— plague, hunger, perils of waters, frost, assaults

of other animals great and small, etc.,— in these things has she spared him as

little as any other animal. Further, the inconsistency of his own natural

dispositions drives him into self-devised torments, and also reduces others ofhis own race to misery, by the oppression of lordship, the barbarism of war,

and so forth; he, himself, as far as in him lies, works for the destruction of his

own race; so that even with the most beneficent external nature, its purpose,

if it were directed to the happiness of our species, would not be attained in an

earthly system, because our nature is not susceptible of it. Man is then always

only a link in the chain of natural purposes; a principle certainly in respect of

many purposes, for which nature seems to have destined him in her

disposition, and towards which he sets himself, but also a means for the

maintenance of purposiveness in the mechanism of the remaining links. As

the only being on earth which has an Understanding and, consequently, a

faculty of setting arbitrary purposes before itself, he is certainly entitled to be

the lord of nature; and if it be regarded as a teleological system he is, by his

destination, the ultimate purpose of nature. But this is subject to the condition

of his having an Understanding and the Will to give to it and to himself such

a reference to purposes, as can be self-sufficient independently of nature, and,

consequently, can be a final purpose; which, however, must not be sought in

nature itself.

              But in order to find out where in man we have to place that ultimate

purpose of nature, we must seek out what nature can supply to prepare him

for what he must do himself in order to be a final purpose, and we must

separate it from all those purposes whose possibility depends upon things that

one can expect only from nature. Of the latter kind is earthly happiness, by

which is understood the complex of all man’s purposes possible through

nature, whether external nature or man’s nature; i.e. the matter of all his

earthly purposes, which, if he makes it his whole purpose, renders him

incapable of positing his own existence as a final purpose, and being in

harmony therewith. There remains therefore of all his purposes in nature only

the formal subjective condition; viz. the aptitude of setting purposes in

general before himself, and (independent of nature in his purposive

determination) of using nature, conformably to the maxims of his free

purposes in general, as a means. This nature can do in regard to the final

purpose that lies outside it, and it therefore may be regarded as its ultimate

purpose. The production of the aptitude of a rational being for arbitrary

purposes in general (consequently in his freedom) is culture. Therefore,

culture alone can be the ultimate purpose which we have cause for ascribing

to nature in respect to the human race (not man’s earthly happiness or the fact

that he is the chief instrument of instituting order and harmony in irrationalnature external to himself).

              But all culture is not adequate to this ultimate purpose of nature. The

culture of skill is indeed the chief subjective condition of aptitude for

furthering one’s purposes in general; but it is not adequate to furthering the

will 1 in the determination and choice of purposes, which yet essentially

belongs to the whole extent of an aptitude for purposes. The latter condition

of aptitude, which we might call the culture of training (discipline), is

negative, and consists in the freeing of the will from the despotism of desires.

By these, tied as we are to certain natural things, we are rendered incapable

even of choosing, while we allow those impulses to serve as fetters, which

Nature has given us as guiding threads that we should not neglect or violate

the destination of our animal nature — we being all the time free enough to

strain or relax, to extend or diminish them, according as the purposes of

Reason require.

              Skill cannot be developed in the human race except by means of

inequality among men; for the great majority provide the necessities of life,

as it were, mechanically, without requiring any art in particular, for the

convenience and leisure of others who work at the less necessary elements of

culture, science and art. In an oppressed condition they have hard work and

little enjoyment, although much of the culture of the higher classes gradually

spreads to them. Yet with the progress of this culture (the height of which is

called luxury, reached when the propensity to what can be done without

begins to be injurious to what is indispensable), their calamities increase

equally in two directions, on the one hand through violence from without, on

the other hand through internal discontent; but still this splendid misery is

bound up with the development of the natural capacities of the human race,

and the purpose of nature itself, although not our purpose, is thus attained.

The formal condition under which nature can alone attain this its final design,

is that arrangement of men’s relations to one another, by which lawful

authority in a whole, which we call a civil community, is opposed to the abuse

of their conflicting freedoms; only in this can the greatest development of

natural capacities take place. For this also there would be requisite,— if men

were clever enough to find it out and wise enough to submit themselves

voluntarily to its constraint,— a cosmopolitan whole, i.e. a system of all

states that are in danger of acting injuriously upon each other.1 Failing this,

and with the obstacles which ambition, lust of dominion, and avarice,especially in those who have the authority in their hands, oppose even to the

possibility of such a scheme, there is, inevitably, war (by which sometimes

states subdivide and resolve themselves into smaller states, sometimes a state

annexes other smaller states and strives to form a greater whole). Though war

is an undesigned enterprise of men (stirred up by their unbridled passions),

yet is it [perhaps]2 a deep-hidden and designed enterprise of supreme wisdom

for preparing, if not for establishing, conformity to law amid the freedom of

states, and with this a unity of a morally grounded system of those states. In

spite of the dreadful afflictions with which it visits the human race, and the

perhaps greater afflictions with which the constant preparation for it in time

of peace oppresses them, yet is it (although the hope for a restful state of

popular happiness is ever further off) a motive for developing all talents

serviceable for culture, to the highest possible pitch.3

              As concerns the discipline of the inclinations,— for for which our

natural capacity in regard of our destination as an animal race is quite

purposive, but which render the development of humanity very difficult,—

there is manifest in respect of this second requirement for culture a purposive

striving of nature to a cultivation which makes us receptive of higher

purposes than nature itself can supply. We cannot strive against the

preponderance of evil, which is poured out upon us by the refinement of taste

pushed to idealisation, and even by the luxury of science as affording food

for pride, through the insatiable number of inclinations thus aroused. But yet

we cannot mistake the purpose of nature — ever aiming to win us away from

the rudeness and violence of those inclinations (inclinations to enjoyment)

which belong rather to our animality, and for the most part are opposed to the

cultivation of our higher destiny, and to make way for the development of our

humanity. The beautiful arts and the sciences which, by their universally-

communicable pleasure, and by the polish and refinement of society, make

man more civilised, if not morally better, win us in large measure from the

tyranny of sense-propensions, and thus prepare men for a lordship, in which

Reason alone shall have authority; whilst the evils with which we are visited,

partly by nature, partly by the intolerant selfishness of meu, summon,

strengthen, and harden the powers of the soul not to submit to them, and so

make us feel an aptitude for higher purposes, which lies hidden in us.1

        1
               [First Edition has freedom. ]

        1
               [These views are set forth by Kant more fully in the essay Zumewigen Frieden (1795).]

        2
               [Second Edition.]

        3
               [Cf. The Philosophical Theory of Religion, Part i., On the bad

principle in Human Nature, III., where Kant remarks that although war “is

not so incurably bad as the deadness of a universal monarchy . . . yet, as an

ancient observed, it makes more bad men than it takes away.”]

        1
               The value of life for us, if it is estimated by that which we enjoy (by

the natural purpose of the sum of all inclinations, i.e. happiness), is easy to

decide. It sinks below zero; for who would be willing to enter upon life anew

under the same conditions? who would do so even according to a new, self-

chosen plan (yet in conformity with the course of nature), if it were merely

directed to enjoyment? We have shown above what value life has in virtue of

what it contains in itself, when lived in accordance with the purpose that

nature has along with us, and which consists in what we do (not merely what

we enjoy), in which, however, we are always but means towards an

undetermined final purpose. There remains then nothing but the value which

we ourselves give our life, through what we can not only do, but do

purposively in such independence of nature that the existence of nature itself

can only be a purpose under this condition.§ 84. Of the final purpose of the existence of a world, i.e. of creation itself

 

 

              A final purpose is that purpose which needs no other as condition of

its possibility.

              If the mere mechanism of nature be assumed as the ground of

explanation of its purposiveness, we cannot ask: what are things in the world

there for? For according to such an idealistic system it is only the physical

possibility of things (to think which as purposes would be mere subtlety

without any Object) that is under discussion; whether we refer this form of

things to chance or to blind necessity, in either case the question would be

vain. If, however, we assume the purposive combination in the world to be

real and to be [brought about] by a particular kind of causality, viz. that of a

designedly-working cause, we cannot stop at the question: why have things of

the world (organised beings) this or that form? why are they placed by nature

in this or that relation to one another? But once an Understanding is thought

that must be regarded as the cause of the possibility of such forms as are

actually found in things, it must be also asked on objective grounds: Who

could have determined this productive Understanding to an operation of this

kind? This being is then the final purpose in reference to which such things

are there.

              I have said above that the final purpose is not a purpose which nature

would be competent to bring about and to produce in conformity with its

Idea, because it is unconditioned. For there is nothing in nature (regarded as a

sensible being) for which the determining ground present in itself would not

be always conditioned; and this holds not merely of external (material)

nature, but also of internal (thinking) nature — it being of course understood

that I only am considering that in myself which is nature. But a thing that is

to exist necessarily, on account of its objective constitution, as the final

purpose of an intelligent cause, must be of the kind that in the order of

purposes it is dependent on no further condition than merely its Idea.

              Now we have in the world only one kind of beings whose causality

is teleological, i.e. is directed to purposes and is at the same time so

constituted that the law according to which they have to determine purposesfor themselves is represented as unconditioned and independent of natural

conditions, and yet as in itself necessary. The being of this kind is man, but

man considered as noumenon; the only natural being in which we can

recognise, on the side of its peculiar constitution, a supersensible faculty

(freedom ) and also the law of causality, together with its Object, which this

faculty may propose to itself as highest purpose (the highest good in the

world).

              Now of man (and so of every rational creature in the world) as a

moral being it can no longer be asked: why (quem in finem ) he exists? His

existence involves the highest purpose to which, as far as is in his power, he

can subject the whole of nature; contrary to which at least he cannot regard

himself as subject to any influence of nature.— If now things of the world, as

beings dependent in their existence, need a supreme cause acting according to

purposes, man is the final purpose of creation; since without him the chain of

mutually subordinated purposes would not be complete as regards its ground.

Only in man, and only in him as subject of morality, do we meet with

unconditioned legislation in respect of purposes, which therefore alone

renders him capable of being a final purpose, to which the whole of nature is

teleologically subordinated.1

        1
               It would be possible that the happiness of rational beings in the

world should be a purpose of nature, and then also this would be its ultimate

purpose. At least we cannot see a priori why nature should not be so ordered,

because by means of its mechanism this effect would be certainly possible, at

least so far as we see. But morality, with a causality according to purposes

subordinated thereto, is absolutely impossible by means of natural causes; for

the principle by which it determines to action is supersensible, and is

therefore the only possible principle in the order of purposes that in respect of

nature is absolutely unconditioned. Its subject consequently alone is qualified

to be the final purpose of creation to which the whole of nature is

subordinated.— Happiness, on the contrary, as has been shown in the

preceding paragraphs by the testimony of experience, is not even a purpose of

nature in respect of man in preference to other creatures; much less a final

purpose of creation. Men may of course make it their ultimate subjective

purpose. But if I ask, in reference to the final purpose of creation, why must

men exist? then we are speaking of an objective supreme purpose, such as the

highest Reason would require for creation. If we answer: These beings existto afford objects for the benevolence of that Supreme Cause; then we

contradict the condition to which the Reason of man subjects even his inmost

wish for happiness (viz. the harmony with his own internal moral legislation).

This proves that happiness can only be a conditioned purpose, and that it is

only as a moral being that man can be the final purpose of creation; but that

as concerns his state happiness is only connected with it as a consequence,

according to the measure of his harmony with that purpose regarded as the

purpose of his being.                            § 85. Of Physico-theology

 

 

              Physico-theology is the endeavour of Reason to infer the Supreme

Cause of nature and its properties from the purposes of nature (which can

only be empirically known). Moral theology (ethico-theology) would be the

endeavour to infer that Cause and its properties from the moral purpose of

rational beings in nature (which can be known a priori ).

              The former naturally precedes the latter. For if we wish to infer a

World Cause teleologically from the things in the world, purposes of nature

must first be given, for which we afterwards have to seek a final purpose, and

for this the principle of the causality of this Supreme Cause.

              Many investigations of nature can and must be conducted according

to the teleological principle, without our having cause to inquire into the

ground of the possibility of purposive working with which we meet in

various products of nature. But if we wish to have a concept of this we have

absolutely no further insight into it than the maxim of the reflective

Judgement affords: viz. if only a single organic product of nature were given

to us, by the constitution of our cognitive faculty we could think no other

ground for it than that of a cause of nature itself (whether the whole of nature

or only this bit of it) which contains the causality for it through

Understanding. This principle of judging, though it does not bring us any

further in the explanation of natural things and their origin, yet discloses to us

an outlook over nature, by which perhaps we may be able to determine more

closely the concept, otherwise so unfruitful, of an Original Being.

              Now I say that Physico-theology, however far it may be pursued, can

disclose to us nothing of a final purpose of creation; for it does not even

extend to the question as to this. It can, it is true, justify the concept of an

intelligent World Cause, as a subjective concept (only available for the

constitution of our cognitive faculty) of the possibility of things that we can

make intelligible to ourselves according to purposes; but it cannot determine

this concept further, either in a theoretical or a practical point of view. Its

endeavour does not come up to its design of being the basis of a Theology,

but it always remains only a physical Teleology; because the purposivereference therein is and must be always considered only as conditioned in

nature, and it consequently cannot inquire into the purpose for which nature

itself exists (for which the ground must be sought outside nature),—

notwithstanding that it is upon the determinate Idea of this that the

determinate concept of that Supreme Intelligent World Cause, and the

consequent possibility of a Theology, depend.

              What the things in the world are mutually useful for; what good the

manifold in a thing does for the thing; how we have ground to assume that

nothing in the world is in vain, but that everything in nature is good for

something,— the condition being granted that certain things are to exist (as

purposes), whence our Reason has in its power for the Judgement no other

principle of the possibility of the Object, which it inevitably judges

teleologically, than that of subordinating the mechanism of nature to the

Architectonic of an intelligent Author of the world — all this the teleological

consideration of the world supplies us with excellently and to our extreme

admiration. But because the data, and so the principles, for determining that

concept of an intelligent World Cause (as highest artist) are merely empirical,

they do not enable us to infer any of its properties beyond those which

experience reveals in its effects. Now experience, since it can never embrace

collective nature as a system, must often (apparently) happen upon this

concept (and by mutually conflicting grounds of proof); but it can never, even

if we had the power of surveying empirically the whole system as far as it

concerns mere nature, raise us above nature to the purpose of its existence,

and so to the determinate concept of that supreme Intelligence.

              If we lessen the problem with the solution of which Physico-

theology has to do, its solution appears easy. If we reduce the concept of a

Deity to that of an intelligent being thought by us, of which there may be one

or more, which possesses many and very great properties, but not all the

properties which are requisite for the foundation of a nature in harmony with

the greatest possible purpose; or if we do not scruple in a theory to supply by

arbitrary additions what is deficient in the grounds of proof, and so, where we

have only ground for assuming much perfection (and what is “much” for

us?), consider ourselves entitled to presuppose all possible perfection; thus

indeed physical Teleology may make weighty claims to the distinction of

being the basis of a Theology. But if we are desired to point out what impels

and moreover authorises us to add these supplements, then we shall seek invain for a ground of justification in the principles of the theoretical use of

Reason, which is ever desirous in the explanation of an Object of experience

to ascribe to it no more properties than those for which empirical data of

possibility are to be found. On closer examination we should see that

properly speaking an Idea of a Supreme Being, which rests on a quite

different use of Reason (the practical use), lies in us fundamentally a priori,

impelling us to supplement, by the concept of a Deity, the defective

representation, supplied by a physical Teleology, of the original ground of the

purposes in nature; and we should not falsely imagine that we had worked out

this Idea, and with it a Theology by means of the theoretical use of Reason in

the physical cognition of the world — much less that we had proved its

reality.

              One cannot blame the ancients much, if they thought of their gods as

differing much from each other both as regards their faculties and as regards

their designs and volitions, but yet thought of all of them, the Supreme One

not excepted, as always limited after human fashion. For if they considered

the arrangement and the course of things in nature, they certainly found

ground enough for assuming something more than mechanism as its cause,

and for conjecturing behind the machinery of this world designs of certain

higher causes, which they could not think otherwise than superhuman. But

because they met with good and evil, the purposive and the unpurposive,

mingled together (at least as far as our insight goes), and could not permit

themselves to assume nevertheless that wise and benevolent purposes of

which they saw no proof lay hidden at bottom, on behalf of the arbitrary Idea

of a supremely perfect original Author, their judgement upon the supreme

World Cause could hardly have been other than it was, so long as they

proceeded consistently according to maxims of the mere theoretical use of

Reason. Others, who wished to be theologians as well as physicists, thought

to find contentment for the Reason by providing for the absolute unity of the

principle of natural things which Reason demands, the Idea of a Being of

which as sole Substance the things would be all only inherent determinations.

This Substance would not be Cause of the World by means of intelligence,

but in it all the intelligences of the beings in the world would be comprised.

This Being consequently would produce nothing according to purposes; but

in it all things, on account of the unity of the subject of which they are mere

determinations, must necessarily relate themselves purposively to one

another, though without purpose and design. Thus they introduced theIdealism of final causes, by changing the unity (so difficult to explain) of a

number of purposively combined substances, from being the unity of causal

dependence on one Substance to be the unity of inherence in one. This

system — which in the sequel, considered on the side of the inherent world

beings, becomes Pantheism, and (later) on the side of the Subject subsisting

by itself as Original Being, becomes Spinozism, — does not so much resolve

as explain away into nothing the question of the first ground of the

purposiveness of nature; because this latter concept, bereft of all reality, must

be taken for a mere misinterpretation of a universal ontological concept of a

thing in general.

              Hence the concept of a Deity, which would be adequate for our

teleological judging of nature, can never be derived from mere theoretical

principles of the use of Reason (on which Physicotheology alone is based).

For as one alternative we may explain all Teleology as a mere deception of

the Judgement in its judging of the causal combination of things, and fly to

the sole principle of a mere mechanism of nature, which merely seems to us,

on account of the unity of the Substance of whose determinations nature is

but the manifold, to contain a universal reference to purposes. Or if, instead

of this Idealism of final causes, we wish to remain attached to the principle of

the Realism of this particular kind of causality, we may set beneath natural

purposes many intelligent original beings or only a single one. But so far as

we have for the basis of this concept [of Realism] only empirical principles

derived from the actual purposive combination in the world, we cannot on the

one hand find any remedy for the discordance that nature presents in many

examples in respect of unity of purpose; and on the other hand, as to the

concept of a single intelligent Cause, so far as we are authorised by mere

experience, we can never draw it therefrom in a manner sufficiently

determined for any serviceable Theology whatever (whether theoretical or

practical).

              Physical Teleology impels us, it is true, to seek a Theology; but it

cannot produce one, however far we may investigate nature by means of

experience and, in reference to the purposive combination apparent in it, call

in Ideas of Reason (which must be theoretical for physical problems). What is

the use, one might well complain, of placing at the basis of all these

arrangements a great Understanding incommensurable by us, and supposing

it to govern the world according to design, if nature does not and cannot tellus anything of the final design? For without this we cannot refer all these

natural purposes to any common point, nor can we form any teleological

principle, sufficient either for cognising the purposes collected in a system, or

for forming a concept of the Supreme Understanding, as Cause of such a

nature, that could serve as a standard for our Judgement reflecting

teleologically thereon. I should thus have an artistic Understanding for

scattered purposes, but no Wisdom for a final purpose, in which final purpose

nevertheless must be contained the determining ground of the said

Understanding. But in the absence of a final purpose which pure Reason

alone can supply (because all purposes in the world are empirically

conditioned, and can contain nothing absolutely good but only what is good

for this or that regarded as a contingent design), and which alone would teach

me what properties, what degree, and what relation of the Supreme Cause to

nature I have to think in order to judge of nature as a teleological system;

how and with what right do I dare to extend at pleasure my very limited

concept of that original Understanding (which I can base on my limited

knowledge of the world), of the Might of that original Being in actualising its

Ideas, and of its Will to do so, and complete this into the Idea of an Allwise,

Infinite Being? If this is to be done theoretically, it would presuppose

omniscience in me, in order to see into the purposes of nature in their whole

connexion, and in addition the power of conceiving all possible plans, in

comparison with which the present plan would be judged on [sufficient]

grounds as the best. For without this complete knowledge of the effect I can

arrive at no determinate concept of the Supreme Cause, which can only be

found in the concept of an Intelligence infinite in every respect, i.e. the

concept of a Deity, and so I can supply no foundation for Theology.

              Hence, with every possible extension of physical Teleology,

according to the propositions above laid down we may say: By the

constitution and the principles of our cognitive faculty we can think of nature,

in its purposive arrangements which have become known to us, in no other

way than as the product of an Understanding to which it is subject. But the

theoretical investigation of nature can never reveal to us whether this

Understanding may not also, with the whole of nature and its production,

have had a final design (which would not lie in the nature of the sensible

world). On the contrary, with all our knowledge of nature it remains

undecided whether that Supreme Cause is its original ground according to a

final purpose, or not rather by means of an Understanding determined by themere necessity of its nature to produce certain forms (according to the

analogy of what we call the artinstinct in animals); without it being necessary

to ascribe to it even wisdom, much less the highest wisdom combined with

all other properties requisite for the perfection of its product.

              Hence Physico-theology is a misunderstood physical Teleology,

only serviceable as a preparation (propaedeutic) for Theology; and it is only

adequate to this design by the aid of a foreign principle on which it can rely,

and not in itself, as its name would intimate.                            § 86. Of Ethico-theology

 

 

              The commonest Understanding, if it thinks over the presence of

things in the world, and the existence of the world itself, cannot forbear from

the judgement that all the various creatures, no matter how great the art

displayed in their arrangement, and how various their purposive mutual

connexion,— even the complex of their numerous systems (which we

incorrectly call worlds),— would be for nothing, if there were not also men

(rational beings in general). Without men the whole creation would be a mere

waste, in vain, and without final purpose. But it is not in reference to man’s

cognitive faculty (theoretical Reason) that the being of everything else in the

world gets its worth; he is not there merely that there may be some one to

contemplate the world. For if the contemplation of the world only afforded a

representation of things without any final purpose, no worth could accrue to

its being from the mere fact that it is known; we must presuppose for it a final

purpose, in reference to which its contemplation itself has worth. Again it is

not in reference to the feeling of pleasure, or to the sum of pleasures, that we

think a final purpose of creation as given; i.e. we do not estimate that

absolute worth by well-being or by enjoyment (whether bodily or mental), or

in a word, by happiness. For the fact that man, if he exists, takes this for his

final design, gives us no concept as to why in general he should exist, and as

to what worth he has in himself to make his existence pleasant. He must,

therefore, be supposed to be the final purpose of creation, in order to have a

rational ground for holding that nature must harmonise with his happiness, if

it is considered as an absolute whole according to principles of purposes.—

Hence there remains only the faculty of desire; not, however, that which

makes man dependent (through sensuous impulses) upon nature, nor that in

respect of which the worth of his being depends upon what he receives and

enjoys. But the worth which he alone can give to himself, and which consists

in what he does, how and according to what principles he acts, and that not as

a link in nature’s chain but in the freedom of his faculty of desire — i.e. a

good will — is that whereby alone his being can have an absolute worth, and

in reference to which the being of the world can have a final purpose.

              The commonest judgement of healthy human Reason completelyaccords with this, that it is only as a moral being that man can be a final

purpose of creation; if we but direct men’s attention to the question and incite

them to investigate it. What does it avail, one will say, that this man has so

much talent, that he is so active therewith, and that he exerts thereby a useful

influence over the community, thus having a great worth both in relation to

his own happy condition and to the benefit of others, if he does not possess a

good will? He is a contemptible Object considered in respect of his inner self;

and if the creation is not to be without any final purpose at all, he, who as

man belongs to it, must, in a world under moral laws, inasmuch as he is a bad

man, forfeit his subjective purpose (happiness). This is the only condition

under which his existence can accord with the final purpose.

              If now we meet with purposive arrangements in the world and, as

Reason inevitably requires, subordinate the purposes that are only

conditioned to an unconditioned, supreme, i.e. final, purpose; then we easily

see in the first place that we are thus concerned not with a purpose of nature

(internal to itself), so far as it exists, but with the purpose of its existence

along with all its ordinances, and, consequently, with the ultimate purpose of

creation, and specially with the supreme condition under which can be

posited a final purpose (i.e. the ground which determines a supreme

Understanding to produce the beings of the world).

              Since now it is only as a moral being that we recognise man as the

purpose of creation, we have in the first place a ground (at least, the chief

condition) for regarding the world as a whole connected according to

purposes, and as a system of final causes. And, more especially, as regards

the reference (necessary for us by the constitution of our Reason) of natural

purposes to an intelligent World Cause, we have one principle enabling us to

think the nature and properties of this First Cause as supreme ground in the

kingdom of purposes, and to determine its concept. This physical Teleology

could not do; it could only lead to indeterminate concepts thereof,

unserviceable alike in theoretical and in practical use.

              From the principle, thus determined, of the causality of the Original

Being we must not think Him merely as Intelligence and as legislative for

nature, but also as legislating supremely in a moral kingdom of purposes. In

reference to the highest good, alone possible under His sovereignty, viz. the

existence of rational beings under moral laws, we shall think this Original

Being as all-knowing: thus our inmost dispositions (which constitute theproper moral worth of the actions of rational beings of the world) will not be

hid from Him. We shall think Him as all-mighty: thus He will be able to

make the whole of nature accord with this highest purpose. We shall think

Him as all-good, and at the same time as just: because these two properties

(which when united constitute Wisdom ) are the conditions of the causality of

a supreme Cause of the world, as highest good, under moral laws. So also all

the other transcendental properties, such as Eternity, Omnipresence, etc. [for

goodness and justice are moral properties1 ], which are presupposed in

reference to such a final purpose, must be thought in Him.— In this way

moral Teleology supplies the deficiency in physical Teleology, and first

establishes a Theology; because the latter, if it did not borrow from the

former without being observed, but were to proceed consistently, could only

found a Demonology, which is incapable of any definite concept.

              But the principle of the reference of the world to a supreme Cause,

as Deity, on account of the moral purposive destination of certain beings in it,

does not accomplish this by completing the physico-teleological ground of

proof and so taking this necessarily as its basis. It is sufficient in itself and

directs attention to the purposes of nature and the investigation of that

incomprehensible great art lying hidden behind its forms, in order to confirm

incidentally by means of natural purposes the Ideas that pure practical Reason

furnishes. For the concept of beings of the world under moral laws is a

principle (a priori ) according to which man must of necessity judge himself.

Further, if there is in general a World Cause acting designedly and directed

towards a purpose, this moral relation must be just as necessarily the

condition of the possibility of a creation, as that in accordance with physical

laws (if, that is, this intelligent Cause has also a final purpose). This is

regarded a priori by Reason as a necessary fundamental proposition for it in

its teleological judging of the existence of things. It now only comes to this,

whether we have sufficient ground for Reason (either speculative or practical)

to ascribe to the supreme Cause, acting in accordance with purposes, a final

purpose. For it may a priori be taken by us as certain that this, by the

subjective constitution of our Reason and even of the Reason of other beings

as far as we can think it, can be nothing else than man under moral laws:

since otherwise the purposes of nature in the physical order could not be

known a priori, especially as it can in no way be seen that nature could not

exist without such purposes.        1
               [Second Edition.]

                                        Remark

 

              Suppose the case of a man at the moment when his mind is disposed

to a moral sensation. If surrounded by the beauties of nature, he is in a state

of restful, serene enjoyment of his being, he feels a want, viz. to be grateful

for this to some being or other. Or if another time he finds himself in the

same state of mind when pressed by duties that he can and will only

adequately discharge by a voluntary sacrifice, he again feels in himself a

want, viz. to have thus executed a command and obeyed a Supreme Lord. Or,

again; if he has in some heedless way transgressed his duty, but without

becoming answerable to men, his severe self-reproach will speak to him with

the voice of a judge to whom he has to give account. In a word, he needs a

moral Intelligence, in order to have a Being for the purpose of his existence,

which may be, conformably to this purpose, the cause of himself and of the

world. It is vain to assign motives behind these feelings, for they are

immediately connected with the purest moral sentiment, because gratitude,

obedience, and humiliation (submission to deserved chastisement) are mental

dispositions that make for duty; and the mind which is inclined towards a

widening of its moral sentiment here only voluntarily conceives an object that

is not in the world in order where possible to render its duty before such an

one. It is therefore at least possible and grounded too in our moral disposition

to represent a pure moral need of the existence of a Being, by which our

morality gains strength or even (at least according to our representation) more

scope, viz. a new object for its exercise. That is, [there is a need] to assume a

morally-legislating Being outside the world, without any reference to

theoretical proofs, still less to self-interest, from pure moral grounds free

from all foreign influence (and consequently only subjective), on the mere

recommendation of a pure practical Reason legislating by itself alone. And

although such a mental disposition might seldom occur or might not last long,

but be transient and without permanent effect, or might even pass away

without any meditation on the object represented in such shadowy outline, or

without care to bring it under clear concepts — there is yet here unmistakably

the ground why our moral capacity, as a subjective principle, should not be

contented in its contemplation of the world with its purposiveness by means

of natural causes, but should ascribe to it a supreme Cause governing nature

according to moral principles.— In addition, we feel ourselves constrained bythe moral law to strive for a universal highest purpose which yet we, in

common with the rest of nature, are incapable of attaining; and it is only so

far as we strive for it that we can judge ourselves to be in harmony with the

final purpose of an intelligent World Cause (if such there be). Thus is found a

pure moral ground of practical Reason for assuming this Cause (since it can

be done without contradiction), in order that we may no more regard that

effort of Reason as quite idle, and so run the risk of abandoning it from

weariness.

              With all this, so much only is to be said, that though fear first

produces gods (demons), it is Reason by means of its moral principles that

can first produce the concept of God (even when, as commonly is the case,

one is unskilled in the Teleology of nature, or is very doubtful on account of

the difficulty of adjusting by a sufficiently established principle its mutually

contradictory phenomena). Also, the inner moral purposive destination of

man’s being supplies that in which natural knowledge is deficient, by

directing us to think, for the final purpose of the being of all things (for which

no other principle than an ethical one is satisfactory to Reason), the supreme

Cause [as endowed] with properties, whereby it is able to subject the whole

of nature to that single design (for which nature is merely the instrument),—

i.e. to think it as a Deity.                § 87. Of the moral proof of the Being of God

 

 

              There is a physical Teleology, which gives sufficient ground of proof

to our theoretical reflective Judgement to assume the being of an intelligent

World-Cause. But we find also in ourselves and still more in the concept of a

rational being in general endowed with freedom (of his causality) a moral

Teleology. However, as the purposive reference, together with its law, is

determined a priori in ourselves and therefore can be cognised as necessary,

this internal conformity to law requires no intelligent cause external to us;

any more than we need look to a highest Understanding as the source of the

purposiveness (for every possible exercise of art) that we find in the

geometrical properties of figures. But this moral Teleology concerns us as

beings of the world, and therefore as beings bound up with other things in the

world; upon which latter, whether as purposes or as objects in respect of

which we ourselves are final purpose, the same moral laws require us to pass

judgement. This moral Teleology, then, has to do with the reference of our

own causality to purposes and even to a final purpose that we must aim at in

the world, as well as with the reciprocal reference of the world to that moral

purpose, and the external possibility of its accomplishment (to which no

physical Teleology can lead us). Hence the question necessarily arises,

whether it compels our rational judgement to go beyond the world and seek

an intelligent supreme principle for that reference of nature to the moral in us;

in order to represent nature as purposive even in reference to our inner moral

legislation and its possible accomplishment. There is therefore certainly a

moral Teleology, which is connected on the one hand with the nomothetic of

freedom and on the other with that of nature; just as necessarily as civil

legislation is connected with the question where the executive authority is to

be sought, and in general in every case [with the question] wherein Reason is

to furnish a principle of the actuality of a certain regular order of things only

possible according to Ideas.— We shall first set forth the progress of Reason

from that moral Teleology and its reference to physical, to Theology; and

then make some observations upon the possibility and the validity of this way

of reasoning.

              If we assume the being of certain things (or even only certain formsof things) to be contingent and so to be possible only through something else

which is their cause, we may seek for the unconditioned ground of this

causality of the supreme (and so of the conditioned) either in the physical or

the teleological order (either according to the nexus effectivus or the nexus

finalis ). That is, we may either ask, what is the supreme productive cause of

these things; or what is their supreme (absolutely unconditioned) purpose, i.e.

the final purpose of that cause in its production of this or all its products

generally? In the second case it is plainly presupposed that this cause is

capable of representing purposes to itself, and consequently is an intelligent

Being; at least it must be thought as acting in accordance with the laws of

such a being.

              If we follow the latter order, it is a Fundamental Proposition, to

which even the commonest human Reason is compelled to give immediate

assent, that if there is to be in general a final purpose furnished a priori by

Reason, this can be no other than man (every rational being of the world)

under moral laws. 1 For (and so every one judges) if the world consisted of

mere lifeless, or even in part of living but irrational, beings, its existence

would have no worth because in it there would be no being who would have

the least concept of what worth is. Again, if there were intelligent beings,

whose Reason were only able to place the worth of the existence of things in

the relation of nature to themselves (their well-being), but not to furnish of

itself an original worth (in freedom), then there would certainly be (relative)

purposes in the world, but no (absolute) final purpose, because the existence

of such rational beings would be always purposeless. But the moral laws have

this peculiar characteristic that they prescribe to Reason something as a

purpose without any condition, and consequently exactly as the concept of a

final purpose requires. The existence of a Reason that can be for itself the

supreme law in the purposive reference, in other words the existence of

rational beings under moral laws, can therefore alone be thought as the final

purpose of the being of a world. If on the contrary this be not so, there would

be either no purpose at all in the cause of its being, or there would be

purposes, but no final purpose.

              The moral law as the formal rational condition of the use of our

freedom obliges us by itself alone, without depending on any purpose as

material condition; but it nevertheless determines for us, and indeed a priori,

a final purpose towards which it obliges us to strive; and this purpose is thehighest good in the world possible through freedom.

              The subjective condition under which man (and, according to all our

concepts, every rational finite being) can set a final purpose before himself

under the above law is happiness. Consequently, the highest physical good

possible in the world, to be furthered as a final purpose as far as in us lies, is

happiness, under the objective condition of the harmony of man with the law

of morality as worthiness to be happy.

              But it is impossible for us in accordance with all our rational

faculties to represent these two requirements of the final purpose proposed to

us by the moral law, as connected by merely natural causes, and yet as

conformable to the Idea of that final purpose. Hence the concept of the

practical necessity of such a purpose through the application of our powers

does not harmonise with the theoretical concept of the physical possibility of

working it out, if we connect with our freedom no other causality (as a

means) than that of nature.

              Consequently, we must assume a moral World-Cause (an Author of

the world), in order to set before ourselves a final purpose consistently with

the moral law; and in so far as the latter is necessary, so far (i.e. in the same

degree and on the same ground) the former also must be necessarily assumed;

i.e. we must admit that there is a God.1

              This proof, to which we can easily give the form of logical precision,

does not say: it is as necessary to assume the Being of God as to recognise

the validity of the moral law; and consequently he who cannot convince

himself of the first, can judge himself free from the obligations of the second.

No! there must in such case only be given up the aiming at the final purpose

in the world, to be brought about by the pursuit of the second (viz. a

happiness of rational beings in harmony with the pursuit of moral laws,

regarded as the highest good). Every rational being would yet have to cognise

himself as straitly bound by the precepts of morality, for its laws are formal

and command unconditionally without respect to purposes (as the matter of

volition). But the one requisite of the final purpose, as practical Reason

prescribes it to beings of the world, is an irresistible purpose imposed on

them by their nature (as finite beings), which Reason wishes to know as

subject only to the moral law as inviolable condition, or even as universally

set up in accordance with it. Thus Reason takes for final purpose thefurthering of happiness in harmony with morality. To further this so far as is

in our power (i.e. in respect of happiness) is commanded us by the moral law;

be the issue of this endeavour what it may. The fulfilling of duty consists in

the form of the earnest will, not in the intermediate causes of success.

              Suppose then that partly through the weakness of all the speculative

arguments so highly extolled, and partly through many irregularities in nature

and the world of sense which come before him, a man is persuaded of the

proposition, There is no God; he would nevertheless be contemptible in his

own eyes if on that account he were to imagine the laws of duty as empty,

invalid and inobligatory, and wished to resolve to transgress them boldly.

Such an one, even if he could be convinced in the sequel of that which he had

doubted at the first, would always be contemptible while having such a

disposition, although he should fulfil his duty as regards its [external] effect

as punctiliously as could be desired, for [he would be acting] from fear or

from the aim at recompense, without the sentiment of reverence for duty. If,

conversely, as a believer [in God] he performs his duty according to his

conscience, uprightly and disinterestedly, and nevertheless believes that he is

free from all moral obligation so soon as he is convinced that there is no God,

this could accord but badly with an inner moral disposition.

              We may then suppose the case of a righteous man [e.g. Spinoza ],1

who holds himself firmly persuaded that there is no God, and also (because in

respect of the Object of morality a similar consequence results) no future life;

how is he to judge of his own inner purposive destination, by means of the

moral law, which he reveres in practice? He desires no advantage to himself

from following it, either in this or another world; he wishes, rather,

disinterestedly to establish the good to which that holy law directs all his

powers. But his effort is bounded; and from nature, although he may expect

here and there a contingent accordance, he can never expect a regular

harmony agreeing according to constant rules (such as his maxims are and

must be, internally), with the purpose that he yet feels himself obliged and

impelled to accomplish. Deceit, violence, and envy will always surround him,

although he himself be honest, peaceable, and kindly; and the righteous men

with whom he meets will, notwithstanding all their worthiness of happiness,

be yet subjected by nature which regards not this, to all the evils of want,

disease, and untimely death, just like the beasts of the earth. So it will be until

one wide grave engulfs them together (honest or not, it makes no difference),and throws them back — who were able to believe themselves the final

purpose of creation — into the abyss of the purposeless chaos of matter from

which they were drawn.— The purpose, then, which this well-intentioned

person had and ought to have before him in his pursuit of moral laws, he

must certainly give up as impossible. Or else, if he wishes to remain

dependent upon the call of his moral internal destination, and not to weaken

the respect with which the moral law immediately inspires him, by assuming

the nothingness of the single, ideal, final purpose adequate to its high demand

(which cannot be brought about without a violation of moral sentiment), he

must, as he well can — since there is at least no contradiction from a practical

point of view in forming a concept of the possibility of a morally prescribed

final purpose — assume the being of a moral author of the world, that is, a

God.

        1
               I say deliberately under moral laws. It is not man in accordance

with moral laws, i.e. a being who behaves himself in conformity with them,

who is the final purpose of creation. For by using the latter expression we

should be asserting more than we know; viz. that it is in the power of an

Author of the world to cause man always to behave himself in accordance

with moral laws. But this presupposes a concept of freedom and of nature (of

which latter we can only think an external author), which would imply an

insight into the supersensible substrate of nature and its identity with that

which causality through freedom makes possible in the world. And this far

surpasses the insight of our Reason. Only of man under moral laws can we

say, without transgressing the limits of our insight: his being constitutes the

final purpose of the world. This harmonises completely with the judgement

of human Reason reflecting morally upon the course of the world. We believe

that we perceive in the case of the wicked the traces of a wise purposive

reference, if we only see that the wanton criminal does not die before he has

undergone the deserved punishment of his misdeeds. According to our

concepts of free causality, our good or bad behaviour depends on ourselves;

we regard it the highest wisdom in the government of the world to ordain for

the first, opportunity, and for both, their consequence, in accordance with

moral laws. In the latter properly consists the glory of God, which is hence

not unsuitably described by theologians as the ultimate purpose of creation.—

It is further to be remarked that when we use the word creation, we

understand nothing more than we have said here, viz. the cause of the being

of the world or of the things in it (substances). This is what the conceptproperly belonging to this word involves (actuatio substantiae est creatio );

and consequently there is not implied in it the supposition of a freely

working, and therefore intelligent, cause (whose being we first of all want to

prove).

        1
               [Note added in Second Edition.] This moral argument does not

supply any objectively-valid proof of the Being of God; it does not prove to

the sceptic that there is a God, but proves that if he wishes to think in a way

consonant with morality, he must admit the assumption of this proposition

under the maxims of his practical Reason.— We should therefore not say: it

is necessary for morals [Sittlichkeit], to assume the happiness of all rational

beings of the world in proportion to their morality [Moralität]; but rather, this

is necessitated by morality. Accordingly, this is a subjective argument

sufficient for moral beings.

        1
               [Second Edition.]            § 88. Limitation of the validity of the moral proof

 

 

              Pure Reason, as a practical faculty, i.e. as the faculty of determining

the free use of our causality by Ideas (pure rational concepts), not only

comprises in the moral law a regulative principle of our actions, but supplies

us at the same time with a subjective constitutive principle in the concept of

an Object which Reason alone can think, and which is to be actualised by our

actions in the world according to that law. The Idea of a final purpose in the

employment of freedom according to moral laws has therefore subjective

practical reality. We are a priori determined by Reason to promote with all

our powers the summum bonum [Weltbeste] which consists in the

combination of the greatest welfare of rational beings with the highest

condition of the good in itself, i.e. in universal happiness conjoined with

morality most accordant to law. In this final purpose the possibility of one

part, happiness, is empirically conditioned, i.e. dependent on the constitution

of nature (which may or may not agree with this purpose) and is in a

theoretical aspect problematical; whilst the other part, morality, in respect of

which we are free from the effects of nature, stands fast a priori as to its

possibility, and is dogmatically certain. It is then requisite for the objective

theoretical reality of the concept of the final purpose of rational beings, that

we should not only have a priori presupposed a final purpose for ourselves,

but also that the creation, i.e. the world itself, should have as regards its

existence a final purpose, which if it could be proved a priori would add

objectivity to the subjective reality of the final purpose [of rational beings].

For if the creation has on the whole a final purpose, we cannot think it

otherwise than as harmonising with the moral purpose (which alone makes

the concept of a purpose possible). Now we find without doubt purposes in

the world, and physical Teleology exhibits them in such abundance, that if

we judge in accordance with Reason, we have ground for assuming as a

principle in the investigation of nature that nothing in nature is without a

purpose; but the final purpose of nature we seek there in vain. This can and

must therefore, as its Idea only lies in Reason, be sought as regards its

objective possibility only in rational beings. And the practical Reason of

these latter not only supplies this final purpose; it also determines thisconcept in respect of the conditions under which alone a final purpose of

creation can be thought by us.

              The question is now, whether the objective reality of the concept of a

final purpose of creation cannot be exhibited adequately to the theoretical

requirements of pure Reason — if not apodictically for the determinant

Judgement yet adequately for the maxims of the theoretical reflective

Judgement? This is the least one could expect from theoretical philosophy,

which undertakes to combine the moral purpose with natural purposes by

means of the Idea of one single purpose; but yet this little is far more than it

can accomplish.

              According to the principle of the theoretical reflective Judgement we

should say: if we have ground for assuming for the purposive products of

nature a supreme Cause of nature — whose causality in respect of the

actuality of creation is of a different kind from that required for the

mechanism of nature, i.e. must be thought as the causality of an

Understanding — we have also sufficient ground for thinking in this original

Being not merely the purposes everywhere in nature but also a final purpose.

This is not indeed a final purpose by which we can explain the presence of

such a Being, but one of which we may at least convince ourselves (as was

the case in physical Teleology) that we can make the possibility of such a

world conceivable, not merely according to purposes, but only through the

fact that we ascribe to its existence a final purpose.

              But a final purpose is merely a concept of our practical Reason, and

can be inferred from no data of experience for the theoretical judging of

nature, nor can it be applied to the cognition of nature. No use of this concept

is possible except its use for practical Reason according to moral laws; and

the final purpose of creation is that constitution of the world which

harmonises with that which alone we can put forward definitely according to

laws, viz. the final purpose of our pure practical Reason, in so far as it is to be

practical.— Now we have in the moral law, which enjoins on us in a practical

point of view the application of our powers to the accomplishment of this

final purpose, a ground for assuming its possibility and practicability, and

consequently too (because without the concurrence of nature with a condition

not in our power, its accomplishment would be impossible) a nature of things

harmonious with it. Hence we have a moral ground for thinking in a world

also a final purpose of creation.              We have not yet advanced from moral Teleology to a Theology, i.e.

to the being of a moral Author of the world, but only to a final purpose of

creation which is determined in this way. But in order to account for this

creation, i.e. the existence of things, in accordance with a final purpose, we

must assume not only first an intelligent Being (for the possibility of things of

nature which we are compelled to judge of as purposes ), but also a moral

Being, as author of the world, i.e. a God. This second conclusion is of such a

character that we see it holds merely for the Judgement according to concepts

of practical Reason, and as such for the reflective and not the determinant

Judgement. It is true that in us morally practical Reason is essentially

different in its principles from technically practical Reason. But we cannot

assume that it must be so likewise in the supreme World-Cause, regarded as

Intelligence, and that a peculiar mode of its causality is requisite for the final

purpose, different from that which is requisite merely for purposes of nature.

We cannot therefore assume that in our final purpose we have not merely a

moral ground for admitting a final purpose of creation (as an effect), but also

for admitting a moral Being as the original ground of creation. But we may

well say, that, according to the constitution of our rational faculty, we cannot

comprehend the possibility of such a purposiveness in respect of the moral

law, and its Object, as there is in this final purpose, apart from an Author and

Governor of the world, who is at the same time its moral Lawgiver.

              The actuality of a highest morally-legislating Author is therefore

sufficiently established merely for the practical use of our Reason, without

determining anything theoretically as regards its being. For Reason requires,

in respect of the possibility of its purpose, which is given to us independently

by its own legislation, an Idea through which the inability to follow up this

purpose, according to the mere natural concepts of the world, is removed

(sufficiently for the reflective Judgement). Thus this Idea gains practical

reality, although all means of creating such for it in a theoretical point of

view, for the explanation of nature and determination of the supreme Cause,

are entirely wanting for speculative cognition. For the theoretical reflective

Judgement physical Teleology sufficiently proves from the purposes of

nature an intelligent World-Cause; for the practical Judgement moral

Teleology establishes it by the concept of a final purpose, which it is forced

to ascribe to creation in a practical point of view. The objective reality of the

Idea of God, as moral Author of the world, cannot, it is true, be established

by physical purposes alone. But nevertheless, if the cognition of thesepurposes is combined with that of the moral purpose, they are, by virtue of

the maxim of pure Reason which bids us seek unity of principles so far as is

possible, of great importance for the practical reality of that Idea, by bringing

in the reality which it has for the Judgement in a theoretical point of view.

              To prevent a misunderstanding which may easily arise, it is in the

highest degree needful to remark that, in the first place, we can think these

properties of the highest Being only according to analogy. How indeed could

we explore the nature of that, to which experience can show us nothing

similar? Secondly, in this way we only think the supreme Being; we cannot

thereby cognise Him and ascribe anything theoretically to Him. It would be

needful for the determinant Judgement in the speculative aspect of our

Reason, to consider what the supreme World-Cause is in Himself. But here

we are only concerned with the question what concept we can form of Him,

according to the constitution of our cognitive faculties; and whether we have

to assume His existence in order merely to furnish practical reality to a

purpose, which pure Reason without any such presupposition enjoins upon us

a priori to bring about with all our powers, i.e. in order to be able to think as

possible a designed effect. Although that concept may be transcendent for the

speculative Reason, and the properties which we ascribe to the Being thereby

thought may, objectively used, conceal an anthropomorphism in themselves;

yet the design of its use is not to determine the nature of that Being which is

unattainable by us, but to determine ourselves and our will accordingly. We

may call a cause after the concept which we have of its effect (though only in

reference to this relation), without thereby meaning to determine internally its

inner constitution, by means of the properties which can be made known to

us solely by similar causes and must be given in experience. For example,

amongst other properties we ascribe to the soul a vis locomotiva because

bodily movements actually arise whose cause lies in the representation of

them; without therefore meaning to ascribe to it the only mode [of action]

that we know in moving forces (viz. by attraction, pressure, impulse, and

consequently motion, which always presuppose an extended being). Just so

we must assume something, which contains the ground of the possibility and

practical reality, i.e. the practicability, of a necessary moral final purpose; but

we can think of this, in accordance with the character of the effect expected

of it, as a wise Being governing the world according to moral laws, and,

conformably to the constitution of our cognitive faculties, as a cause of things

distinct from nature, only in order to express the relation of this Being (whichtranscends all our cognitive faculties) to the Objects of our practical Reason.

We do not pretend thus to ascribe to it theoretically the only causality of this

kind known to us, viz. an Understanding and a Will: we do not even pretend

to distinguish objectively the causality thought in this Being, as regards what

is for us final purpose, from the causality thought in it as regards nature (and

its purposive determinations in general). We can only assume this distinction

as subjectively necessary by the constitution of our cognitive faculties, and as

valid for the reflective, not for the objectively determinant Judgement. But if

we come to practice, then such a regulative principle (of prudence or

wisdom) [commanding us] to act conformably to that as purpose, which by

the constitution of our cognitive faculties can only be thought as possible in a

certain way, is at the same constitutive, i.e. practically determinant.

Nevertheless, as a principle for judging of the objective possibility of things,

it is no way theoretically determinant (i.e. it does not say that the only kind of

possibility which belongs to the Object is that which belongs to our thinking

faculty), but is a mere regulative principle for the reflective Judgement.

                                        Remark

 

 

              This moral proof is not one newly discovered, although perhaps its

basis is newly set forth; since it has lain in man’s rational faculty from its

earliest germ, and is only continually developed with its advancing

cultivation. So soon as men begin to reflect upon right and wrong — at a time

when, quite indifferent as to the purposiveness of nature, they avail

themselves of it without thinking anything more of it than that it is the

accustomed course of nature — this judgement is inevitable, viz. that the

issue cannot be the same, whether a man has behaved candidly or falsely,

fairly or violently, even though up to his life’s end, as far as can be seen, he

has met with no happiness for his virtues, no punishment for his vices. It is as

if they perceived a voice within [saying] that the issue must be different. And

so there must lie hidden in them a representation, however obscure, of

something after which they feel themselves bound to strive; with which such

a result would not agree,— with which, if they looked upon the course of the

world as the only order of things, they could not harmonise that inner

purposive determination of their minds. Now they might represent in various

rude fashions the way in which such an irregularity could be adjusted (an

irregularity which must be far more revolting to the human mind than theblind chance that we are sometimes willing to use as a principle for judging

of nature). But they could never think any other principle of the possibility of

the unification of nature with its inner ethical laws, than a supreme Cause

governing the world according to moral laws; because a final purpose in them

proposed as duty, and a nature without any final purpose beyond them in

which that purpose might be actualised, would involve a contradiction. As to

the [inner]1 constitution of that World-Cause they could contrive much

nonsense. But that moral relation in the government of the world would

remain always the same, which by the uncultivated Reason, considered as

practical, is universally comprehensible, but with which the speculative

Reason can make far from the like advance.— And in all probability attention

would be directed first by this moral interest to the beauty and the purposes in

nature, which would serve excellently to strengthen this Idea though they

could not be the foundation of it. Still less could that moral interest be

dispensed with, because it is only in reference to the final purpose that the

investigation of the purposes of nature acquires that immediate interest which

displays itself in such a great degree in the admiration of them without any

reference to the advantage to be derived from them.

        1
               [Second Edition.]                    § 89. Of the use of the moral argument

 

 

              The limitation of Reason in respect of all our Ideas of the

supersensible to the conditions of its practical employment has, as far as the

Idea of God is concerned, undeniable uses. For it prevents Theology from

rising into Theosophy (into transcendent concepts which confound Reason),

or from sinking into Demonology (an anthropomorphic way of representing

the highest Being). And it also prevents Religion from turning into Theurgy

(a fanatical belief that we can have a feeling of other supersensible beings

and can reciprocally influence them), or into Idolatry (a superstitious belief

that we can please the Supreme Being by other means than by a moral

sentiment).1

              For if we permit the vanity or the presumption of sophistry to

determine the least thing theoretically (in a way that extends our knowledge)

in respect of what lies beyond the world of sense, or if we allow any pretence

to be made of insight into the being and constitution of the nature of God, of

His Understanding and Will, of the laws of both and of His properties which

thus affect the world, I should like to know where and at what point we will

bound these assumptions of Reason. For wherever such insight can be

derived, there may yet more be expected (if we only strain our reflection, as

we have a mind to do). Bounds must then be put to such claims according to

a certain principle, and not merely because we find that all attempts of the

sort have hitherto failed, for that proves nothing against the possibility of a

better result. But here no principle is possible, except either to assume that in

respect of the supersensible absolutely nothing can be theoretically

determined (except mere negations); or else that our Reason contains in itself

a yet unused mine of cognitions, reaching no one knows how far, stored up

for ourselves and our posterity.— But as concerns Religion, i.e. morals in

reference to God as legislator, if the theoretical cognition of Him is to come

first, morals must be adjusted in accordance with Theology; and not only is

an external arbitrary legislation of a Supreme Being introduced in place of an

internal necessary legislation of Reason, but also whatever is defective in our

insight into the nature of this Being must extend to ethical precepts, and thus

make Religion immoral and perverted.              As regards the hope of a future life, if instead of the final purpose we

have to accomplish in conformity with the precept of the moral law, we ask

of our theoretical faculty of cognition a clue for the judgement of Reason

upon our destination (which clue is only considered as necessary or worthy of

acceptance in a practical reference), then in this aspect Psychology, like

Theology, gives no more than a negative concept of our thinking being. That

is, none of its actions or of the phenomena of the internal sense can be

explained materialistically; and hence of its separate nature and of the

continuance or non-continuance of its personality after death absolutely no

ampliative determinant judgement is possible on speculative grounds by

means of our whole theoretical cognitive faculty. Here then everything is

handed over to the teleological judging of our existence in a practically

necessary aspect, and to the assumption of our continuance as a condition

requisite for the final purpose absolutely furnished by Reason. And so this

advantage (which indeed at first glance seems to be a loss) is apparent; that,

as Theology for us can never be Theosophy, or rational Psychology become

Pneumatology — an ampliative science — so on the other hand this latter is

assured of never falling into Materialism. Psychology, rather, is a mere

anthropology of the internal sense, i.e. is the knowledge of our thinking self

in life; and, as theoretical cognition, remains merely empirical. On the other

hand, rational Psychology, as far as it is concerned with questions as to our

eternal existence, is not a theoretical science at all, but rests on a single

conclusion of moral Teleology; as also its whole use is necessary merely on

account of the latter, i.e. on account of our practical destination.

        1
               In a practical sense that religion is always idolatry which conceives

the Supreme Being with properties, according to which something else

besides morality can be a fit condition for that which man can do being in

accordance with His Will. For however pure and free from sensible images

the concept that we have formed may be in a theoretical point of view, yet it

will be in a practical point of view still represented as an idol, i.e. in regard to

the character of His Will, anthropomorphically.  § 90. Of the kind of belief in a teleological proof of the Being of God

 

 

              The first requisite for every proof, whether it be derived from the

immediate empirical presentation (as in the proof from observation of the

object or from experiment) of that which is to be proved, or by Reason a

priori from principles, is this. It should not persuade, but convince, 1 or at

least should tend to conviction. I.e. the ground of proof or the conclusion

should not be merely a subjective (aesthetical) determining ground of assent

(mere illusion), but objectively valid and a logical ground of cognition; for

otherwise the Understanding is ensnared, but not convinced. Such an illusory

proof is that which, perhaps with good intent but yet with wilful concealment

of its weaknesses, is adduced in Natural Theology. In this we bring in the

great number of indications of the origin of natural things according to the

principle of purposes, and take advantage of the merely subjective basis of

human Reason, viz. its special propensity to think only one principle instead

of several, whenever this can be done without contradiction; and, when in

this principle only one or more requisites for determining a concept are

furnished, to add in our thought these additional [features] so as to complete

the concept of the thing by arbitrarily supplementing it. For, in truth, when

we meet with so many products in nature which are to us marks of an

intelligent cause, why should we not think One cause rather than many; and

in this One, not merely great intelligence, power, etc., but rather

Omniscience, and Omnipotence — in a word, think it as a Cause that

contains the sufficient ground of such properties in all possible things?

Further, why should we not ascribe to this unique, all-powerful, original

Being not only intelligence for natural laws and products, but also, as to a

moral Cause of the world, supreme, ethical, practical Reason? For by this

completion of the concept a sufficient principle is furnished both for insight

into nature and for moral wisdom; and no objection grounded in any way can

be made against the possibility of such an Idea. If now at the same time the

moral motives of the mind are aroused, and a lively interest in the latter is

added by the force of eloquence (of which they are indeed very worthy), then

there arises therefrom a persuasion of the objective adequacy of the proof;

and also (in most cases of its use) a wholesome illusion which quite dispenseswith all examination of its logical strictness, and even on the contrary regards

this with abhorrence and dislike as if an impious doubt lay at its basis.—

Now against this there is indeed nothing to say, so long as we only have

regard to its popular usefulness. But then the division of the proof into the

two dissimilar parts involved in the argument — belonging to physical and

moral Teleology respectively — cannot and must not be prevented. For the

blending of these makes it impossible to discern where the proper force of the

proof lies, and in what part and how it must be elaborated in order that its

validity may be able to stand the strictest examination (even if we should be

compelled to admit in one part the weakness of our rational insight). Thus it

is the duty of the philosopher (supposing even that he counts as nothing the

claims of sincerity) to expose the above illusion, however wholesome it is,

which such a confusion can produce; and to distinguish what merely belongs

to persuasion from that which leads to conviction (for these are

determinations of assent which differ not merely in degree but in kind), in

order to present plainly the state of the mind in this proof in its whole

clearness, and to be able to subject it frankly to the closest examination.

              But a proof which is intended to convince, can again be of two

kinds; either deciding what the object is in itself, or what it is for us (for men

in general) according to our necessary rational principles of judgement (proof

κατ’ ἀλήθειαν or κατ’ ἄνθρωπον, the last word being taken in its universal

signification of man in general). In the first case it is based on adequate

principles for the determinant Judgement, in the second for the reflective

Judgement. In the latter case it can never, when resting on merely theoretical

principles, tend to conviction; but if a practical principle of Reason (which is

therefore universally and necessarily valid) lies at its basis, it may certainly

lay claim to conviction adequate in a pure practical point of view, i.e. to

moral conviction. But a proof tends to conviction, though without convincing,

if it is [merely]1 brought on the way thereto; i.e. if it contains in itself only

objective grounds, which although not attaining to certainty are yet of such a

kind that they do not serve merely for persuasion as subjective grounds of the

judgement.2

              All theoretical grounds of proof resolve themselves either into: (1)

Proofs by logically strict Syllogisms of Reason; or where this is not the case,

(2) Conclusions according to analogy; or where this also has no place, (3)

Probable opinion; or finally, which has the least weight, (4) Assumption of amerely possible ground of explanation, i.e. Hypothesis. — Now I say that all

grounds of proof in general, which aim at theoretical conviction, can bring

about no belief of this kind from the highest to the lowest degree, if there is to

be proved the proposition of the existence of an original Being, as a God, in

the signification adequate to the whole content of this concept; viz. a moral

Author of the world, by whom the final purpose of creation is at the same

time supplied.

              (1.) As to the logically accurate proof proceeding from universal to

particular, we have sufficiently established in the Critique the following:

Since no intuition possible for us corresponds to the concept of a Being that

is to be sought beyond nature — whose concept therefore, so far as it is to be

theoretically determined by synthetical predicates, remains always

problematical for us — there is absolutely no cognition of it to be had (by

which the extent of our theoretical knowledge is in the least enlarged). The

particular concept of a supersensible Being cannot be subsumed under the

universal principles of the nature of things, in order to conclude from them to

it, because those principles are valid simply for nature, as an object of sense.

              (2.) We can indeed think one of two dissimilar things, even in the

very point of their dissimilarity, in accordance with the analogy 1 of the

other; but we cannot, from that wherein they are dissimilar, conclude from

the one to the other by analogy, i.e. transfer from the one to the other this sign

of specific distinction. Thus I can, according to the analogy of the law of the

equality of action and reaction in the mutual attraction and repulsion of

bodies, also conceive of the association of the members of a commonwealth

according to rules of right; but I cannot transfer to it those specific

determinations (material attraction or repulsion), and ascribe them to the

citizens in order to constitute a system called a state.— Just so we can indeed

conceive of the causality of the original Being in respect of the things of the

world, as natural purposes, according to the analogy of an Understanding, as

ground of the forms of certain products which we call works of art (for this

only takes place on behalf of the theoretical or practical use that we have to

make by our cognitive faculty of this concept in respect of the natural things

in the world according to a certain principle). But we can in no way conclude

according to analogy, because in the case of beings of the world

Understanding must be ascribed to the cause of an effect which is judged

artificial, that in respect of nature the same causality which we perceive inmen attaches also to the Being which is quite distinct from nature. For this

concerns the very point of dissimilarity which is thought between a cause

sensibly conditioned in respect of its effects and the supersensible original

Being itself in our concept of it, and which therefore cannot be transferred

from one to the other.— In the very fact that I must conceive the divine

causality only according to the analogy of an Understanding (which faculty

we know in no other being than in sensibly-conditioned man) lies the

prohibition to ascribe to it this Understanding in its peculiar signification.1

              (3.) Opinion finds in a priori judgements no place whatever, for by

them we either cognise something as quite certain or else cognise nothing at

all. But if the given grounds of proof from which we start (as here from the

purposes in the world) are empirical, then we cannot even with their aid form

any opinion as to anything beyond the world of sense, nor can we concede to

such venturesome judgements the smallest claim to probability. For

probability is part of a certainty possible in a certain series of grounds (its

grounds compare with the sufficient ground as parts with a whole), the

insufficient ground of which must be susceptible of completion. But since, as

determining grounds of one and the same judgement, they must be of the

same kind, for otherwise they would not together constitute a whole (such as

certainty is), one part of them cannot lie within the bounds of possible

experience and another outside all possible experience. Consequently, since

merely empirical grounds of proof lead to nothing supersensible, and since

what is lacking in the series of them cannot in any way be completed, we do

not approach in the least nearer in our attempt to attain by their means to the

supersensible and to a cognition thereof. Thus in any judgement about the

latter by means of arguments derived from experience, probability has no

place.

              (4.) If an hypothesis is to serve for the explanation of the possibility

of a given phenomenon, at least its possibility must be completely certain.1 It

is sufficient that in an hypothesis I disclaim any cognition of actuality (which

is claimed in an opinion given out as probable); more than this I cannot give

up. The possibility of that which I place at the basis of my explanation, must

at least be exposed to no doubt; otherwise there would be no end of empty

chimeras. But to assume the possibility of a supersensible Being determined

according to certain concepts would be a completely groundless supposition.

For here none of the conditions requisite for cognition, as regards that in itwhich rests upon intuition, is given, and so the sole criterion of possibility

remaining is the mere principle of Contradiction (which can only prove the

possibility of the thought, not of the object thought).

              The result then is this. For the existence [Dasein] of the original

Being, as a Godhead, or of the soul as an immortal spirit, absolutely no proof

in a theoretical point of view is possible for the human Reason, which can

bring about even the least degree of belief. The ground of this is quite easy to

comprehend. For determining our Ideas of the supersensible we have no

material whatever, and we must derive this latter from things in the world of

sense, which is absolutely inadequate for such an Object. Thus, in the

absence of all determination of it, nothing remains but the concept of a non-

sensible something which contains the ultimate ground of the world of sense,

but which does not furnish any knowledge (any amplification of the concept)

of its inner constitution.

        1
               [Cf. Introd. to Logic, ix. p. 63, “Conviction is opposed to

Persuasion, which is a belief from inadequate reasons, of which we do not

know whether they are only subjective or are also objective.”]

        1
               [Second Edition.]

        2
               [I.e. Urtheils. First Edition had Urtheilens, the judging subject.]

        1
               Analogy (in a qualitative signification) is the identity of the relation

between reasons and consequences (causes and effects), so far as it is to be

found, notwithstanding the specific difference of the things or those

properties in them which contain the reason for like consequences (i.e.

considered apart from this relation). Thus we conceive of the artificial

constructions of beasts by comparing them with those of men; by comparing

the ground of those effects brought about by the former, which we do not

know, with the ground of similar effects brought about by men (reason),

which we do know; i.e. we regard the ground of the former as an analogon of

reason. We then try at the same time to show that the ground of the artisan

faculty of beasts, which we call instinct, specifically different as it is in fact

from reason, has yet a similar relation to its effect (the buildings of the beaver

as compared with those of men).— But then I cannot therefore conclude that

because man uses reason for his building, the beaver must have the like, and

call this a conclusion according to analogy. But from the similarity of the

mode of operation of beasts (of which we cannot immediately perceive theground) to that of men (of which we are immediately conscious), we can

quite rightly conclude according to analogy, that beasts too act in accordance

with representations (not as Descartes has it, that they are machines), and

that despite their specific distinction they are yet (as living beings) of the

same genus as man. The principle of our right so to conclude consists in the

sameness of the ground for reckoning beasts in respect of the said

determination in the same genus with men, regarded as men, so far as we can

externally compare them with one another in accordance with their actions.

There is par ratio. Just so I can conceive, according to the analogy of an

Understanding, the causality of the supreme World-Cause, by comparing its

purposive products in the world with the artificial works of men; but I cannot

conclude according to analogy to those properties in it [which are in man],

because here the principle of the possibility of such a method of reasoning

entirely fails, viz. the paritas rationis for counting the Supreme Being in one

and the same genus with man (in respect of the causality of both). The

causality of the beings of the world, which is always sensibly conditioned (as

is causality through Understanding) cannot be transferred to a Being which

has in common with them no generic concept save that of Thing in general.

        1
               We thus miss nothing in the representation of the relations of this

Being to the world, as far as the consequences, theoretical or practical, of this

concept are concerned. To wish to investigate what it is in itself, is a curiosity

as purposeless as it is vain.

        1
               [Cf. Introd. to Logic, p. 76, where the conditions of a legitimate

hypothesis are laid down. See also Critique of Pure Reason, Methodology, c.

i. § 3 .]          § 91. Of the kind of belief produced by a practical faith

 

 

              If we look merely to the way in which anything can be for us

(according to the subjective constitution of our representative powers) an

Object of knowledge (res cognoscibilis ), then our concepts will not cohere

with Objects, but merely with our cognitive faculties and the use which they

can make of a given representation (in a theoretical or practical point of

view). Thus the question whether anything is or is not a cognisable being is

not a question concerning the possibility of things but of our knowledge of

them.

              Cognisable things are of three kinds: things of opinion (opinabile );

things of fact (scibile ); and things of faith (mere credibile ).

              (1.) Objects of mere rational Ideas, which for theoretical knowledge

cannot be presented in any possible experience, are so far not cognisable

things, and consequently in respect of them we can form no opinion; for to

form an opinion a priori is absurd in itself and the straight road to mere

chimeras. Either then our proposition is certain a priori or it contains nothing

for belief. Therefore things of opinion are always Objects of an empirical

cognition at least possible in itself (objects of the world of sense); but, which,

on account merely of the [low] degree of this faculty that we possess, is for

us impossible. Thus the ether of the new physicists,1 an elastic fluid

pervading all other matter (mingled intimately with it) is a mere thing of

opinion, yet is such that, if our external senses were sharpened to the highest

degree, it could be perceived; though it can never be presented in any

observation or experiment. To assume [the existence of] rational inhabitants

of other planets is a thing of opinion; for if we could come closer to them,

which is in itself possible, we should decide by experience whether they did

or did not exist; but as we shall never come so near, it remains in the region

of opinion. But to hold the opinion that there are in the material universe pure

thinking spirits without bodies (viz. if we dismiss as unworthy of our notice

certain phenomena which have been published as actual2 ) is to be called

poetic fiction. This is no thing of opinion, but a mere Idea which remains

over, when we remove from a thinking being everything material, and onlyleave thought to it. Whether then the latter (which we know only in man, that

is, in combination with a body) does survive, we cannot decide. Such a thing

is a sophistical being (ens rationis ratiocinantis ), not a rational being (ens

rationis ratiocinatae )1 ; of which latter it is possible to show conclusively,

the objective reality of its concept; at least for the practical use of Reason,

because this which has its peculiar and apodictically certain principles a

priori, demands (postulates) it.

              (2.) Objects for concepts, whose objective reality can be proved

(whether through pure Reason or through experience, and, in the first case,

from its theoretical or practical data, in all cases by means of a corresponding

intuition) are things of fact (res facti ).2 Of this kind are the mathematical

properties of magnitudes (in geometry), because they are susceptible of a

presentation a priori for the theoretical use of Reason. Further, things or their

characteristics, which can be exhibited in experience (either our own or that

of others through the medium of testimony) are likewise things of fact.—

And, what is very remarkable, there is one rational Idea (susceptible in itself

of no presentation in intuition, and consequently, of no theoretical proof of its

possibility) which also comes under things of fact. This is the Idea of

freedom, whose reality, regarded as that of a particular kind of causality (of

which the concept, theoretically considered, would be transcendent), may be

exhibited by means of practical laws of pure Reason, and conformably to

this, in actual actions, and, consequently, in experience.— This is the only

one of all the Ideas of pure Reason, whose object is a thing of fact, and to be

reckoned under the scibilia.

              (3.) Objects, which in reference to the use of pure practical Reason

that is in conformity with duty must be thought a priori (whether as

consequences or as grounds), but which are transcendent for its theoretical

use, are mere things of faith. Of this kind is the highest good in the world, to

be brought about by freedom.1 The concept of this cannot be established as

regards its objective reality in any experience possible for us and thus

adequately for the theoretical use of Reason; but its use is commanded by

practical pure Reason [in reference to the best possible working out of that

purpose],2 and it consequently must be assumed possible. This commanded

effect, together with the only conditions of its possibility thinkable by us, viz.

the Being of God and the immortality of the soul, are things of faith (res fidei

), and of all objects are the only ones which can be so called.3 For thoughwhat we learn by testimony from the experience of others must be believed

by us, yet it is not therefore a thing of faith; for it was the proper experience

of some one witness and so a thing of fact, or is presupposed as such. Again

it must be possible by this path (that of historical faith) to arrive at

knowledge; and the Objects of history and geography, like everything in

general which it is at least possible to know by the constitution of our

cognitive faculties, belong not to things of faith but to things of fact. It is only

objects of pure Reason which can be things of faith at all, though not as

objects of the mere pure speculative Reason: for then they could not be

reckoned with certainty among things, i.e. Objects of that cognition which is

possible for us. They are Ideas, i.e. concepts of the objective reality of which

we cannot theoretically be certain. On the other hand, the highest final

purpose to be worked out by us, by which alone we can become worthy of

being ourselves the final purpose of creation, is an Idea which has in a

practical reference objective reality for us, and is also a thing. But because we

cannot furnish such reality to this concept in a theoretical point of view, it is a

mere thing of faith of the pure Reason, along with God and Immortality, as

the conditions under which alone we, in accordance with the constitution of

our (human) Reason, can conceive the possibility of that effect of the use of

our freedom in conformity with law. But belief in things of faith is a belief in

a pure practical point of view, i.e. a moral faith, which proves nothing for

theoretical pure rational cognition, but only for that which is practical and

directed to the fulfilment of its duties; it in no way extends speculation or the

practical rules of prudence in accordance with the principle of self-love. If the

supreme principle of all moral laws is a postulate, so is also the possibility of

its highest Object; and consequently, too, the condition under which we can

think this possibility is postulated along with it and by it. Thus the cognition

of the latter is neither knowledge nor opinion of the being and character of

these conditions, regarded as theoretical cognition; but is a mere assumption

in a reference which is practical and commanded for the moral use of our

Reason.

              If we were able also plausibly to base upon the purposes of nature,

which physical Teleology presents to us in such rich abundance, a

determinate concept of an intelligent World-Cause, then the existence

[Dasein] of this Being would not be a thing of faith. For since this would not

be assumed on behalf of the performance of my duty, but only in reference to

the explanation of nature, it would be merely the opinion and hypothesis mostconformable to our Reason. Now such Teleology leads in no way to a

determinate concept of God; on the contrary, this can only be found in the

concept of a moral Author of the World, because this alone furnishes the final

purpose to which we can only reckon ourselves [as attached] if we behave

conformably to what the moral law prescribes as final purpose and

consequently obliges us [to do]. Hence it is only by its reference to the Object

of our duty, as the condition of the possibility of attaining the final purpose of

the same, that the concept of God attains the privilege of counting as a thing

of faith, in our belief; but on the other hand, this same concept cannot make

its Object valid as a thing of fact. For, although the necessity of duty is very

plain for practical Reason, yet the attainment of its final purpose, so far as it

is not altogether in our own power, is only assumed on behalf of the practical

use of Reason, and therefore is not so practically necessary as duty itself.1

              Faith (as habitus, not as actus ) is the moral attitude of Reason as to

belief in that which is unattainable by theoretical cognition. It is therefore the

constant principle of the mind, to assume as true, on account of the obligation

in reference to it, that which it is necessary to presuppose as condition of the

possibility of the highest moral final purpose2 ; although its possibility or

impossibility be alike impossible for us to see into. Faith (absolutely so

called) is trust in the attainment of a design, the promotion of which is a duty,

but the possibility of the fulfilment of which (and consequently also that of

the only conditions of it thinkable by us) is not to be comprehended by us.

Faith, then, that refers to particular objects, which are not objects of possible

knowledge or opinion (in which latter case it ought to be called, especially in

historical matters, credulity and not faith), is quite moral. It is a free belief,

not in that for which dogmatical proofs for the theoretically determinant

Judgement are to be found, or in that to which we hold ourselves bound, but

in that which we assume on behalf of a design in accordance with laws of

freedom. This, however, is not, like opinion, without any adequate ground;

but, is grounded as in Reason (although only in respect of its practical

employment), and adequately for its design. For without this, the moral

attitude of thought in its repudiation of the claim of the theoretical Reason for

proofs (of the possibility of the Objects of morality) has no permanence; but

wavers between practical commands and theoretical doubts. To be

incredulous means to cling to maxims, and not to believe testimony in

general; but he is unbelieving, who denies all validity to rational Ideas,

because there is wanting a theoretical ground of their reality.1 He judgestherefore dogmatically. A dogmatical unbelief cannot subsist together with a

moral maxim dominant in the mental attitude (for Reason cannot command

one to follow a purpose, which is cognised as nothing more than a chimera);

but a doubtful faith can. To this the absence of conviction by grounds of

speculative Reason is only a hindrance, the influence of which upon conduct

a critical insight into the limits of this faculty can remove, while it substitutes

by way of compensation a paramount practical belief.

              If, in place of certain mistaken attempts, we wish to introduce a

different principle into philosophy and to promote its influence, it makes us

highly contented to see how and why those attempts must have disappointed

us.

              God, freedom, and immortality, are the problems at the solution of

which all the equipments of Metaphysic aim, as their ultimate and unique

purpose. Now it was believed that the doctrine of freedom is needed for

practical philosophy only as its negative condition; but that on the other hand

the doctrine of God and of the constitution of the soul, as belonging to

theoretical philosophy, must be established for themselves and separately, in

order afterwards to unite both with that which the moral law (possible only

under the condition of freedom) commands, and so to constitute a religion.

But we can easily see that these attempts must fail. For from mere ontological

concepts of things in general, or of the existence of a necessary Being, it is

possible to form absolutely no determinate concept of an original Being by

means of predicates which can be given in experience and can therefore serve

for cognition. Again a concept based on experience of the physical

purposiveness of nature could furnish no adequate proof for morality, or

consequently for cognition of a Deity. Just as little could the cognition of the

soul by means of experience (which we only apply in this life) supply us with

a concept of its spiritual immortal nature, a concept which would be adequate

for morality. Theology and Pneumatology, regarded as problems of the

sciences of a speculative Reason, can be established by no empirical data and

predicates, because the concept of them is transcendent for our whole

cognitive faculty.— The determination of both concepts, God and the soul (in

respect of its immortality) alike, can only take place by means of predicates,

which, although they are only possible from a supersensible ground, must yet

prove their reality in experience; for thus alone can they make possible a

cognition of a quite supersensible Being.— The only concept of this kind tobe met with in human Reason is that of the freedom of men under moral

laws, along with the final purpose which Reason prescribes by these laws. Of

these two [the moral laws and the final purpose] the first are useful for

ascribing to the Author of Nature, the second for ascribing to man, those

properties which contain the necessary condition of the possibility of both

[God and the soul]; so that from this Idea a conclusion can be drawn as to the

existence and constitution of these beings which are otherwise quite hidden

from us.

              Thus the ground of the failure of the attempt to prove God and

immortality by the merely theoretical path lies in this, that no cognition

whatever is possible of the supersensible in this way (of natural concepts).

The ground of its success by the moral way (of the concept of freedom) is as

follows. Here the supersensible (freedom), which in this case is fundamental,

by a determinate law of causality that springs from it, not only supplies

material for cognition of other supersensibles (the moral final purpose and the

conditions of its attainability), but also establishes its reality in actions as a

fact; though at the same time it can furnish a valid ground of proof in no

other than a practical point of view (the only one, however, of which Religion

has need).

              It is thus very remarkable that of the three pure rational Ideas, God,

freedom, and immortality, that of freedom is the only concept of the

supersensible which (by means of the causality that is thought in it) proves its

objective reality in nature by means of the effects it can produce there; and

thus renders possible the connexion of both the others with nature, and of all

three together with Religion. We have therefore in us a principle capable of

determining the Idea of the supersensible within us, and thus also that of the

supersensible without us, for knowledge, although only in a practical point of

view; a principle this of which mere speculative philosophy (which could

give a merely negative concept of freedom) must despair. Consequently the

concept of freedom (as fundamental concept of all unconditioned practical

laws) can extend Reason beyond those bounds, within which every natural

(theoretical) concept must remain hopelessly limited.

        1
               [This illustration is also given in the Logic (p. 57); where the three

modi of belief, Opinion, Faith, and Knowledge, are distinguished from each

other. Cf. Critique of Pure Reason, Methodology, c. ii. § 3 .]        2
               [The speculations of Swedenborg seem to have always had a

strange fascination for Kant. He says of two reported cases of Swedenborg’s

clairvoyance that he knows not how to disprove them (Rosenkranz vii. 5); but

in his Anthropology §§ 35, 37 , he attacks Swedenborgianism as folly. So in

an early essay, Dreams of a Visionary explained by Dreams of Metaphysics,

he avows his scepticism as to the value of the information which “psychical

research” can supply about the spirit-world, though he is careful not to

commit himself to any dogmatic statement on the subject of ghosts. In the

Critique of Pure Reason (when discussing the Postulates of Empirical

Thought) he gives, as an instance of a concept inconsistent with the canons of

possibility, “a power of being in a community of thought with other men,

however distant from us.”]

        1
               [Cf. supra, p. 229.]

        2
               I here extend, correctly as it seems to me, the concept of a thing of

fact beyond the usual signification of this word. For it is not needful, not even

feasible, to limit this expression merely to actual experience, if we are talking

of the relation of things to our cognitive faculties; for an experience merely

possible is quite sufficient in order that we may speak of them merely as

objects of a definite kind of cognition.

        1
               [Cf. Introduction to Logic, p. 59 note.]

        2
               [Second Edition.]

        3
               Things of faith are not therefore articles of faith; if we understand

by the latter things of faith to the confession of which (internal or external)

we can be bound. Natural theology contains nothing like this. For since they,

as things of faith (like things of fact) cannot be based on theoretical proofs,

[they are accepted by] a belief which is free and which only as such is

compatible with the morality of the subject.

        1
               The final purpose which the moral law enjoins upon us to further,

is not the ground of duty; since this lies in the moral law, which, as formal

practical principle, leads categorically, independently of the Objects of the

faculty of desire (the material of the will) and consequently of any purpose

whatever. This formal characteristic of my actions (their subordination under

the principle of universal validity), wherein alone consists their inner moral

worth, is quite in our power; and I can quite well abstract from the possibilityor the unattainableness of purposes which I am obliged to promote in

conformity with that law (because in them consists only the external worth of

my actions) as something which is never completely in my power, in order

only to look to that which is of my doing. But then the design of promoting

the final purpose of all rational beings (happiness so far as it is possible for it

to be accordant with duty) is even yet prescribed by the law of duty. The

speculative Reason, however, does not see at all the attainableness of this

(neither on the side of our own physical faculty nor on that of the co-

operation of nature). It must rather, so far as we can judge in a rational way,

hold the derivation, by the aid of such causes, of such a consequence of our

good conduct from mere nature (internal and external) without God and

immortality, to be an ungrounded and vain, though well-meant, expectation;

and if it could have complete certainty of this judgement, it would regard the

moral law itself as the mere deception of our Reason in a practical aspect. But

since the speculative Reason fully convinces itself that the latter can never

take place, but that on the other hand those Ideas whose object lies outside

nature can be thought without contradiction, it must for its own practical law

and the problem prescribed thereby, and therefore in a moral aspect,

recognise those Ideas as real in order not to come into contradiction with

itself.

        2
               It is a trust in the promise of the moral law; [not however such as is

contained in it, but such as I put into it and that on morally adequate

grounds.3 ] For a final purpose cannot be commanded by any law of Reason

without this latter at the same time promising, however uncertainly, its

attainableness; and thus justifying our belief in the special conditions under

which alone our Reason can think it as attainable. The word fides expresses

this; and it can only appear doubtful, how this expression and this particular

Idea came into moral philosophy, since it first was introduced with

Christianity, and the adoption of it perhaps might seem to be only a flattering

imitation of Christian terminology. But this is not the only case in which this

wonderful religion with its great simplicity of statement has enriched

philosophy with far more definite and purer concepts of morality, than it had

been able to furnish before; but which, once they are there, are freely assented

to by Reason and are assumed as concepts to which it could well have come

of itself and which it could and should have introduced.

        1
               [Cf. Introd. to Logic, ix. p. 60, “That man is morally unbelievingwho does not accept that which though impossible to know is morally

necessary to suppose.”]

 

 

                           General remark on Teleology

 

 

              If the question is, what rank the moral argument, which proves the

Being of God only as a thing of faith for the practical pure Reason, maintains

among the other arguments in philosophy, it is easy to set aside the whole

achievement of this last; by which it appears that there is no choice, but that

our theoretical faculty must give up all its pretensions before an impartial

criticism.

              All belief must in the first place be grounded upon facts, if it is not

to be completely groundless; and therefore the only distinction in proofs that

there can be is that belief in the consequence derived therefrom can either be

grounded on this fact as knowledge for theoretical cognition, or merely as

faith for practical. All facts belong either to the natural concept which proves

its reality in the objects of sense, given (or which may possibly be given)

before all natural concepts; or to the concept of freedom, which sufficiently

establishes its reality through the causality of Reason in regard of certain

effects in the world of sense, possible through it, which it incontrovertibly

postulates in the moral law. The natural concept (merely belonging to

theoretical cognition) is now either metaphysical and thinkable completely a

priori, or physical, i.e. thinkable a posteriori and as necessary only through

determinate experience. The metaphysical natural concept (which

presupposes no determinate experience) is therefore ontological.

              The ontological proof of the being of God from the concept of an

original Being is either that which from ontological predicates, by which

alone it can be thought as completely determined, infers absolutely necessary

being; or that which, from the absolute necessity of the being somewhere of

some thing, whatever it be, infers the predicates of the original Being. For

there belongs to the concept of an original Being, inasmuch as it is not

derived from anything, the unconditioned necessity of its presence, and (in

order to represent this) its complete determination by its [mere]1 concept. It

was believed that both requirements were found in the concept of the

ontological Idea of a Being the most real of all; and thus two metaphysical

proofs originated.              The proof (properly called ontological) resting upon a merely

metaphysical natural concept concludes from the concept of the Being the

most real of all, its absolutely necessary existence; for (it is said), if it did not

exist, a reality would be wanting to it, viz. existence.— The other (which is

also called the metaphysico-cosmological proof) concludes from the

necessity of the existence somewhere of a thing (which must be conceded, for

a being is given to us in self-consciousness), its complete determination as

that of a Being the most real of all; for everything existing must be

completely determined, but the absolutely necessary (i.e. that which we ought

to cognise as such and consequently a priori ) must be completely

determined by means of its own concept. But this is only the case with the

concept of a thing the most real of all. It is not needful to expose here the

sophistry in both arguments, which has been already done elsewhere;1 it is

only needful to remark that neither proof, even if they could be defended by

all manner of dialectical subtlety, could ever pass from the schools into the

world, or have the slightest influence on the mere sound Understanding.

              The proof, which rests on a natural concept that can only be

empirical and yet is to lead us beyond the bounds of nature regarded as the

complex of the objects of sense, can be no other than that derived from the

purposes of nature. The concept of these cannot, it is true, be given a priori

but only through experience; but yet it promises such a concept of the

original ground of nature as alone, among all those which we can conceive, is

suited to the supersensible, viz. that of a highest Understanding as Cause of

the world. This, in fact, it completely performs in accordance with principles

of the reflective Judgement, i.e. in accordance with the constitution of our

(human) faculty of cognition.— But whether or not it is in a position to

supply from the same data this concept of a supreme, i.e. independent

intelligent Being, in short of a God or Author of a world under moral laws,

and consequently as sufficiently determined for the Idea of a final purpose of

the being of the world — this is the question upon which everything depends,

whether we desire a theoretically adequate concept of the Original Being on

behalf of our whole knowledge of nature, or a practical concept for religion.

              This argument derived from physical Teleology is worthy of respect.

It produces a similar effect in the way of conviction upon the common

Understanding as upon the subtlest thinker; and a Reimarus 1 has acquired

immortal honour in his work (not yet superseded), in which he abundantlydevelops this ground of proof with his peculiar thoroughness and lucidity.—

But how does this proof acquire such mighty influence upon the mind? How

does a judgement by cold reason (for we might refer to persuasion the

emotion and elevation of reason produced by the wonders of nature) issue

thus in a calm and unreserved assent? It is not the physical purposes, which

all indicate in the World Cause an unfathomable intelligence; these are

inadequate thereto, because they do not satisfy the need of the inquiring

Reason. For, wherefore (it asks) are all those natural things that exhibit art?

Wherefore is man himself, whom we must regard as the ultimate purpose of

nature thinkable by us? Wherefore is this collective Nature here, and what is

the final purpose of such great and manifold art? Reason cannot be contented

with enjoyment or with contemplation, observation, and admiration (which, if

it stops there, is only enjoyment of a particular kind) as the ultimate final

purpose for the creation of the world and of man himself; for this presupposes

a personal worth, which man alone can give himself, as the condition under

which alone he and his being can be the final purpose. Failing this (which

alone is susceptible of a definite concept), the purposes of nature do not

satisfactorily answer our questions; especially because they cannot furnish

any determinate concept of the highest Being as an all-sufficient (and

therefore unique and so properly called highest ) being, and of the laws

according to which an Understanding is Cause of the world.

              Hence that the physico-teleological proof convinces, just as if it were

a theological proof, does not arise from our availing ourselves of the Ideas of

purposes of nature as so many empirical grounds of proof of a highest

Understanding. But it mingles itself unnoticed with that moral ground of

proof, which dwells in every man and influences him secretly, in the

conclusion by which we ascribe to the Being, which manifests itself with

such incomprehensible art in the purposes of nature, a final purpose and

consequently wisdom (without however being justified in doing so by the

perception of the former); and by which therefore we arbitrarily fill up the

lacunas of the [design] argument. In fact it is only the moral ground of proof

which produces conviction, and that only in a moral reference with which

every man feels inwardly his agreement. But the physico - teleological proof

has only the merit of leading the mind, in its consideration of the world, by

the way of purposes and through them to an intelligent Author of the world.

The moral reference to purposes and the Idea of a moral legislator and Author

of the world, as a theological concept, seem to be developed of themselvesout of that ground of proof, although they are in truth pure additions.

              Henceforward we may allow the customary statement to stand. For it

is generally difficult (if the distinction requires much reflection) for ordinary

sound Understanding to distinguish from one another as heterogeneous the

different principles which it confuses, and from one of which alone it actually

draws conclusions with correctness. The moral ground of proof of the Being

of God, properly speaking, does not merely complete and render perfect the

physico-teleological proof; but it is a special proof that supplies the

conviction which is wanting in the latter. This latter in fact can do nothing

more than guide Reason, in its judgements upon the ground of nature and that

contingent but admirable order of nature only known to us by experience, to

the causality of a Cause containing the ground of the same in accordance with

purposes (which we by the constitution of our cognitive faculties must think

as an intelligent cause); and thus by arresting the attention of Reason it makes

it more susceptible of the moral proof. For what is requisite to the latter

concept is so essentially different from everything which natural concepts

contain and can teach, that there is need of a particular ground of proof quite

independent of the former, in order to supply the concept of the original

Being adequately for Theology and to infer its existence.— The moral proof

(which it is true only proves the Being of God in a practical though

indispensable aspect of Reason) would preserve all its force, if we found in

the world no material, or only that which is doubtful, for physical Teleology.

It is possible to conceive rational beings surrounded by a nature which

displayed no clear trace of organisation but only the effects of a mere

mechanism of crude matter; on behalf of which and amid the changeability of

some merely contingent purposive forms and relations there would appear to

be no ground for inferring an intelligent Author. In such case there would be

no occasion for a physical Teleology; and yet Reason, which here gets no

guidance from natural concepts, would find in the concept of freedom and in

the moral Ideas founded thereon a practically sufficient ground for

postulating the concept of the original Being in conformity with these, i.e. as

a Deity, and for postulating nature (even the nature of our own being) as a

final purpose in accordance with freedom and its laws — and all this in

reference to the indispensable command of practical Reason.— However the

fact that there is in the actual world for the rational beings in it abundant

material for physical Teleology (even though this is not necessary) serves as

a desirable confirmation of the moral argument, as far as nature can exhibitanything analogous to the (moral) rational Ideas. For the concept of a

supreme Cause possessing intelligence (though not reaching far enough for a

Theology) thus acquires sufficient reality for the reflective Judgement, but it

is not required as the basis of the moral proof; nor does this latter serve to

complete as a proof the former, which does not by itself point to morality at

all, by means of an argument developed according to a single principle. Two

such heterogeneous principles as nature and freedom can only furnish two

different kinds of proof; and the attempt to derive one from the other is found

unavailing as regards that which is to be proved.

              If the physico-teleological ground of proof sufficed for the proof

which is sought, it would be very satisfactory for the speculative Reason; for

it would furnish the hope of founding a Theosophy (for so we must call the

theoretical cognition of the divine nature and its existence which would

suffice at once for the explanation of the constitution of the world and for the

determination of moral laws). In the same way if Psychology enabled us to

arrive at a cognition of the immortality of the soul it would make

Pneumatology possible, which would be just as welcome to the speculative

Reason. But neither, agreeable as they would be to the arrogance of our

curiosity, would satisfy the wish of Reason in respect of a theory which must

be based on a cognition of the nature of things. Whether the first, as

Theology, and the second, as Anthropology, when founded on the moral

principle, i.e. the principle of freedom, and consequently in accordance with

the practical use [of Reason] do not better fulfil their objective final design, is

another question which we need not here pursue.

              The physico-teleological ground of proof does not reach to

Theology, because it does not and cannot give any determinate concept,

sufficient for this design, of the original Being; but we must derive this from

quite another quarter, or must supply its lacuna by an arbitrary addition. You

infer, from the great purposiveness of natural forms and their relations, a

world-cause endowed with Understanding; but what is the degree of this

Understanding? Without doubt you cannot assume that it is the highest

possible Understanding; because for that it would be requisite that you should

see that a greater Understanding than that of which you perceive proofs in the

world, is not thinkable; and this would be to ascribe Omniscience to

yourself.1 In the same way, if you infer from the magnitude of the world the

very great might of its Author, you must be content with this having only acomparative significance for your faculty of comprehension; for since you do

not know all that is possible, so as to compare it with the magnitude of the

world as far as you know it, you cannot infer the Almightiness of its Author

from so small a standard, and so on. Now you arrive in this way at no definite

concept of an original Being available for a Theology; for this can only be

found in the concept of the totality of perfections compatible with

intelligence, and you cannot help yourself to this by merely empirical data.

But without such a definite concept you cannot infer a unique intelligent

original Being; you can only assume it (with whatever motive).— Now it

may certainly be conceded that you should arbitrarily add (for Reason has

nothing fundamental to say to the contrary): Where so much perfection is

found, we may well assume that all perfection is united in a unique Cause of

the world, because Reason succeeds better both theoretically and practically

with a principle thus definite. But then you cannot regard this concept of the

original Being as proved by you, for you have only assumed it on behalf of a

better employment of Reason. Hence all lamentation or impotent anger on

account of the alleged mischief of rendering doubtful the coherency of your

chain of reasoning, is vain pretentiousness, which would fain have us believe

that the doubt here freely expressed as to your argument is a doubting of

sacred truth, in order that under this cover the shallowness of your argument

may pass unnoticed.

              Moral Teleology, on the other hand, which is not less firmly based

than physical,— which, indeed, rather deserves the preference because it rests

a priori on principles inseparable from our Reason — leads to that which is

requisite for the possibility of a Theology, viz. to a determinate concept of the

supreme Cause, as Cause of the world according to moral laws, and,

consequently, to the concept of such a cause as satisfies our moral final

purpose. For this are required, as natural properties belonging to it, nothing

less than Omniscience, Omnipotence, Omnipresence, and the like, which

must be thought as bound up with the moral final purpose which is infinite

and thus as adequate to it. Hence moral Teleology alone can furnish the

concept of a unique Author of the world, which is available for a Theology.

              In this way Theology leads immediately to Religion, i.e. the

recognition of our duties as divine commands 1 ; because it is only the

recognition of our duty and of the final purpose enjoined upon us by Reason

which brings out with definiteness the concept of God. This concept,therefore, is inseparable in its origin from obligation to that Being. On the

other hand, even if the concept of the original Being could be also found

determinately by the merely theoretical path (viz. the concept of it as mere

Cause of nature), it would afterwards be very difficult — perhaps impossible

without arbitrary interpolation [of elements]— to ascribe to this Being by

well-grounded proofs a causality in accordance with moral laws; and yet

without this that quasi-theological concept could furnish no foundation for

religion. Even if a religion could be established by this theoretical path, it

would actually, as regards sentiment (wherein its essence lies) be different

from that in which the concept of God and the (practical) conviction of His

Being originate from the fundamental Ideas of morality. For if we must

suppose the Omnipotence, Omniscience, etc., of an Author of the world as

concepts given to us from another quarter, in order afterwards only to apply

our concepts of duties to our relation to Him, then these latter concepts must

bear very markedly the appearance of compulsion and forced submission. If,

instead of this, the respect for the moral law, quite freely, in virtue of the

precept of our own Reason, represents to us the final purpose of our

destination, we admit among our moral views a Cause harmonising with this

and with its accomplishment, with the sincerest reverence, which is quite

distinct from pathological fear; and we willingly submit ourselves thereto.1

              If it be asked why it is incumbent upon us to have any Theology at

all, it appears clear that it is not needed for the extension or correction of our

cognition of nature or in general for any theory, but simply in a subjective

point of view for Religion, i.e. the practical or moral use of our Reason. If it

is found that the only argument which leads to a definite concept of the object

of Theology is itself moral, it is not only not strange, but we miss nothing in

respect of its final purpose as regards the sufficiency of belief from this

ground of proof, provided that it be admitted that such an argument only

establishes the Being of God sufficiently for our moral destination, i.e. in a

practical point of view, and that here speculation neither shows its strength in

any way, nor extends by means of it the sphere of its domain. Our surprise

and the alleged contradiction between the possibility of a Theology asserted

here and that which the Critique of speculative Reason said of the Categories

— viz. that they can only produce knowledge when applied to objects of

sense, but in no way when applied to the supersensible — vanish, if we see

that they are here used for a cognition of God not in a theoretical point of

view (in accordance with what His own nature, inscrutable to us, may be) butsimply in a practical.— In order then at this opportunity to make an end of

the misinterpretation of that very necessary doctrine of the Critique, which, to

the chagrin of the blind dogmatist, refers Reason to its bounds, I add here the

following elucidation.

              If I ascribe to a body motive force and thus think it by means of the

category of causality, then I at the same time cognise it by that [category]; i.e.

I determine the concept of it, as of an Object in general, by means of what

belongs to it by itself (as the condition of the possibility of that relation) as an

object of sense. If the motive force ascribed to it is repulsive, then there

belongs to it (although I do not place near it any other body upon which it

may exert force) a place in space, and moreover extension, i.e. space in itself,

besides the filling up of this by means of the repulsive forces of its parts. In

addition there is the law of this filling up (that the ground of the repulsion of

the parts must decrease in the same proportion as the extension of the body

increases, and as the space, which it fills with the same parts by means of this

force, is augmented).— On the contrary, if I think a supersensible Being as

the first mover, and thus by the category of causality as regards its

determination of the world (motion of matter), I must not think it as existing

in any place in space nor as extended; I must not even think it as existing in

time or simultaneously with other beings. Hence I have no determinations

whatever, which could make intelligible to me the condition of the possibility

of motion by means of this Being as its ground. Consequently, I do not in the

very least cognise it by means of the predicate of Cause (as first mover), for

itself; but I have only the representation of a something containing the ground

of the motions in the world; and the relation of the latter to it as their cause,

since it does not besides furnish me with anything belonging to the

constitution of the thing which is cause, leaves its concept quite empty. The

reason of this is, that by predicates which only find their Object in the world

of sense I can indeed proceed to the being of something which must contain

their ground, but not to the determination of its concept as a supersensible

being, which excludes all these predicates. By the category of causality, then,

if I determine it by the concept of a first mover, I do not in the very least

cognise what God is. Perhaps, however, I shall have better success if I start

from the order of the world, not merely to think its causality as that of a

supreme Understanding, but to cognise it by means of this determination of

the said concept; because here the troublesome condition of space and of

extension disappears.— At all events the great purposiveness in the worldcompels us to think a supreme cause of it, and to think its causality as that of

an Understanding; but we are not therefore entitled to ascribe this to it. (E.g.

we think of the eternity of God as presence in all time, because we can form

no other concept of mere being as a quantum, i.e. as duration; or we think of

the divine Omnipresence as presence in all places in order to make

comprehensible to ourselves His immediate presence in things which are

external to one another; without daring to ascribe to God any of these

determinations, as something cognised in Him.) If I determine the causality

of a man, in respect of certain products which are only explicable by

designed purposiveness, by thinking it as that of Understanding, I need not

stop here, but I can ascribe to him this predicate as a well-known property

and cognise him accordingly. For I know that intuitions are given to the

senses of men and are brought by the Understanding under a concept and thus

under a rule; that this concept only contains the common characteristic (with

omission of the particular ones) and is thus discursive; and that the rules for

bringing given representations under a consciousness in general are given by

Understanding before those intuitions, etc. I therefore ascribe this property to

man as a property by means of which I cognise him. However, if I wish to

think a supersensible Being (God) as an intelligence, this is not only

permissible in a certain aspect of my employment of Reason — it is

unavoidable; but to ascribe to Him Understanding and to flatter ourselves that

we can cognise Him by means of it as a property of His, is in no way

permissible. For I must omit all those conditions under which alone I know

an Understanding, and thus the predicate which only serves for determining

man cannot be applied at all to a supersensible Object; and therefore by a

causality thus determined, I cannot cognise what God is. And so it is with all

Categories, which can have no significance for cognition in a theoretical

aspect, if they are not applied to objects of possible experience.— However,

according to the analogy of an Understanding I can in a certain other aspect

think a supersensible being, without at the same time meaning thereby to

cognise it theoretically; viz. if this determination of its causality concerns an

effect in the world, which contains a design morally necessary but

unattainable by a sensible being. For then a cognition of God and of His

Being (Theology) is possible by means of properties and determinations of

His causality merely thought in Him according to analogy, which has all

requisite reality in a practical reference though only in respect of this (as

moral).— An Ethical Theology is therefore possible; for though morality cansubsist without theology as regards its rule, it cannot do so as regards the

final design which this proposes, unless Reason in respect of it is to be

renounced. But a Theological Ethic (of pure Reason) is impossible; for laws

which Reason itself does not give and whose observance it does not bring

about as a pure practical faculty, cannot be moral. In the same way a

Theological Physic would be a nonentity, for it would propose no laws of

nature but ordinances of a Highest Will; while on the other hand a physical

(properly speaking a physico-teleological) Theology can serve at least as a

propaedeutic to Theology proper, by giving occasion for the Idea of a final

purpose which nature cannot present by the observation of natural purposes

of which it offers abundant material. It thus makes felt the need of a

Theology which shall determine the concept of God adequately for the

highest practical use of Reason, but it cannot develop this and base it

satisfactorily on its proofs.

        1
               [First Edition.]

        1
               [In the Critique of Pure Reason, Dialectic, bk. II. c. iii. §§ 4, 5 .]

        1
               [H. S. Reimarus (1694 - 1768), the author of the famous

Wolfenbüttel Fragments, published after the death of Reimarus by Lessing.

The book alluded to by Kant is probably the Abhandlungen von den

vornehmsten Wahrheiten der natürlichen Religion (1754), which had great

popularity in its day.]

        1
               [These arguments are advanced by Hume, Inquiry, § vii. Cf. also

Pure Reason, Dialectic, bk. II. c. iii. § 6 , and Practical Reason, Dialectic, c.

ii. § vii. ]

        1
               [Cf. Practical Reason, Dialectic, c. ii. § v. ]

        1
               The admiration for beauty, and also the emotion aroused by the

manifold purposes of nature, which a reflective mind is able to feel even prior

to a clear representation of a rational Author of the world, have something in

themselves like religious feeling. They seem in the first place by a method of

judging analogous to moral to produce an effect upon the moral feeling

(gratitude to, and veneration for, the unknown cause); and thus by exciting

moral Ideas to produce an effect upon the mind, when they inspire that

admiration which is bound up with far more interest than mere theoretical

observation can bring about.        2
               It is a trust in the promise of the moral law; [not however such as is

contained in it, but such as I put into it and that on morally adequate

grounds.3 ] For a final purpose cannot be commanded by any law of Reason

without this latter at the same time promising, however uncertainly, its

attainableness; and thus justifying our belief in the special conditions under

which alone our Reason can think it as attainable. The word fides expresses

this; and it can only appear doubtful, how this expression and this particular

Idea came into moral philosophy, since it first was introduced with

Christianity, and the adoption of it perhaps might seem to be only a flattering

imitation of Christian terminology. But this is not the only case in which this

wonderful religion with its great simplicity of statement has enriched

philosophy with far more definite and purer concepts of morality, than it had

been able to furnish before; but which, once they are there, are freely assented

to by Reason and are assumed as concepts to which it could well have come

of itself and which it could and should have introduced.

        3
               [Second Edition.]

 

 

 

 

           Introduction to the Metaphysic of Morals

                                Translated by W. Hastie

                                     CONTENTS

 

GENERAL DIVISIONS OF THE METAPHYSIC OF MORALS
I. DIVISION OF THE METAPHYSIC OF MORALS AS A SYSTEM OF DUTIES GENERALLY.
II. DIVISION OF THE METAPHYSIC OF MORALS ACCORDING TO RELATIONS OF OBLIGATION.
III. DIVISION OF THE METAPHYSIC OF MORALS AS A SYSTEM OF DUTIES GENERALLY.
GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO THE METAPHYSIC OF MORALS
I. THE RELATION OF THE FACULTIES OF THE HUMAN MIND TO THE MORAL LAWS.
II. THE IDEA AND NECESSITY OF A METAPHYSIC OF MORALS.
III. THE DIVISION OF A METAPHYSIC OF MORALS.
IV. GENERAL PRELIMINARY CONCEPTIONS DEFINED AND EXPLAINED.            General Divisions of the Metaphysic of Morals

 

 

I. Division of the Metaphysic of Morals as a System of Duties Generally.

 

 

              1. All duties are either duties of right, that is, juridical duties (officia

juris), or duties of virtue, that is, ethical duties (officia virtutis s. ethica).

Juridical duties are such as may be promulgated by external legislation;

ethical duties are those for which such legislation is not possible. The reason

why the latter cannot be properly made the subject of external legislation is

because they relate to an end or final purpose, which is itself, at the same

time, embraced in these duties, and which it is a duty for the individual to

have as such. But no external legislation can cause any one to adopt a

particular intention, or to propose to himself a certain purpose; for this

depends upon an internal condition or act of the mind itself. However,

external actions conducive to such a mental condition may be commanded,

without its being implied that the individual will of necessity make them an

end to himself.

              But why, then, it may be asked, is the science of morals, or moral

philosophy, commonly entitled — especially by Cicero — the science of duty

and not also the science of right, since duties and rights refer to each other?

The reason is this. We know our own freedom — from which all moral laws

and consequently all rights as well as all duties arise — only through the

moral imperative, which is an immediate injunction of duty; whereas the

conception of right as a ground of putting others under obligation has

afterwards to be developed out of it.

              2. In the doctrine of duty, man may and ought to be represented in

accordance with the nature of his faculty of freedom, which is entirely supra-

sensible. He is, therefore, to be represented purely according to his humanity

as a personality independent of physical determinations (homo noumenon), in

distinction from the same person as a man modified with these

determinations (homo phenomenon). Hence the conceptions of right and end

when referred to duty, in view of this twofold quality, give the following

division:Division of the Metaphysic of Morals According to the Objective Relation of

                                  the Law of Duty.

 

                         I. The Right of Humanity.
I. Juridical   Oneself     in our own person (juridicial
      Duties     to or     duties towards oneself)             Perfect
                Others                                            Duty
                        II. The Right of Mankind.
                            in others (juridical duties
                            towards others.)
 
 
                       III. The End of Humanity.
II. Ethical   Oneself       in our person (eithical duties
     Duties     to or       towards oneself)                 Imperfect
               Others                                             Duty
                        IV. The End of Mankind.
                            in others (ethical duties
                            towards others.)

Division of the Metaphysic of Morals According to the Objective

Relation of the Law of Duty.

 

                         I. The Right of Humanity.
I. Juridical   Oneself     in our own person (juridicial
      Duties     to or     duties towards oneself)             Perfect
                Others                                            Duty
                        II. The Right of Mankind.
                            in others (juridical duties
                            towards others.)
 
 
                       III. The End of Humanity.
II. Ethical   Oneself       in our person (eithical duties
     Duties     to or       towards oneself)                 Imperfect
               Others                                             Duty
                        IV. The End of Mankind.
                            in others (ethical duties
                            towards others.)

   II. Division of the Metaphysic of Morals According to Relations of

                                      Obligation.

 

 

              As the subjects between whom a relation of right and duty is

apprehended — whether it actually exists or not — admit of being conceived

in various juridical relations to each other, another division may be proposed

from this point of view, as follows:

Division Possible According to the Subjective Relation of Those who Bind

      Under Obligations, and Those who are Bound Under Obligations.

 

              The juridical relation of man to beings who have neither right nor

duty: Vacat. There is no such relation, for such beings are irrational, and they

neither put us under obligation, nor can we be put under obligation by them.

              The juridical relation of man to beings who have both rights and

duties: Adest. There is such a relation, for it is the relation of men to men.

              The juridical relation of man to beings who have only duties and no

rights: Vacat. There is no such relation, for such beings would be men

without juridical personality, as slaves of bondsmen.

              The juridical relation of man to a being who has only rights and no

duties (God): Vacat. There is no such relation in mere philosophy, because

such a being is not an object of possible experience.

              A real relation between right and duty is therefore found, in this

scheme, only in No. 2. The reason why such is not likewise found in No. 4 is

because it would constitute a transcendent duty, that is, one to which no

corresponding subject can be given that is external and capable of imposing

obligation. Consequently the relation from the theoretical point of view is

here merely ideal; that is, it is a relation to an object of thought which we

form for ourselves. But the conception of this object is not entirely empty. On

the contrary, it is a fruitful conception in relation to ourselves and the maxims

of our inner morality, and therefore in relation to practice generally. And it is

in this bearing that all the duty involved and practicable for us in such a

merely ideal relation lies.Division Possible According to the Subjective Relation of Those who Bind

      Under Obligations, and Those who are Bound Under Obligations.

 

              The juridical relation of man to beings who have neither right nor

duty: Vacat. There is no such relation, for such beings are irrational, and they

neither put us under obligation, nor can we be put under obligation by them.

              The juridical relation of man to beings who have both rights and

duties: Adest. There is such a relation, for it is the relation of men to men.

              The juridical relation of man to beings who have only duties and no

rights: Vacat. There is no such relation, for such beings would be men

without juridical personality, as slaves of bondsmen.

              The juridical relation of man to a being who has only rights and no

duties (God): Vacat. There is no such relation in mere philosophy, because

such a being is not an object of possible experience.

              A real relation between right and duty is therefore found, in this

scheme, only in No. 2. The reason why such is not likewise found in No. 4 is

because it would constitute a transcendent duty, that is, one to which no

corresponding subject can be given that is external and capable of imposing

obligation. Consequently the relation from the theoretical point of view is

here merely ideal; that is, it is a relation to an object of thought which we

form for ourselves. But the conception of this object is not entirely empty. On

the contrary, it is a fruitful conception in relation to ourselves and the maxims

of our inner morality, and therefore in relation to practice generally. And it is

in this bearing that all the duty involved and practicable for us in such a

merely ideal relation lies.    III. Division of the Metaphysic of Morals as a System of Duties

                                      Generally.

 

 

              According to the constituent principles and the method of the

system.

I. Principles    I. Duties of Right        I. Private Right.
                                             II. Public Right
 
                  II. Duties of Virtue, etc.
                      And so on, including all that
                      refers not only to the
                      materials, but also to the
                      architectonic form of a
                      scientific system of morals,
                      when the metaphysical
                      investigation of the elements
                      has completely traced out the
                      universal principles constituting
                      the whole.
 
  II. Method       I. Didactics
                  II. Ascetics

         General Introduction to the Metaphysic of Morals

 

 

I. The Relation of the Faculties of the Human Mind to the Moral Laws.

 

 

              The active faculty of the human mind, as the faculty of desire in its

widest sense, is the power which man has, through his mental

representations, of becoming the cause of objects corresponding to these

representations. The capacity of a being to act in conformity with his own

representations is what constitutes the life of such a being.

              It is to be observed, first, that with desire or aversion there is always

connected pleasure or pain, the susceptibility for which is called feeling. But

the converse does not always hold; for there may be a pleasure connected, not

with the desire of an object, but with a mere mental representation, it being

indifferent whether an object corresponding to the representation exist or not.

And second, the pleasure or pain connected with the object of desire does not

always precede the activity of desire; nor can it be regarded in every case as

the cause, but it may as well be the effect of that activity. The capacity of

experiencing pleasure or pain on the occasion of a mental representation is

called "feeling," because pleasure and pain contain only what is subjective in

the relations of our mental activity. They do not involve any relation to an

object that could possibly furnish a knowledge of it as such; they cannot even

give us a knowledge of our own mental state. For even sensations,*

considered apart from the qualities which attach to them on account of the

modifications of the subject — as, for instance, in reference to red, sweet, and

such like — are referred as constituent elements of knowledge to objects,

whereas pleasure or pain felt in connection with what is red or sweet express

absolutely nothing that is in the object, but merely a relation to the subject.

And for the reason just stated, pleasure and pain considered in themselves

cannot be more precisely defined. All that can be further done with regard to

them is merely to point out what consequences they may have in certain

relations, in order to make the knowledge of them available practically.

              * The sensibility as the faculty of sense may be defined by reference

to the subjective nature of our representations generally. It is theunderstanding that fir refers the subjective representations to an object; it

alone thinks anything by means of these representations. Now, the subjective

nature of our representations might be of such a kind that they could be

related to objects so as to furnish knowledge of them, either in regard to their

form or matter — in the former relation by pure perception, in the latter by

sensation proper. In this case, the sense-faculty, as the capacity for receiving

objective representations, would be properly called sense perception. But

mere mental representation from its subjective nature cannot, in fact, become

a constituent of objective knowledge, because it contains merely the relation

of the representations to the subject, and includes nothing that can be used for

attaining a knowledge of the object. In this case, then, this receptivity of the

mind for subjective representations is called feeling. It includes the effect of

the representations, whether sensible or intellectual, upon the subject; and it

belongs to the sensibility, although the representation itself may belong to the

understanding or the reason.

              The pleasure which is necessarily connected with the activity of

desire, when the representation of the object desired affects the capacity of

feeling, may be called practical pleasure. And this designation is applicable

whether the pleasure is the cause or the effect of the desire. On the other

hand, that pleasure which is not necessarily connected with the desire of an

object, and which, therefore, is not a pleasure in the existence of the object,

but is merely attached to a mental representation alone, may be called

inactive complacency, or mere contemplative pleasure. The feeling of this

latter kind of pleasure is what is called taste. Hence, in a system of practical

philosophy, the contemplative pleasure of taste will not be discussed as an

essential constituent conception, but need only be referred to incidentally or

episodically. But as regards practical pleasure, it is otherwise. For the

determination of the activity of the faculty of desire or appetency, which is

necessarily preceded by this pleasure as its cause, is what properly constitutes

desire in the strict sense of the term. Habitual desire, again, constitutes

inclination; and the connection of pleasure with the activity of desire, in so

far as this connection is judged by the understanding to be valid according to

a general rule holding good at least for the individual, is what is called

interest. Hence, in such a case, the practical pleasure is an interest of the

inclination of the individual. On the other hand, if the pleasure can only

follow a preceding determination of the faculty of desire, it is an intellectual

pleasure, and the interest in the object must be called a rational interest; forwere the interest sensuous, and not based only upon pure principles of reason,

sensation would necessarily be conjoined with the pleasure, and would thus

determine the activity of the desire. Where an entirely pure interest of reason

must be assumed, it is not legitimate to introduce into it an interest of

inclination surreptitiously. However, in order to conform so far with the

common phraseology, we may allow the application of the term "inclination"

even to that which can only be the object of an "intellectual" pleasure in the

sense of a habitual desire arising from a pure interest of reason. But such

inclination would have to be viewed, not as the cause, but as the effect of the

rational interest; and we might call it the non-sensuous or rational inclination

(propensio intellectualis). Further, concupiscence is to be distinguished from

the activity of desire itself, as a stimulus or incitement to its determination. It

is always a sensuous state of the mind, which does not itself attain to the

definiteness of an act of the power of desire.

              The activity of the faculty of desire may proceed in accordance with

conceptions; and in so far as the principle thus determining it to action is

found in the mind, and not in its object it constitutes a power acting or not

acting according to liking. In so far as the activity is accompanied with the

consciousness of the power of the action to produce the object, it forms an act

of choice; if this consciousness is not conjoined with it, the activity is called a

wish. The faculty of desire, in so far as its inner principle of determination as

the ground of its liking or predilection lies in the reason of the subject,

constitutes the will. The will is therefore the faculty of active desire or

appetency, viewed not so much in relation to the action — which is the

relation of the act of choice — as rather in relation to the principle that

determines the power of choice to the action. It has, in itself, properly no

special principle of determination, but in so far as it may determine the

voluntary act of choice, it is the practical reason itself.

              Under the will, taken generally, may be included the volitional act of

choice, and also the mere act of wish, in so far as reason may determine the

faculty of desire in its activity. The act of choice that can be determined by

pure reason constitutes the act of free-will. That act which is determinable

only by inclination as a sensuous impulse or stimulus would be irrational

brute choice (arbitrium brutum). The human act of choice, however, as

human, is in fact affected by such impulses or stimuli, but is not determined

by them; and it is, therefore, not pure in itself when taken apart from theacquired habit of determination by reason. But it may be determined to action

by the pure will. The freedom of the act of volitional choice is its

independence of being determined by sensuous impulses or stimuli. This

forms the negative conception of the free-will. The positive conception of

freedom is given by the fact that the will is the capability of pure reason to be

practical of itself. But this is not possible otherwise than by the maxim of

every action being subjected to the condition of being practicable as a

universal law. Applied as pure reason to the act of choice, and considered

apart from its objects, it may be regarded as the faculty of principles; and, in

this connection, it is the source of practical principles. Hence it is to be

viewed as a law-giving faculty. But as the material upon which to construct a

law is not furnished to it, it can only make the form of the form of the maxim

of the act of will, in so far as it is available as a universal law, the supreme

law and determining principle of the will. And as the maxims, or rules of

human action derived from subjective causes, do not of themselves

necessarily agree with those that are objective and universal, reason can only

prescribe this supreme law as an absolute imperative of prohibition or

command.

              The laws of freedom, as distinguished from the laws of nature, are

moral laws. So far as they refer only to external actions and their lawfulness,

they are called juridical; but if they also require that, as laws, they shall

themselves be the determining principles of our actions, they are ethical. The

agreement of an action with juridical laws is its legality; the agreement of an

action with ethical laws is its morality. The freedom to which the former laws

refer, can only be freedom in external practice; but the freedom to which the

latter laws refer is freedom in the internal as well as the external exercise of

the activity of the will in so far as it is determined by laws of reason. So, in

theoretical philosophy, it is said that only the objects of the external senses

are in space, but all the objects both of internal and external sense are in time;

because the representations of both, as being representations, so far belong all

to the internal sense. In like manner, whether freedom is viewed in reference

to the external or the internal action of the will, its laws, as pure practical

laws of reason for the free activity of the will generally, must at the same

time be inner principles for its determination, although they may not always

be considered in this relation.          II. The Idea and Necessity of a Metaphysic of Morals.

 

 

              It has been shown in The Metaphysical Principles of the Science of

Nature that there must be principles a priori for the natural science that has to

deal with the objects of the external senses. And it was further shown that it

is possible, and even necessary, to formulate a system of these principles

under the name of a "metaphysical science of nature," as a preliminary to

experimental physics regarded as natural science applied to particular objects

of experience. But this latter science, if care be taken to keep its

generalizations free from error, may accept many propositions as universal on

the evidence of experience, although if the term "universal" be taken in its

strict sense, these would necessarily have to be deduced by the metaphysical

science from principles a priori. Thus Newton accepted the principle of the

equality of action and reaction as established by experience, and yet he

extended it as a universal law over the whole of material nature. The chemists

go even farther, grounding their most general laws regarding the combination

and decomposition of the materials of bodies wholly upon experience; and

yet they trust so completely to the universality and necessity of those laws

that they have no anxiety as to any error being found in propositions founded

upon experiments conducted in accordance with them.

              But it is otherwise with moral laws. These, in contradistinction to

natural laws, are only valid as laws, in so far as they can be rationally

established a priori and comprehended as necessary. In fact, conceptions and

judgements regarding ourselves and our conduct have no moral significance,

if they contain only what may be learned from experience; and when any one

is, so to speak, misled into making a moral principle out of anything derived

from this latter source, he is already in danger of falling into the coarsest and

most fatal errors.

              If the philosophy of morals were nothing more than a theory of

happiness (eudaemonism), it would be absurd to search after principles a

priori as a foundation for it. For however plausible it may sound to say that

reason, even prior to experience, can comprehend by what means we may

attain to a lasting enjoyment of the real pleasures of life, yet all that is taughton this subject a priori is either tautological, or is assumed wholly without

foundation. It is only experience that can show what will bring us enjoyment.

The natural impulses directed towards nourishment, the sexual instinct, or the

tendency to rest and motion, as well as the higher desires of honour, the

acquisition of knowledge, and such like, as developed with our natural

capacities, are alone capable of showing in what those enjoyments are to be

found. And, further, the knowledge thus acquired is available for each

individual merely in his own way; and it is only thus he can learn the means

by which be has to seek those enjoyments. All specious rationalizing a priori,

in this connection, is nothing at bottom but carrying facts of experience up to

generalizations by induction (secundum principia generalia non universalia);

and the generality thus attained is still so limited that numberless exceptions

must be allowed to every individual in order that he may adapt the choice of

his mode of life to his own Particular inclinations and his capacity for

pleasure. And, after all, the individual has really to acquire his prudence at

the cost of his own suffering or that of his neighbors the form

              But it is quite otherwise with the principles of morality. They lay

down commands for every one without regard to his particular inclinations,

and merely because and so far as he is free, and has a practical reason.

Instruction in the laws of morality is not drawn from observation of oneself

or of our animal nature, nor from perception of the course of the world in

regard to what happens, or how men act.* But reason commands how we

ought to act, even although no example of such action were to be found; nor

does reason give any regard to the advantage which may accrue to us by so

acting, and which experience could alone actually show. For, although reason

allows us to seek what is for our advantage in every possible way, and

although, founding upon the evidence of experience, it may further promise

that greater advantages will probably follow on the average from the

observance of her commands than from their transgression, especially if

prudence guides the conduct, yet the authority of her precepts as commands

does not rest on such considerations. They are used by reason only as

counsels, and by way of a counterpoise against seductions to an opposite

course, when adjusting beforehand the equilibrium of a partial balance in the

sphere of practical judgement, in order thereby to secure the decision of this

judgement, according to the due weight of the a priori principles of a pure

practical reason.              * This holds notwithstanding the fact that the term morals," in Latin

mores, and in German sitten, signifies originally only manners or mode of

life.

              Metaphysics designates any system of knowledge a priori that

consists of pure conceptions. Accordingly, a practical philosophy not having

nature, but the freedom of the will for its object, will presuppose and require

a metaphysic of morals. It is even a duty to have such a metaphysic; and

every man does, indeed, possess it in himself, although commonly but in an

obscure way. For how could any one believe that he has a source of universal

law in himself, without principles a priori? And just as in a metaphysics of

nature there must be principles regulating the application of the universal

supreme principles of nature to objects of experience, so there cannot but be

such principles in the metaphysic of morals; and we will often have to deal

objectively with the particular nature of man as known only by experience, in

order to show in it the consequences of these universal moral principles. But

this mode of dealing with these principles in their particular applications will

in no way detract from their rational purity, or throw doubt on their a priori

origin. In other words, this amounts to saying that a metaphysic of morals

cannot be founded on anthropology as the empirical science of man, but may

be applied to it.

              The counterpart of a metaphysic of morals, and the other member of

the division of practical philosophy, would be a moral anthropology, as the

empirical science of the moral nature of man. This science would contain

only the subjective conditions that hinder or favor the realization in practice

of the universal moral laws in human nature, with the means of propagating,

spreading, and strengthening the moral principles — as by the education of

the young and the instruction of the people — and all other such doctrines

and precepts founded upon experience and indispensable in themselves,

although they must neither precede the metaphysical investigation of the

principles of reason, nor be mixed up with it. For, by doing so, there would

be a great danger of laying down false, or at least very flexible moral laws,

which would hold forth as unattainable what is not attached only because the

law has not been comprehended and presented in its purity, in which also its

strength consists. Or, otherwise, spurious and mixed motives might be

adopted instead of what is dutiful and good in itself; and these would furnish

no certain moral principles either for the guidance of the judgement or for thediscipline of the heart in the practice of duty. It is only by pure reason,

therefore, that duty can and must be prescribed.

              The higher division of philosophy, under which the division just

mentioned stands, is into theoretical philosophy and practical philosophy.

Practical philosophy is just moral philosophy in its widest sense, as has been

explained elsewhere.* All that is practicable and possible, according to

natural laws, is the special subject of the activity of art, and its precepts and

rules entirely depend on the theory of nature. It is only what is practicable

according to laws of freedom that can have principles independent of theory,

for there is no theory in relation to what passes beyond the determinations of

nature. Philosophy therefore cannot embrace under its practical division a

technical theory, but only a morally practical doctrine. But if the dexterity of

the will in acting according to laws of freedom, in contradistinction to nature,

were to be also called an art, it would necessarily indicate an art which would

make a system of freedom possible like the system of nature. This would

truly be a Divine art, if we were in a position by means of it to realize

completely what reason prescribes to us, and to put the idea into practice.

              * In the Critique of Judgement (1790).                III. The Division of a Metaphysic of Morals.

 

 

              All legislation, whether relating to internal or external action, and

whether prescribed a priori by mere reason or laid down by the will of

another, involves two elements: First, a law which represents the action that

ought to happen as necessary objectively, thus making the action a duty;

second, a motive which connects the principle determining the will to this

action with the mental representation of the law subjectively, so that the law

makes duty the motive of the action. By the first element, the action is

represented as a duty, in accordance with the mere theoretical knowledge of

the possibility of determining the activity of the will by practical rules. By the

second element, the obligation so to act is connected in the subject with a

determining principle of the will as such. All legislation, therefore, may be

differentiated by reference to its motive-principle.* The legislation which

makes an action a duty, and this duty at the same time a motive, is ethical.

That legislation which does not include the motive-principle in the law, and

consequently admits another motive than the idea of duty itself, is juridical.

In respect of the latter, it is evident that the motives distinct from the idea of

duty, to which it may refer, must be drawn from the subjective (pathological)

influences of inclination and of aversion, determining the voluntary activity,

and especially from the latter; because it is a legislation which has to be

compulsory, and not merely a mode of attracting or persuading. The

agreement or non-agreement of an action with the law, without reference to

its motive, is its legality; and that character of the action in which the idea of

duty arising from the law at the same time forms the motive of the action, is

its morality.

              * This ground of division will apply, although the action which it

makes a duty may coincide with another action that may be otherwise looked

at from another point of view. For instance, actions may in all cases be

classified as external.

              Duties specially in accord with a juridical legislation can only be

external duties. For this mode of legislation does not require that the idea of

the duty, which is internal, shall be of itself the determining principle of theact of will; and as it requires a motive suitable to the nature of its laws, it can

only connect what is external with the law. Ethical legislation, on the other

hand, makes internal actions also duties, but not to the exclusion of the

external, for it embraces everything which is of the nature of duty. And just

because just because ethical legislation includes within its law the internal

motive of the action as contained in the idea of duty, it involves a

characteristic which cannot at all enter into the legislation that is external.

Hence, ethical legislation cannot as such be external, not even when

proceeding from a Divine will, although it may receive duties which rest on

an external legislation as duties, into the position of motives, within its own

legislation.

              From what has been said, it is evident that all duties, merely because

they are duties, belong to ethics; and yet the legislation upon which they are

founded is not on that account in all cases contained in ethics. On the

contrary, the law of many of them lies outside of ethics. Thus ethics

commands that I must fulfil a promise entered into by contract, although the

other party might not be able to compel me to do so. It adopts the law (pacta

sunt servanda) and the duty corresponding to it, from jurisprudence or the

science of right, by which they are established. It is not in ethics, therefore,

but in jurisprudence, that the principle of the legislation lies, that "promises

made and accepted must be kept." Accordingly, ethics specially teaches that

if the motive-principle of external compulsion which juridical legislation

connects with a duty is even let go, the idea of duty alone is sufficient of

itself as a motive. For were it not so, and were the legislation itself not

juridical, and consequently the duty arising from it not specially a duty of

right as distinguished from a duty of virtue, then fidelity in the performance

of acts, to which the individual may be bound by the terms of a contract,

would have to be classified with acts of benevolence and the obligation that

underlies them, which cannot be correct. To keep one's promise is not

properly a duty of virtue, but a duty of right, and the performance of it can be

enforced by external compulsion. But to keep one's promise, even when no

compulsion can be applied to enforce it, is, at the same time, a virtuous

action, and a proof of virtue. jurisprudence as the science of right, and ethics

as the science of virtue, are therefore distinguished not so much by their

different duties, as rather by the difference Of the legislation which connects

the one or the other kind of motive with their laws.              Ethical legislation is that which cannot be external, although the

duties it prescribes may be external as well as internal. Juridical legislation is

that which may also be external. Thus it is an external duty to keep a promise

entered into by contract; but the injunction to do this merely because it is a

duty, without regard to any other motive, belongs exclusively to the internal

legislation. It does not belong thus to the ethical sphere as being a particular

kind of duty or a particular mode of action to which we are bound — for it is

an external duty in ethics as well as in jurisprudence — but it is because the

legislation in the case referred to is internal, and cannot have an external

lawgiver, that the obligation is reckoned as belonging to ethics. For the same

reason, the duties of benevolence, although they are external duties as

obligations to external actions, are, in like manner, reckoned as belonging to

ethics, because they can only be enjoined by legislation that is internal. Ethics

has no doubt its own peculiar duties — such as those towards oneself — but

it has also duties in common with jurisprudence, only not under the same

mode of obligation. In short, the peculiarity of ethical legislation is to enjoin

the performance of certain actions merely because they are duties, and to

make the principle of duty itself — whatever be its source or occasion — the

sole sufficing motive of the activity of the will. Thus, then, there are many

ethical duties that are directly such; and the inner legislation also makes the

others — all and each of them — indirectly ethical.

              The deduction of the division of a system is the proof of its

completeness as well as of its continuity, so that there may be a logical

transition from the general conception divided to the members of the

division, and through the whole series of the subdivisions without any break

or leap in the arrangement (divisio per saltum). Such a division is one of the

most difficult conditions for the architect of a system to fulfil. There is even

some doubt as to what is the highest conception that is primarily divided into

right and wrong (aut fas aut nefas). It is assuredly the conception of the

activity of the free-will in general. In like manner, the expounders of

ontology start from something and nothing, without perceiving that these are

already members of a division for which the highest divided conception is

awanting, and which can be no other than that of thing in general.      IV. General Preliminary Conceptions Defined and Explained.

 

 

                          (Philosophia practica universalis).

 

 

              The conception of freedom is a conception of pure reason. It is

therefore transcendent in so far as regards theoretical philosophy; for it is a

conception for which no corresponding instance or example can be found or

supplied in any possible experience. Accordingly freedom is not presented as

an object of any theoretical knowledge that is possible for us. It is in no

respect a constitutive, but only a regulative conception; and it can be accepted

by the speculative reason as at most a merely negative principle. In the

practical sphere of reason, however, the reality of freedom may be

demonstrated by certain practical principles which, as laws, prove a causality

of the pure reason in the process of determining the activity of the will that is

independent of all empirical and sensible conditions. And thus there is

established the fact of a pure will existing in us as the source of all moral

conceptions and laws.

              On this positive conception of freedom in the practical relation

certain unconditional practical laws are founded, and they specially constitute

moral laws. In relation to us as human beings, with an activity of will

modified by sensible influences so as not to be conformable to the pure will,

but as often contrary to it, these laws appear as imperatives commanding or

prohibiting certain actions; and as such they are categorical or unconditional

imperatives. Their categorical and unconditional character distinguishes them

from the technical imperatives which express the prescriptions of art, and

which always command only conditionally. According to these categorical

imperatives, certain actions are allowed or disallowed as being morally

possible or impossible; and certain of them or their opposites are morally

necessary and obligatory. Hence, in reference to such actions, there arises the

conception of a duty whose observance or transgression is accompanied with

a pleasure or pain of a peculiar kind, known as moral feeling. We do not,

however, take the moral feelings or sentiments into account in considering

the practical laws of reason. For they do not form the foundation or principleof practical laws of reason, but only the subjective effects that arise in the

mind on the occasion of our voluntary activity being determined by these

laws. And while they neither add to nor take from the objective validity or

influence of the moral laws in the judgement of reason, such sentiments may

vary according to the differences of the individuals who experience them.

              The following conceptions are common to jurisprudence and ethics

as the two main divisions of the metaphysic of morals.

              Obligation is the necessity of a free action when viewed in relation

to a categorical imperative of reason. An imperative is a practical rule by

which an action, otherwise contingent in itself, is made necessary. It is

distinguished from a practical law in that such a law, while likewise

representing the action as necessary, does not consider whether it is internally

necessary as involved in the nature of the agent — say as a holy being — or

is contingent to him, as in the case of man as we find him; for where the first

condition holds good, there is in fact no imperative. Hence an imperative is a

rule which not only represents but makes a subjectively contingent action

necessary; and it, accordingly, represents the subject as being (morally)

necessitated to act in accordance with this rule. A categorical or

unconditional imperative is one which does not represent the action in any

way immediately through the conception of an end that is to be attained by it;

but it presents the action to the mind as objectively necessary by the mere

representation of its form as an action, and thus makes it necessary. Such

imperatives cannot be put forward by any other practical science than that

which prescribes obligations, and it is only the science of morals that does

this. All other imperatives are technical, and they are altogether conditional.

The ground of the possibility of categorical imperatives lies in the fact that

they refer to no determination of the activity of the will by which a purpose

might be assigned to it, but solely to its freedom.

              Every action is allowed (licitum) which is not contrary to obligation;

and this freedom not being limited by an opposing imperative, constitutes a

moral right as a warrant or title of action (facultas moralis). From this it is at

once evident what actions are disallowed or illicit (illicita).

              Duty is the designation of any action to which anyone is bound by an

obligation. It is therefore the subject-matter of all obligation. Duty as regards

the action concerned may be one and the same, and yet we may be bound to itin various ways.

              The categorical imperative, as expressing an obligation in respect to

certain actions, is a morally practical law. But because obligation involves

not merely practical necessity expressed in a law as such, but also actual

necessitation, the categorical imperative is a law either of command or

prohibition, according as the doing or not doing of an action is represented as

a duty. An action which is neither commanded nor forbidden is merely

allowed, because there is no law restricting freedom, nor any duty in respect

of it. Such an action is said to be morally indifferent (indifferens, adiaphoron,

res merae facultatis). It may be asked whether there are such morally

indifferent actions; and if there are, whether in addition to the preceptive and

prohibitive law (lex praeceptiva et prohibitiva, lex mandati et vetiti), there is

also required a permissive law (lex permissiva), in order that one may be free

in such relations to act, or to forbear from acting, at his pleasure? If it were

so, the moral right in question would not, in all cases, refer to actions that are

indifferent in themselves (adiaphora); for no special law would be required to

establish such a right, considered according to moral laws.

              An action is called an act — or moral deed — in so far as it is

subject to laws of obligation, and consequently in so far as the subject of it is

regarded with reference to the freedom of his choice in the exercise of his

will. The agent — as the actor or doer of the deed — is regarded as, through

the act, the author of its effect; and this effect, along with the action itself,

may be imputed to him, if be previously knew the law in virtue of which an

obligation rested upon him.

              A person is a subject who is capable of having his actions imputed to

him. Moral personality is, therefore, nothing but the freedom of a rational

being under moral laws; and it is to be distinguished from psychological

freedom as the mere faculty by which we become conscious of ourselves in

different states of the identity of our existence. Hence it follows that a person

is properly subject to no other laws than those he lays down for himself,

either alone or in conjunction with others.

              A thing is what is incapable of being the subject of imputation.

Every object of the free activity of the will, which is itself void of freedom, is

therefore called a thing (res corporealis).

              Right or wrong applies, as a general quality, to an act (rectum autminus rectum), in so far as it is in accordance with duty or contrary to duty

(factum licitum aut illicitum), no matter what may be the subject or origin of

the duty itself. An act that is contrary to duty is called a transgression

(reatus).

              An unintentional transgression of a duty, which is, nevertheless,

imputable to a person, is called a mere fault (culpa). An intentional

transgression — that is, an act accompanied with the consciousness that it is a

transgression — constitutes a crime (dolus).

              Whatever is juridically in accordance with external laws is said to be

just (jus, instum); and whatever is not juridically in accordance with external

laws is unjust (unjustum).

              A collision of duties or obligations (collisio officiorum s.

obligationum) would be the result of such a relation between them that the

one would annul the other, in whole or in part. Duty and obligation, however,

are conceptions which express the objective practical necessity of certain

actions, and two opposite rules cannot be objective and necessary at the same

time; for if it is a duty to act according to one of them, it is not only no duty

to act according to an opposite rule, but to do so would even be contrary to

duty. Hence a collision of duties and obligations is entirely inconceivable

(obligationes non colliduntur). There may, however, be two grounds of

obligation (rationes obligandi), connected with an individual under a rule

prescribed for himself, and yet neither the one nor the other may be sufficient

to constitute an actual obligation (rationes obligandi non obligantes); and in

that case the one of them is not a duty. If two such grounds of obligation are

actually in collision with each other, practical philosophy does not say that

the stronger obligation is to keep the upper hand (fortior obligatio vincit), but

that the stronger ground of obligation is to maintain its place (fortior

obligandi ratio vincit).

              Obligatory Laws for which an external legislation is possible are

called generally external laws. Those external laws, the obligatoriness of

which can be recognised by reason a priori even without an external

legislation, are called natural laws. Those laws, again, which are not

obligatory without actual external legislation, are called positive laws. An

external legislation, containing pure natural laws, is therefore conceivable;

but in that case a previous natural law must be presupposed to establish theauthority of the lawgiver by the right to subject others to obligation through

his own act of will.

              The principle which makes a certain action a duty is a practical law.

The rule of the agent or actor, which he forms as a principle for himself on

subjective grounds, is called his maxim. Hence, even when the law is one and

invariable, the maxims of the agent may yet be very different.

              The categorical imperative only expresses generally what constitutes

obligation. It may be rendered by the following formula: "Act according to a

maxim which can be adopted at the same time as a universal law." Actions

must therefore be considered, in the first place, according to their subjective

principle; but whether this principle is also valid objectively can only be

known by the criterion of the categorical imperative. For reason brings the

principle or maxim of any action to the test, by calling upon the agent to

think of himself in connection with it as at the same time laying down a

universal law, and to consider whether his action is so qualified as to be fit

for entering into such a universal legislation.

              The simplicity of this law, in comparison with the great and

manifold consequences which may be drawn from it, as well as its

commanding authority and supremacy without the accompaniment of any

visible motive or sanction, must certainly at first appear very surprising. And

we may well wonder at the power of our reason to determine the activity of

the will by the mere idea of the qualification of a maxim for the universality

of a practical law, especially when we are taught thereby that this practical

moral law first reveals a property of the will which the speculative reason

would never have come upon either by principles a priori, or from any

experience whatever; and even if it had ascertained the fact, it could never

have theoretically established its possibility. This practical law, however, not

only discovers the fact of that property of the will, which is freedom, but

irrefutably establishes it. Hence it will be less surprising to find that the moral

laws are undemonstrable, and yet apodeictic, like the mathematical

postulates; and that they, at the same time, open up before us a whole field of

practical knowledge, from which reason, on its theoretical side, must find

itself entirely excluded with its speculative idea of freedom and all such ideas

of the supersensible generally.

              The conformity of an action to the law of duty constitutes itslegality; the conformity of the maxim of the action with the law constitutes its

morality. A maxim is thus a subjective principle of action, which the

individual makes a rule for himself as to how in fact he will act.

              On the other hand, the principle of duty is what reason absolutely,

and therefore objectively and universally, lays down in the form of a

command to the individual, as to how he ought to act.

              The supreme principle of the science of morals accordingly is this:

"Act according to a maxim which can likewise be valid as a universal law."

Every maxim which is not qualified according to this condition is contrary to

Morality.

              Laws arise from the will, viewed generally as practical reason;

maxims spring from the activity of the will in the process of choice. The

latter in man is what constitutes free-will. The will which refers to nothing

else than mere law can neither be called free nor not free, because it does not

relate to actions immediately, but to the giving of a law for the maxim of

actions; it is therefore the practical reason itself. Hence as a faculty, it is

absolutely necessary in itself, and is not subject to any external necessitation.

It is, therefore, only the act of choice in the voluntary process that can be

called free.

              The freedom of the act of will, however, is not to be defined as a

liberty of indifference (libertas indifferentae), that, is, as a capacity of

choosing to act for or against the law. The voluntary process, indeed, viewed

as a phenomenal appearance, gives many examples of this choosing in

experience; and some have accordingly so defined the free-will. For freedom,

as it is first made knowable by the moral law, is known only as a negative

property in us, as constituted by the fact of not being necessitated to act by

sensible principles of determination. Regarded as a noumenal reality,

however, in reference to man as a pure rational intelligence, the act of the will

cannot be at all theoretically exhibited; nor can it therefore be explained how

this power can act necessitatingly in relation to the sensible activity in the

process of choice, or consequently in what the positive quality of freedom

consists. Only thus much we can see into and comprehend, that although

man, as a being belonging to the world of sense, exhibits — as experience

shows — a capacity of choosing not only conformably to the law but also

contrary to it, his freedom as a rational being belonging to the world ofintelligence cannot be defined by reference merely to sensible appearances.

For sensible phenomena cannot make a super-sensible object — such as free-

will is — intelligible; nor can freedom ever be placed in the mere fact that the

rational subject can make a choice in conflict with his own law-giving reason,

although experience may prove that it happens often enough, notwithstanding

our inability to conceive how it is possible. For it is one thing to admit a

proposition as based on experience, and another thing to make it the defining

principle and the universal differentiating mark of the act of free-will, in its

distinction from the arbitrium brutum s. servum; because the empirical

proposition does not assert that any particular characteristic necessarily

belongs to the conception in question, but this is requisite in the process of

definition. Freedom in relation to the internal legislation of reason can alone

be properly called a power; the possibility of diverging from the law thus

given is an incapacity or want of power. How then can the former be defined

by the latter? It could only be by a definition which would add to the practical

conception of the free-will, its exercise as shown by experience; but this

would be a hybrid definition which would exhibit the conception in a false

light.

              A morally practical law is a proposition which contains a categorical

imperative or command. He who commands by a law (imperans) is the

lawgiver or legislator. He is the author of the obligation that accompanies the

law, but he is not always the author of the law itself. In the latter case, the law

would be positive, contingent, and arbitrary. The law which is imposed upon

us a priori and unconditionally by our own reason may also be expressed as

proceeding from the will of a supreme lawgiver or the Divine will. Such a

will as supreme can consequently have only rights and not duties; and it only

indicates the idea of a moral being whose will is law for all, without

conceiving of him as the author of that will.

              Imputation, in the moral sense, is the judgement by which anyone is

declared to be the author or free cause of an action which is then regarded as

his moral fact or deed, and is subjected to law. When the judgement likewise

lays down the juridical consequences of the deed, it is judicial or valid

(imputatio judiciaria s. valida); otherwise it would be only adjudicative or

declaratory (imputatio dijudicatoria). That person — individual or collective

— who is invested with the right to impute actions judicially, is called a

judge or a court (judex s. forum).              When any one does, in conformity with duty, more than he can be

compelled to do by the law, it is said to be meritorious (meritum). What is

done only in exact conformity with the law, is what is due (debitum). And

when less is done than can be demanded to be done by the law, the result is

moral demerit (demeritum) or culpability.

              The juridical effect or consequence of a culpable act of demerit is

punishment (paena); that of a meritorious act is reward (praemium), assuming

that this reward was promised in the law and that it formed the motive of the

action. The coincidence or exact conformity of conduct to what is due has no

juridical effect. Benevolent remuneration (remuneratio s. repensio benefica)

has no place in juridical relations.

              The good or bad consequences arising from the performance of an

obligated action — as also the consequences arising from failing to perform a

meritorious action — cannot be imputed to the agent (modus imputation is

tollens). The good consequences of a meritorious actionas also the bad

consequences of a wrongful action — may be imputed to the agent (modus

imputation is poneus).

              The degree of the imputability of actions is to be reckoned according

to the magnitude of the hindrances or obstacles which it has been necessary

for them to overcome. The greater the natural hindrances in the sphere of

sense, and the less the moral hindrance of duty, so much the more is a good

deed imputed as meritorious. This may be seen by considering such examples

as rescuing a man who is an entire stranger from great distress, and at very

considerable sacrifice. Conversely, the less the natural hindrance, and the

greater the hindrance on the ground of duty, so much the more is a

transgression imputable as culpable. Hence the state of mind of the agent or

doer of a deed makes a difference in imputing its consequences, according as

he did it in passion or performed it with coolness and deliberation.

 

 

 

       Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysic of

                                      Morals

                    translated by Thomas Kingsmill Abbott

             

 

                                     CONTENTS

 

PREFACE
FIRST SECTION
TRANSITION FROM THE COMMON RATIONAL KNOWLEDGE OF MORALITY TO THE PHILOSOPHICAL
SECOND SECTION
TRANSITION FROM POPULAR MORAL PHILOSOPHY TO THE METAPHYSIC OF MORALS
THIRD SECTION
TRANSITION FROM THE METAPHYSIC OF MORALS TO THE CRITIQUE OF PURE PRACTICAL REASON                                        Preface

 

 

              Ancient Greek philosophy was divided into three sciences: physics,

ethics, and logic. This division is perfectly suitable to the nature of the thing;

and the only improvement that can be made in it is to add the principle on

which it is based, so that we may both satisfy ourselves of its completeness,

and also be able to determine correctly the necessary subdivisions.

              All rational knowledge is either material or formal: the former

considers some object, the latter is concerned only with the form of the

understanding and of the reason itself, and with the universal laws of thought

in general without distinction of its objects. Formal philosophy is called

logic. Material philosophy, however, has to do with determinate objects and

the laws to which they are subject, is again twofold; for these laws are either

laws of nature or of freedom. The science of the former is physics, that of the

latter, ethics; they are also called natural philosophy and moral philosophy

respectively.

              Logic cannot have any empirical part; that is, a part in which the

universal and necessary laws of thought should rest on grounds taken from

experience; otherwise it would not be logic, i.e., a canon for the

understanding or the reason, valid for all thought, and capable of

demonstration. Natural and moral philosophy, on the contrary, can each have

their empirical part, since the former has to determine the laws of nature as an

object of experience; the latter the laws of the human will, so far as it is

affected by nature: the former, however, being laws according to which

everything does happen; the latter, laws according to which everything ought

to happen. Ethics, however, must also consider the conditions under which

what ought to happen frequently does not.

              We may call all philosophy empirical, so far as it is based on

grounds of experience: on the other band, that which delivers its doctrines

from a priori principles alone we may call pure philosophy. When the latter is

merely formal it is logic; if it is restricted to definite objects of the

understanding it is metaphysic.

              In this way there arises the idea of a twofold metaphysic — a

metaphysic of nature and a metaphysic of morals. Physics will thus have anempirical and also a rational part. It is the same with Ethics; but here the

empirical part might have the special name of practical anthropology, the

name morality being appropriated to the rational part.

              All trades, arts, and handiworks have gained by division of labour,

namely, when, instead of one man doing everything, each confines himself to

a certain kind of work distinct from others in the treatment it requires, so as

to be able to perform it with greater facility and in the greatest perfection.

Where the different kinds of work are not distinguished and divided, where

everyone is a jack-of-all-trades, there manufactures remain still in the greatest

barbarism. It might deserve to be considered whether pure philosophy in all

its parts does not require a man specially devoted to it, and whether it would

not be better for the whole business of science if those who, to please the

tastes of the public, are wont to blend the rational and empirical elements

together, mixed in all sorts of proportions unknown to themselves, and who

call themselves independent thinkers, giving the name of minute philosophers

to those who apply themselves to the rational part only — if these, I say, were

warned not to carry on two employments together which differ widely in the

treatment they demand, for each of which perhaps a special talent is required,

and the combination of which in one person only produces bunglers. But I

only ask here whether the nature of science does not require that we should

always carefully separate the empirical from the rational part, and prefix to

Physics proper (or empirical physics) a metaphysic of nature, and to practical

anthropology a metaphysic of morals, which must be carefully cleared of

everything empirical, so that we may know how much can be accomplished

by pure reason in both cases, and from what sources it draws this its a priori

teaching, and that whether the latter inquiry is conducted by all moralists

(whose name is legion), or only by some who feel a calling thereto.

              As my concern here is with moral philosophy, I limit the question

suggested to this: Whether it is not of the utmost necessity to construct a pure

thing which is only empirical and which belongs to anthropology? for that

such a philosophy must be possible is evident from the common idea of duty

and of the moral laws. Everyone must admit that if a law is to have moral

force, i.e., to be the basis of an obligation, it must carry with it absolute

necessity; that, for example, the precept, "Thou shalt not lie," is not valid for

men alone, as if other rational beings had no need to observe it; and so with

all the other moral laws properly so called; that, therefore, the basis ofobligation must not be sought in the nature of man, or in the circumstances in

the world in which he is placed, but a priori simply in the conception of pure

reason; and although any other precept which is founded on principles of

mere experience may be in certain respects universal, yet in as far as it rests

even in the least degree on an empirical basis, perhaps only as to a motive,

such a precept, while it may be a practical rule, can never be called a moral

law.

              Thus not only are moral laws with their principles essentially

distinguished from every other kind of practical knowledge in which there is

anything empirical, but all moral philosophy rests wholly on its pure part.

When applied to man, it does not borrow the least thing from the knowledge

of man himself (anthropology), but gives laws a priori to him as a rational

being. No doubt these laws require a judgement sharpened by experience, in

order on the one hand to distinguish in what cases they are applicable, and on

the other to procure for them access to the will of the man and effectual

influence on conduct; since man is acted on by so many inclinations that,

though capable of the idea of a practical pure reason, he is not so easily able

to make it effective in concreto in his life.

              A metaphysic of morals is therefore indispensably necessary, not

merely for speculative reasons, in order to investigate the sources of the

practical principles which are to be found a priori in our reason, but also

because morals themselves are liable to all sorts of corruption, as long as we

are without that clue and supreme canon by which to estimate them correctly.

For in order that an action should be morally good, it is not enough that it

conform to the moral law, but it must also be done for the sake of the law,

otherwise that conformity is only very contingent and uncertain; since a

principle which is not moral, although it may now and then produce actions

conformable to the law, will also often produce actions which contradict it.

Now it is only a pure philosophy that we can look for the moral law in its

purity and genuineness (and, in a practical matter, this is of the utmost

consequence): we must, therefore, begin with pure philosophy (metaphysic),

and without it there cannot be any moral philosophy at all. That which

mingles these pure principles with the empirical does not deserve the name of

philosophy (for what distinguishes philosophy from common rational

knowledge is that it treats in separate sciences what the latter only

comprehends confusedly); much less does it deserve that of moralphilosophy, since by this confusion it even spoils the purity of morals

themselves, and counteracts its own end.

              Let it not be thought, however, that what is here demanded is already

extant in the propaedeutic prefixed by the celebrated Wolf to his moral

philosophy, namely, his so-called general practical philosophy, and that,

therefore, we have not to strike into an entirely new field. just because it was

to be a general practical philosophy, it has not taken into consideration a will

of any particular kind — say one which should be determined solely from a

priori principles without any empirical motives, and which we might call a

pure will, but volition in general, with all the actions and conditions which

belong to it in this general signification. By this it is distinguished from a

metaphysic of morals, just as general logic, which treats of the acts and

canons of thought in general, is distinguished from transcendental

philosophy, which treats of the particular acts and canons of pure thought,

i.e., that whose cognitions are altogether a priori. For the metaphysic of

morals has to examine the idea and the principles of a possible pure will, and

not the acts and conditions of human volition generally, which for the most

part are drawn from psychology. It is true that moral laws and duty are

spoken of in the general moral philosophy (contrary indeed to all fitness). But

this is no objection, for in this respect also the authors of that science remain

true to their idea of it; they do not distinguish the motives which are

prescribed as such by reason alone altogether a priori, and which are properly

moral, from the empirical motives which the understanding raises to general

conceptions merely by comparison of experiences; but, without noticing the

difference of their sources, and looking on them all as homogeneous, they

consider only their greater or less amount. It is in this way they frame their

notion of obligation, which, though anything but moral, is all that can be

attained in a philosophy which passes no judgement at all on the origin of all

possible practical concepts, whether they are a priori, or only a posteriori.

              Intending to publish hereafter a metaphysic of morals, I issue in the

first instance these fundamental principles. Indeed there is properly no other

foundation for it than the critical examination of a pure practical Reason; just

as that of metaphysics is the critical examination of the pure speculative

reason, already published. But in the first place the former is not so

absolutely necessary as the latter, because in moral concerns human reason

can easily be brought to a high degree of correctness and completeness, evenin the commonest understanding, while on the contrary in its theoretic but

pure use it is wholly dialectical; and in the second place if the critique of a

pure practical reason is to be complete, it must be possible at the same time to

show its identity with the speculative reason in a common principle, for it can

ultimately be only one and the same reason which has to be distinguished

merely in its application. I could not, however, bring it to such completeness

here, without introducing considerations of a wholly different kind, which

would be perplexing to the reader. On this account I have adopted the title of

Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysic of Morals instead of that of a

Critical Examination of the pure practical reason.

              But in the third place, since a metaphysic of morals, in spite of the

discouraging title, is yet capable of being presented in popular form, and one

adapted to the common understanding, I find it useful to separate from it this

preliminary treatise on its fundamental principles, in order that I may not

hereafter have need to introduce these necessarily subtle discussions into a

book of a more simple character.

              The present treatise is, however, nothing more than the investigation

and establishment of the supreme principle of morality, and this alone

constitutes a study complete in itself and one which ought to be kept apart

from every other moral investigation. No doubt my conclusions on this

weighty question, which has hitherto been very unsatisfactorily examined,

would receive much light from the application of the same principle to the

whole system, and would be greatly confirmed by the adequacy which it

exhibits throughout; but I must forego this advantage, which indeed would be

after all more gratifying than useful, since the easy applicability of a principle

and its apparent adequacy give no very certain proof of its soundness, but

rather inspire a certain partiality, which prevents us from examining and

estimating it strictly in itself and without regard to consequences.

              I have adopted in this work the method which I think most suitable,

proceeding analytically from common knowledge to the determination of its

ultimate principle, and again descending synthetically from the examination

of this principle and its sources to the common knowledge in which we find it

employed. The division will, therefore, be as follows:

              First section . Transition from the common rational knowledge of

morality to the philosophical.              Second section . Transition from popular moral philosophy to the

metaphysic of morals.

              Third section . Final step from the metaphysic of morals to the

critique of the pure practical reason.

 

 

                                     First Section

 

 

  Transition from the Common Rational Knowledge of Morality to the

                                    Philosophical

 

 

              Nothing can possibly be conceived in the world, or even out of it,

which can be called good, without qualification, except a good will.

Intelligence, wit, judgement, and the other talents of the mind, however they

may be named, or courage, resolution, perseverance, as qualities of

temperament, are undoubtedly good and desirable in many respects; but these

gifts of nature may also become extremely bad and mischievous if the will

which is to make use of them, and which, therefore, constitutes what is called

character, is not good. It is the same with the gifts of fortune. Power, riches,

honour, even health, and the general well-being and contentment with one's

condition which is called happiness, inspire pride, and often presumption, if

there is not a good will to correct the influence of these on the mind, and with

this also to rectify the whole principle of acting and adapt it to its end. The

sight of a being who is not adorned with a single feature of a pure and good

will, enjoying unbroken prosperity, can never give pleasure to an impartial

rational spectator. Thus a good will appears to constitute the indispensable

condition even of being worthy of happiness.

              There are even some qualities which are of service to this good will

itself and may facilitate its action, yet which have no intrinsic unconditional

value, but always presuppose a good will, and this qualifies the esteem that

we justly have for them and does not permit us to regard them as absolutely

good. Moderation in the affections and passions, self-control, and calm

deliberation are not only good in many respects, but even seem to constitute

part of the intrinsic worth of the person; but they are far from deserving to be

called good without qualification, although they have been so unconditionally

praised by the ancients. For without the principles of a good will, they may

become extremely bad, and the coolness of a villain not only makes him far

more dangerous, but also directly makes him more abominable in our eyesthan he would have been without it.

              A good will is good not because of what it performs or effects, not

by its aptness for the attainment of some proposed end, but simply by virtue

of the volition; that is, it is good in itself, and considered by itself is to be

esteemed much higher than all that can be brought about by it in favour of

any inclination, nay even of the sum total of all inclinations. Even if it should

happen that, owing to special disfavour of fortune, or the niggardly provision

of a step-motherly nature, this will should wholly lack power to accomplish

its purpose, if with its greatest efforts it should yet achieve nothing, and there

should remain only the good will (not, to be sure, a mere wish, but the

summoning of all means in our power), then, like a jewel, it would still shine

by its own light, as a thing which has its whole value in itself. Its usefulness

or fruitfulness can neither add nor take away anything from this value. It

would be, as it were, only the setting to enable us to handle it the more

conveniently in common commerce, or to attract to it the attention of those

who are not yet connoisseurs, but not to recommend it to true connoisseurs,

or to determine its value.

              There is, however, something so strange in this idea of the absolute

value of the mere will, in which no account is taken of its utility, that

notwithstanding the thorough assent of even common reason to the idea, yet a

suspicion must arise that it may perhaps really be the product of mere high-

flown fancy, and that we may have misunderstood the purpose of nature in

assigning reason as the governor of our will. Therefore we will examine this

idea from this point of view.

              In the physical constitution of an organized being, that is, a being

adapted suitably to the purposes of life, we assume it as a fundamental

principle that no organ for any purpose will be found but what is also the

fittest and best adapted for that purpose. Now in a being which has reason

and a will, if the proper object of nature were its conservation, its welfare, in

a word, its happiness, then nature would have hit upon a very bad

arrangement in selecting the reason of the creature to carry out this purpose.

For all the actions which the creature has to perform with a view to this

purpose, and the whole rule of its conduct, would be far more surely

prescribed to it by instinct, and that end would have been attained thereby

much more certainly than it ever can be by reason. Should reason have been

communicated to this favoured creature over and above, it must only haveserved it to contemplate the happy constitution of its nature, to admire it, to

congratulate itself thereon, and to feel thankful for it to the beneficent cause,

but not that it should subject its desires to that weak and delusive guidance

and meddle bunglingly with the purpose of nature. In a word, nature would

have taken care that reason should not break forth into practical exercise, nor

have the presumption, with its weak insight, to think out for itself the plan of

happiness, and of the means of attaining it. Nature would not only have taken

on herself the choice of the ends, but also of the means, and with wise

foresight would have entrusted both to instinct.

              And, in fact, we find that the more a cultivated reason applies itself

with deliberate purpose to the enjoyment of life and happiness, so much the

more does the man fail of true satisfaction. And from this circumstance there

arises in many, if they are candid enough to confess it, a certain degree of

misology, that is, hatred of reason, especially in the case of those who are

most experienced in the use of it, because after calculating all the advantages

they derive, I do not say from the invention of all the arts of common luxury,

but even from the sciences (which seem to them to be after all only a luxury

of the understanding), they find that they have, in fact, only brought more

trouble on their shoulders. rather than gained in happiness; and they end by

envying, rather than despising, the more common stamp of men who keep

closer to the guidance of mere instinct and do not allow their reason much

influence on their conduct. And this we must admit, that the judgement of

those who would very much lower the lofty eulogies of the advantages which

reason gives us in regard to the happiness and satisfaction of life, or who

would even reduce them below zero, is by no means morose or ungrateful to

the goodness with which the world is governed, but that there lies at the root

of these judgements the idea that our existence has a different and far nobler

end, for which, and not for happiness, reason is properly intended, and which

must, therefore, be regarded as the supreme condition to which the private

ends of man must, for the most part, be postponed.

              For as reason is not competent to guide the will with certainty in

regard to its objects and the satisfaction of all our wants (which it to some

extent even multiplies), this being an end to which an implanted instinct

would have led with much greater certainty; and since, nevertheless, reason is

imparted to us as a practical faculty, i.e., as one which is to have influence on

the will, therefore, admitting that nature generally in the distribution of hercapacities has adapted the means to the end, its true destination must be to

produce a will, not merely good as a means to something else, but good in

itself, for which reason was absolutely necessary. This will then, though not

indeed the sole and complete good, must be the supreme good and the

condition of every other, even of the desire of happiness. Under these

circumstances, there is nothing inconsistent with the wisdom of nature in the

fact that the cultivation of the reason, which is requisite for the first and

unconditional purpose, does in many ways interfere, at least in this life, with

the attainment of the second, which is always conditional, namely, happiness.

Nay, it may even reduce it to nothing, without nature thereby failing of her

purpose. For reason recognizes the establishment of a good will as its highest

practical destination, and in attaining this purpose is capable only of a

satisfaction of its own proper kind, namely that from the attainment of an

end, which end again is determined by reason only, notwithstanding that this

may involve many a disappointment to the ends of inclination.

              We have then to develop the notion of a will which deserves to be

highly esteemed for itself and is good without a view to anything further, a

notion which exists already in the sound natural understanding, requiring

rather to be cleared up than to be taught, and which in estimating the value of

our actions always takes the first place and constitutes the condition of all the

rest. In order to do this, we will take the notion of duty, which includes that

of a good will, although implying certain subjective restrictions and

hindrances. These, however, far from concealing it, or rendering it

unrecognizable, rather bring it out by contrast and make it shine forth so

much the brighter.

              I omit here all actions which are already recognized as inconsistent

with duty, although they may be useful for this or that purpose, for with these

the question whether they are done from duty cannot arise at all, since they

even conflict with it. I also set aside those actions which really conform to

duty, but to which men have no direct inclination, performing them because

they are impelled thereto by some other inclination. For in this case we can

readily distinguish whether the action which agrees with duty is done from

duty, or from a selfish view. It is much harder to make this distinction when

the action accords with duty and the subject has besides a direct inclination to

it. For example, it is always a matter of duty that a dealer should not over

charge an inexperienced purchaser; and wherever there is much commercethe prudent tradesman does not overcharge, but keeps a fixed price for

everyone, so that a child buys of him as well as any other. Men are thus

honestly served; but this is not enough to make us believe that the tradesman

has so acted from duty and from principles of honesty: his own advantage

required it; it is out of the question in this case to suppose that he might

besides have a direct inclination in favour of the buyers, so that, as it were,

from love he should give no advantage to one over another. Accordingly the

action was done neither from duty nor from direct inclination, but merely

with a selfish view.

              On the other hand, it is a duty to maintain one's life; and, in addition,

everyone has also a direct inclination to do so. But on this account the of

anxious care which most men take for it has no intrinsic worth, and their

maxim has no moral import. They preserve their life as duty requires, no

doubt, but not because duty requires. On the other band, if adversity and

hopeless sorrow have completely taken away the relish for life; if the

unfortunate one, strong in mind, indignant at his fate rather than desponding

or dejected, wishes for death, and yet preserves his life without loving it —

not from inclination or fear, but from duty — then his maxim has a moral

worth.

              To be beneficent when we can is a duty; and besides this, there are

many minds so sympathetically constituted that, without any other motive of

vanity or self-interest, they find a pleasure in spreading joy around them and

can take delight in the satisfaction of others so far as it is their own work. But

I maintain that in such a case an action of this kind, however proper, however

amiable it may be, bas nevertheless no true moral worth, but is on a level

with other inclinations, e.g., the inclination to honour, which, if it is happily

directed to that which is in fact of public utility and accordant with duty and

consequently honourable, deserves praise and encouragement, but not

esteem. For the maxim lacks the moral import, namely, that such actions be

done from duty, not from inclination. Put the case that the mind of that

philanthropist were clouded by sorrow of his own, extinguishing all

sympathy with the lot of others, and that, while he still has the power to

benefit others in distress, he is not touched by their trouble because he is

absorbed with his own; and now suppose that he tears himself out of this

dead insensibility, and performs the action without any inclination to it, but

simply from duty, then first has his action its genuine moral worth. Furtherstill; if nature bas put little sympathy in the heart of this or that man; if he,

supposed to be an upright man, is by temperament cold and indifferent to the

sufferings of others, perhaps because in respect of his own he is provided

with the special gift of patience and fortitude and supposes, or even requires,

that others should have the same — and such a man would certainly not be

the meanest product of nature — but if nature had not specially framed him

for a philanthropist, would he not still find in himself a source from whence

to give himself a far higher worth than that of a good-natured temperament

could be? Unquestionably. It is just in this that the moral worth of the

character is brought out which is incomparably the highest of all, namely,

that he is beneficent, not from inclination, but from duty.

              To secure one's own happiness is a duty, at least indirectly; for

discontent with one's condition, under a pressure of many anxieties and

amidst unsatisfied wants, might easily become a great temptation to

transgression of duty. But here again, without looking to duty, all men have

already the strongest and most intimate inclination to happiness, because it is

just in this idea that all inclinations are combined in one total. But the precept

of happiness is often of such a sort that it greatly interferes with some

inclinations, and yet a man cannot form any definite and certain conception

of the sum of satisfaction of all of them which is called happiness. It is not

then to be wondered at that a single inclination, definite both as to what it

promises and as to the time within which it can be gratified, is often able to

overcome such a fluctuating idea, and that a gouty patient, for instance, can

choose to enjoy what he likes, and to suffer what he may, since, according to

his calculation, on this occasion at least, be has not sacrificed the enjoyment

of the present moment to a possibly mistaken expectation of a happiness

which is supposed to be found in health. But even in this case, if the general

desire for happiness did not influence his will, and supposing that in his

particular case health was not a necessary element in this calculation, there

yet remains in this, as in all other cases, this law, namely, that he should

promote his happiness not from inclination but from duty, and by this would

his conduct first acquire true moral worth.

              It is in this manner, undoubtedly, that we are to understand those

passages of Scripture also in which we are commanded to love our

neighbour, even our enemy. For love, as an affection, cannot be commanded,

but beneficence for duty's sake may; even though we are not impelled to it byany inclination — nay, are even repelled by a natural and unconquerable

aversion. This is practical love and not pathological — a love which is seated

in the will, and not in the propensions of sense — in principles of action and

not of tender sympathy; and it is this love alone which can be commanded.

              The second proposition is: That an action done from duty derives its

moral worth, not from the purpose which is to be attained by it, but from the

maxim by which it is determined, and therefore does not depend on the

realization of the object of the action, but merely on the principle of volition

by which the action has taken place, without regard to any object of desire. It

is clear from what precedes that the purposes which we may have in view in

our actions, or their effects regarded as ends and springs of the will, cannot

give to actions any unconditional or moral worth. In what, then, can their

worth lie, if it is not to consist in the will and in reference to its expected

effect? It cannot lie anywhere but in the principle of the will without regard to

the ends which can be attained by the action. For the will stands between its a

priori principle, which is formal, and its a posteriori spring, which is material,

as between two roads, and as it must be determined by something, it that it

must be determined by the formal principle of volition when an action is done

from duty, in which case every material principle has been withdrawn from it.

              The third proposition, which is a consequence of the two preceding,

I would express thus Duty is the necessity of acting from respect for the law.

I may have inclination for an object as the effect of my proposed action, but I

cannot have respect for it, just for this reason, that it is an effect and not an

energy of will. Similarly I cannot have respect for inclination, whether my

own or another's; I can at most, if my own, approve it; if another's, sometimes

even love it; i.e., look on it as favourable to my own interest. It is only what

is connected with my will as a principle, by no means as an effect — what

does not subserve my inclination, but overpowers it, or at least in case of

choice excludes it from its calculation — in other words, simply the law of

itself, which can be an object of respect, and hence a command. Now an

action done from duty must wholly exclude the influence of inclination and

with it every object of the will, so that nothing remains which can determine

the will except objectively the law, and subjectively pure respect for this

practical law, and consequently the maxim* that I should follow this law

even to the thwarting of all my inclinations.

              * A maxim is the subjective principle of volition. The objectiveprinciple (i.e., that which would also serve subjectively as a practical

principle to all rational beings if reason had full power over the faculty of

desire) is the practical law.

              Thus the moral worth of an action does not lie in the effect expected

from it, nor in any principle of action which requires to borrow its motive

from this expected effect. For all these effectsagreeableness of one's

condition and even the promotion of the happiness of others — could have

been also brought about by other causes, so that for this there would have

been no need of the will of a rational being; whereas it is in this alone that the

supreme and unconditional good can be found. The pre-eminent good which

we call moral can therefore consist in nothing else than the conception of law

in itself, which certainly is only possible in a rational being, in so far as this

conception, and not the expected effect, determines the will. This is a good

which is already present in the person who acts accordingly, and we have not

to wait for it to appear first in the result.*

              * It might be here objected to me that I take refuge behind the word

respect in an obscure feeling, instead of giving a distinct solution of the

question by a concept of the reason. But although respect is a feeling, it is not

a feeling received through influence, but is self-wrought by a rational

concept, and, therefore, is specifically distinct from all feelings of the former

kind, which may be referred either to inclination or fear, What I recognise

immediately as a law for me, I recognise with respect. This merely signifies

the consciousness that my will is subordinate to a law, without the

intervention of other influences on my sense. The immediate determination of

the will by the law, and the consciousness of this, is called respect, so that

this is regarded as an effect of the law on the subject, and not as the cause of

it. Respect is properly the conception of a worth which thwarts my self-love.

Accordingly it is something which is considered neither as an object of

inclination nor of fear, although it has something analogous to both. The

object of respect is the law only, and that the law which we impose on

ourselves and yet recognise as necessary in itself. As a law, we are subjected

too it without consulting self-love; as imposed by us on ourselves, it is a

result of our will. In the former aspect it has an analogy to fear, in the latter to

inclination. Respect for a person is properly only respect for the law (of

honesty, etc.) of which he gives us an example. Since we also look on the

improvement of our talents as a duty, we consider that we see in a person oftalents, as it were, the example of a law (viz., to become like him in this by

exercise), and this constitutes our respect. All so-called moral interest

consists simply in respect for the law.

              But what sort of law can that be, the conception of which must

determine the will, even without paying any regard to the effect expected

from it, in order that this will may be called good absolutely and without

qualification? As I have deprived the will of every impulse which could arise

to it from obedience to any law, there remains nothing but the universal

conformity of its actions to law in general, which alone is to serve the will as

a principle, i.e., I am never to act otherwise than so that I could also will that

my maxim should become a universal law. Here, now, it is the simple

conformity to law in general, without assuming any particular law applicable

to certain actions, that serves the will as its principle and must so serve it, if

duty is not to be a vain delusion and a chimerical notion. The common reason

of men in its practical judgements perfectly coincides with this and always

has in view the principle here suggested. Let the question be, for example:

May I when in distress make a promise with the intention not to keep it? I

readily distinguish here between the two significations which the question

may have: Whether it is prudent, or whether it is right, to make a false

promise? The former may undoubtedly of be the case. I see clearly indeed

that it is not enough to extricate myself from a present difficulty by means of

this subterfuge, but it must be well considered whether there may not

hereafter spring from this lie much greater inconvenience than that from

which I now free myself, and as, with all my supposed cunning, the

consequences cannot be so easily foreseen but that credit once lost may be

much more injurious to me than any mischief which I seek to avoid at

present, it should be considered whether it would not be more prudent to act

herein according to a universal maxim and to make it a habit to promise

nothing except with the intention of keeping it. But it is soon clear to me that

such a maxim will still only be based on the fear of consequences. Now it is a

wholly different thing to be truthful from duty and to be so from

apprehension of injurious consequences. In the first case, the very notion of

the action already implies a law for me; in the second case, I must first look

about elsewhere to see what results may be combined with it which would

affect myself. For to deviate from the principle of duty is beyond all doubt

wicked; but to be unfaithful to my maxim of prudence may often be very

advantageous to me, although to abide by it is certainly safer. The shortestway, however, and an unerring one, to discover the answer to this question

whether a lying promise is consistent with duty, is to ask myself, "Should I be

content that my maxim (to extricate myself from difficulty by a false

promise) should hold good as a universal law, for myself as well as for

others? and should I be able to say to myself, "Every one may make a

deceitful promise when he finds himself in a difficulty from which he cannot

otherwise extricate himself?" Then I presently become aware that while I can

will the lie, I can by no means will that lying should be a universal law. For

with such a law there would be no promises at all, since it would be in vain to

allege my intention in regard to my future actions to those who would not

believe this allegation, or if they over hastily did so would pay me back in my

own coin. Hence my maxim, as soon as it should be made a universal law,

would necessarily destroy itself.

              I do not, therefore, need any far-reaching penetration to discern what

I have to do in order that my will may be morally good. Inexperienced in the

course of the world, incapable of being prepared for all its contingencies, I

only ask myself: Canst thou also will that thy maxim should be a universal

law? If not, then it must be rejected, and that not because of a disadvantage

accruing from it to myself or even to others, but because it cannot enter as a

principle into a possible universal legislation, and reason extorts from me

immediate respect for such legislation. I do not indeed as yet discern on what

this respect is based (this the philosopher may inquire), but at least I

understand this, that it is an estimation of the worth which far outweighs all

worth of what is recommended by inclination, and that the necessity of acting

from pure respect for the practical law is what constitutes duty, to which

every other motive must give place, because it is the condition of a will being

good in itself, and the worth of such a will is above everything.

              Thus, then, without quitting the moral knowledge of common human

reason, we have arrived at its principle. And although, no doubt, common

men do not conceive it in such an abstract and universal form, yet they

always have it really before their eyes and use it as the standard of their

decision. Here it would be easy to show how, with this compass in hand, men

are well able to distinguish, in every case that occurs, what is good, what bad,

conformably to duty or inconsistent with it, if, without in the least teaching

them anything new, we only, like Socrates, direct their attention to the

principle they themselves employ; and that, therefore, we do not need scienceand philosophy to know what we should do to be honest and good, yea, even

wise and virtuous. Indeed we might well have conjectured beforehand that

the knowledge of what every man is bound to do, and therefore also to know,

would be within the reach of every man, even the commonest. Here we

cannot forbear admiration when we see how great an advantage the practical

judgement has over the theoretical in the common understanding of men. In

the latter, if common reason ventures to depart from the laws of experience

and from the perceptions of the senses, it falls into mere inconceivabilities

and self-contradictions, at least into a chaos of uncertainty, obscurity, and

instability. But in the practical sphere it is just when the common

understanding excludes all sensible springs from practical laws that its power

of judgement begins to show itself to advantage. It then becomes even subtle,

whether it be that it chicanes with its own conscience or with other claims

respecting what is to be called right, or whether it desires for its own

instruction to determine honestly the worth of actions; and, in the latter case,

it may even have as good a hope of hitting the mark as any philosopher

whatever can promise himself. Nay, it is almost more sure of doing so,

because the philosopher cannot have any other principle, while he may easily

perplex his judgement by a multitude of considerations foreign to the matter,

and so turn aside from the right way. Would it not therefore be wiser in moral

concerns to acquiesce in the judgement of common reason, or at most only to

call in philosophy for the purpose of rendering the system of morals more

complete and intelligible, and its rules more convenient for use (especially for

disputation), but not so as to draw off the common understanding from its

happy simplicity, or to bring it by means of philosophy into a new path of

inquiry and instruction?

              Innocence is indeed a glorious thing; only, on the other hand, it is

very sad that it cannot well maintain itself and is easily seduced. On this

account even wisdom — which otherwise consists more in conduct than in

knowledge — yet has need of science, not in order to learn from it, but to

secure for its precepts admission and permanence. Against all the commands

of duty which reason represents to man as so deserving of respect, he feels in

himself a powerful counterpoise in his wants and inclinations, the entire

satisfaction of which he sums up under the name of happiness. Now reason

issues its commands unyieldingly, without promising anything to the

inclinations, and, as it were, with disregard and contempt for these claims,

which are so impetuous, and at the same time so plausible, and which will notallow themselves to be suppressed by any command. Hence there arises a

natural dialectic, i.e., a disposition, to argue against these strict laws of duty

and to question their validity, or at least their purity and strictness; and, if

possible, to make them more accordant with our wishes and inclinations, that

is to say, to corrupt them at their very source, and entirely to destroy their

worth — a thing which even common practical reason cannot ultimately call

good.

              Thus is the common reason of man compelled to go out of its sphere,

and to take a step into the field of a practical philosophy, not to satisfy any

speculative want (which never occurs to it as long as it is content to be mere

sound reason), but even on practical grounds, in order to attain in it

information and clear instruction respecting the source of its principle, and

the correct determination of it in opposition to the maxims which are based

on wants and inclinations, so that it may escape from the perplexity of

opposite claims and not run the risk of losing all genuine moral principles

through the equivocation into which it easily falls. Thus, when practical

reason cultivates itself, there insensibly arises in it a dialetic which forces it to

seek aid in philosophy, just as happens to it in its theoretic use; and in this

case, therefore, as well as in the other, it will find rest nowhere but in a

thorough critical examination of our reason.

 

 

                                   Second Section

 

 

Transition from Popular Moral Philosophy to the Metaphysic of Morals

 

 

              If we have hitherto drawn our notion of duty from the common use

of our practical reason, it is by no means to be inferred that we have treated it

as an empirical notion. On the contrary, if we attend to the experience of

men's conduct, we meet frequent and, as we ourselves allow, just complaints

that one cannot find a single certain example of the disposition to act from

pure duty. Although many things are done in conformity with what duty

prescribes, it is nevertheless always doubtful whether they are done strictly

from duty, so as to have a moral worth. Hence there have at all times been

philosophers who have altogether denied that this disposition actually exists

at all in human actions, and have ascribed everything to a more or less refined

self-love. Not that they have on that account questioned the soundness of the

conception of morality; on the contrary, they spoke with sincere regret of the

frailty and corruption of human nature, which, though noble enough to take

its rule an idea so worthy of respect, is yet weak to follow it and employs

reason which ought to give it the law only for the purpose of providing for

the interest of the inclinations, whether singly or at the best in the greatest

possible harmony with one another.

              In fact, it is absolutely impossible to make out by experience with

complete certainty a single case in which the maxim of an action, however

right in itself, rested simply on moral grounds and on the conception of duty.

Sometimes it happens that with the sharpest self-examination we can find

nothing beside the moral principle of duty which could have been powerful

enough to move us to this or that action and to so great a sacrifice; yet we

cannot from this infer with certainty that it was not really some secret

impulse of self-love, under the false appearance of duty, that was the actual

determining cause of the will. We like them to flatter ourselves by falsely

taking credit for a more noble motive; whereas in fact we can never, even by

the strictest examination, get completely behind the secret springs of action;since, when the question is of moral worth, it is not with the actions which we

see that we are concerned, but with those inward principles of them which we

do not see.

              Moreover, we cannot better serve the wishes of those who ridicule

all morality as a mere chimera of human imagination over stepping itself

from vanity, than by conceding to them that notions of duty must be drawn

only from experience (as from indolence, people are ready to think is also the

case with all other notions); for or is to prepare for them a certain triumph. I

am willing to admit out of love of humanity that even most of our actions are

correct, but if we look closer at them we everywhere come upon the dear self

which is always prominent, and it is this they have in view and not the strict

command of duty which would often require self-denial. Without being an

enemy of virtue, a cool observer, one that does not mistake the wish for good,

however lively, for its reality, may sometimes doubt whether true virtue is

actually found anywhere in the world, and this especially as years increase

and the judgement is partly made wiser by experience and partly, also, more

acute in observation. This being so, nothing can secure us from falling away

altogether from our ideas of duty, or maintain in the soul a well-grounded

respect for its law, but the clear conviction that although there should never

have been actions which really sprang from such pure sources, yet whether

this or that takes place is not at all the question; but that reason of itself,

independent on all experience, ordains what ought to take place, that

accordingly actions of which perhaps the world has hitherto never given an

example, the feasibility even of which might be very much doubted by one

who founds everything on experience, are nevertheless inflexibly

commanded by reason; that, e.g., even though there might never yet have

been a sincere friend, yet not a whit the less is pure sincerity in friendship

required of every man, because, prior to all experience, this duty is involved

as duty in the idea of a reason determining the will by a priori principles.

              When we add further that, unless we deny that the notion of morality

has any truth or reference to any possible object, we must admit that its law

must be valid, not merely for men but for all rational creatures generally, not

merely under certain contingent conditions or with exceptions but with

absolute necessity, then it is clear that no experience could enable us to infer

even the possibility of such apodeictic laws. For with what right could we

bring into unbounded respect as a universal precept for every rational naturethat which perhaps holds only under the contingent conditions of humanity?

Or how could laws of the determination of our will be regarded as laws of the

determination of the will of rational beings generally, and for us only as such,

if they were merely empirical and did not take their origin wholly a priori

from pure but practical reason?

              Nor could anything be more fatal to morality than that we should

wish to derive it from examples. For every example of it that is set before me

must be first itself tested by principles of morality, whether it is worthy to

serve as an original example, i.e., as a pattern; but by no means can it

authoritatively furnish the conception of morality. Even the Holy One of the

Gospels must first be compared with our ideal of moral perfection before we

can recognise Him as such; and so He says of Himself, "Why call ye Me

(whom you see) good; none is good (the model of good) but God only (whom

ye do not see)?" But whence have we the conception of God as the supreme

good? Simply from the idea of moral perfection, which reason frames a priori

and connects inseparably with the notion of a free will. Imitation finds no

place at all in morality, and examples serve only for encouragement, i.e., they

put beyond doubt the feasibility of what the law commands, they make

visible that which the practical rule expresses more generally, but they can

never authorize us to set aside the true original which lies in reason and to

guide ourselves by examples.

              If then there is no genuine supreme principle of morality but what

must rest simply on pure reason, independent of all experience, I think it is

not necessary even to put the question whether it is good to exhibit these

concepts in their generality (in abstracto) as they are established a priori

along with the principles belonging to them, if our knowledge is to be

distinguished from the vulgar and to be called philosophical.

              In our times indeed this might perhaps be necessary; for if we

collected votes whether pure rational knowledge separated from everything

empirical, that is to say, metaphysic of morals, or whether popular practical

philosophy is to be preferred, it is easy to guess which side would

preponderate.

              This descending to popular notions is certainly very commendable,

if the ascent to the principles of pure reason has first taken place and been

satisfactorily accomplished. This implies that we first found ethics onmetaphysics, and then, when it is firmly established, procure a hearing for it

by giving it a popular character. But it is quite absurd to try to be popular in

the first inquiry, on which the soundness of the principles depends. It is not

only that this proceeding can never lay claim to the very rare merit of a true

philosophical popularity, since there is no art in being intelligible if one

renounces all thoroughness of insight; but also it produces a disgusting

medley of compiled observations and half-reasoned principles. Shallow pates

enjoy this because it can be used for every-day chat, but the sagacious find in

it only confusion, and being unsatisfied and unable to help themselves, they

turn away their eyes, while philosophers, who see quite well through this

delusion, are little listened to when they call men off for a time from this

pretended popularity, in order that they might be rightfully popular after they

have attained a definite insight.

              We need only look at the attempts of moralists in that favourite

fashion, and we shall find at one time the special constitution of human

nature (including, however, the idea of a rational nature generally), at one

time perfection, at another happiness, here moral sense, there fear of God. a

little of this, and a little of that, in marvellous mixture, without its occurring

to them to ask whether the principles of morality are to be sought in the

knowledge of human nature at all (which we can have only from experience);

or, if this is not so, if these principles are to be found altogether a priori, free

from everything empirical, in pure rational concepts only and nowhere else,

not even in the smallest degree; then rather to adopt the method of making

this a separate inquiry, as pure practical philosophy, or (if one may use a

name so decried) as metaphysic of morals,* to bring it by itself to

completeness, and to require the public, which wishes for popular treatment,

to await the issue of this undertaking.

              * Just as pure mathematics are distinguished from applied, pure logic

from applied, so if we choose we may also distinguish pure philosophy of

morals (metaphysic) from applied (viz., applied to human nature). By this

designation we are also at once reminded that moral principles are not based

on properties of human nature, but must subsist a priori of themselves, while

from such principles practical rules must be capable of being deduced for

every rational nature, and accordingly for that of man.

              Such a metaphysic of morals, completely isolated, not mixed with

any anthropology, theology, physics, or hyperphysics, and still less withoccult qualities (which we might call hypophysical), is not only an

indispensable substratum of all sound theoretical knowledge of duties, but is

at the same time a desideratum of the highest importance to the actual

fulfilment of their precepts. For the pure conception of duty, unmixed with

any foreign addition of empirical attractions, and, in a word, the conception

of the moral law, exercises on the human heart, by way of reason alone

(which first becomes aware with this that it can of itself be practical), an

influence so much more powerful than all other springs* which may be

derived from the field of experience, that, in the consciousness of its worth, it

despises the latter, and can by degrees become their master; whereas a mixed

ethics, compounded partly of motives drawn from feelings and inclinations,

and partly also of conceptions of reason, must make the mind waver between

motives which cannot be brought under any principle, which lead to good

only by mere accident and very often also to evil.

              * I have a letter from the late excellent Sulzer, in which he asks me

what can be the reason that moral instruction, although containing much that

is convincing for the reason, yet accomplishes so little? My answer was

postponed in order that I might make it complete. But it is simply this: that

the teachers themselves have not got their own notions clear, and when they

endeavour to make up for this by raking up motives of moral goodness from

every quarter, trying to make their physic right strong, they spoil it. For the

commonest understanding shows that if we imagine, on the one hand, an act

of honesty done with steadfast mind, apart from every view to advantage of

any kind in this world or another, and even under the greatest temptations of

necessity or allurement, and, on the other hand, a similar act which was

affected, in however low a degree, by a foreign motive, the former leaves far

behind and eclipses the second; it elevates the soul and inspires the wish to be

able to act in like manner oneself. Even moderately young children feel this

impression, ana one should never represent duties to them in any other light.

              From what has been said, it is clear that all moral conceptions have

their seat and origin completely a priori in the reason, and that, moreover, in

the commonest reason just as truly as in that which is in the highest degree

speculative; that they cannot be obtained by abstraction from any empirical,

and therefore merely contingent, knowledge; that it is just this purity of their

origin that makes them worthy to serve as our supreme practical principle,

and that just in proportion as we add anything empirical, we detract fromtheir genuine influence and from the absolute value of actions; that it is not

only of the greatest necessity, in a purely speculative point of view, but is

also of the greatest practical importance, to derive these notions and laws

from pure reason, to present them pure and unmixed, and even to determine

the compass of this practical or pure rational knowledge, i.e., to determine the

whole faculty of pure practical reason; and, in doing so, we must not make its

principles dependent on the particular nature of human reason, though in

speculative philosophy this may be permitted, or may even at times be

necessary; but since moral laws ought to hold good for every rational

creature, we must derive them from the general concept of a rational being. In

this way, although for its application to man morality has need of

anthropology, yet, in the first instance, we must treat it independently as pure

philosophy, i.e., as metaphysic, complete in itself (a thing which in such

distinct branches of science is easily done); knowing well that unless we are

in possession of this, it would not only be vain to determine the moral

element of duty in right actions for purposes of speculative criticism, but it

would be impossible to base morals on their genuine principles, even for

common practical purposes, especially of moral instruction, so as to produce

pure moral dispositions, and to engraft them on men's minds to the promotion

of the greatest possible good in the world.

              But in order that in this study we may not merely advance by the

natural steps from the common moral judgement (in this case very worthy of

respect) to the philosophical, as has been already done, but also from a

popular philosophy, which goes no further than it can reach by groping with

the help of examples, to metaphysic (which does allow itself to be checked

by anything empirical and, as it must measure the whole extent of this kind of

rational knowledge, goes as far as ideal conceptions, where even examples

fail us), we must follow and clearly describe the practical faculty of reason,

from the general rules of its determination to the point where the notion of

duty springs from it.

              Everything in nature works according to laws. Rational beings alone

have the faculty of acting according to the conception of laws, that is

according to principles, i.e., have a will. Since the deduction of actions from

principles requires reason, the will is nothing but practical reason. If reason

infallibly determines the will, then the actions of such a being which are

recognised as objectively necessary are subjectively necessary also, i.e., thewill is a faculty to choose that only which reason independent of inclination

recognises as practically necessary, i.e., as good. But if reason of itself does

not sufficiently determine the will, if the latter is subject also to subjective

conditions (particular impulses) which do not always coincide with the

objective conditions; in a word, if the will does not in itself completely

accord with reason (which is actually the case with men), then the actions

which objectively are recognised as necessary are subjectively contingent,

and the determination of such a will according to objective laws is obligation,

that is to say, the relation of the objective laws to a will that is not thoroughly

good is conceived as the determination of the will of a rational being by

principles of reason, but which the will from its nature does not of necessity

follow.

              The conception of an objective principle, in so far as it is obligatory

for a will, is called a command (of reason), and the formula of the command

is called an imperative.

              All imperatives are expressed by the word ought [or shall], and

thereby indicate the relation of an objective law of reason to a will, which

from its subjective constitution is not necessarily determined by it (an

obligation). They say that something would be good to do or to forbear, but

they say it to a will which does not always do a thing because it is conceived

to be good to do it. That is practically good, however, which determines the

will by means of the conceptions of reason, and consequently not from

subjective causes, but objectively, that is on principles which are valid for

every rational being as such. It is distinguished from the pleasant, as that

which influences the will only by means of sensation from merely subjective

causes, valid only for the sense of this or that one, and not as a principle of

reason, which holds for every one.*

              * The dependence of the desires on sensations is called inclination,

and this accordingly always indicates a want. The dependence of a

contingently determinable will on principles of reason is called an interest.

This therefore, is found only in the case of a dependent will which does not

always of itself conform to reason; in the Divine will we cannot conceive any

interest. But the human will can also take an interest in a thing without

therefore acting from interest. The former signifies the practical interest in the

action, the latter the pathological in the object of the action. The former

indicates only dependence of the will on principles of reason in themselves;the second, dependence on principles of reason for the sake of inclination,

reason supplying only the practical rules how the requirement of the

inclination may be satisfied. In the first case the action interests me; in the

second the object of the action (because it is pleasant to me). We have seen in

the first section that in an action done from duty we must look not to the

interest in the object, but only to that in the action itself, and in its rational

principle (viz., the law).

              A perfectly good will would therefore be equally subject to objective

laws (viz., laws of good), but could not be conceived as obliged thereby to act

lawfully, because of itself from its subjective constitution it can only be

determined by the conception of good. Therefore no imperatives hold for the

Divine will, or in general for a holy will; ought is here out of place, because

the volition is already of itself necessarily in unison with the law. Therefore

imperatives are only formulae to express the relation of objective laws of all

volition to the subjective imperfection of the will of this or that rational

being, e.g., the human will.

              Now all imperatives command either hypothetically or categorically.

The former represent the practical necessity of a possible action as means to

something else that is willed (or at least which one might possibly will). The

categorical imperative would be that which represented an action as

necessary of itself without reference to another end, i.e., as objectively

necessary.

              Since every practical law represents a possible action as good and,

on this account, for a subject who is practically determinable by reason,

necessary, all imperatives are formulae determining an action which is

necessary according to the principle of a will good in some respects. If now

the action is good only as a means to something else, then the imperative is

hypothetical; if it is conceived as good in itself and consequently as being

necessarily the principle of a will which of itself conforms to reason, then it is

categorical.

              Thus the imperative declares what action possible by me would be

good and presents the practical rule in relation to a will which does not

forthwith perform an action simply because it is good, whether because the

subject does not always know that it is good, or because, even if it know this,

yet its maxims might be opposed to the objective principles of practicalreason.

              Accordingly the hypothetical imperative only says that the action is

good for some purpose, possible or actual. In the first case it is a

problematical, in the second an assertorial practical principle. The categorical

imperative which declares an action to be objectively necessary in itself

without reference to any purpose, i.e., without any other end, is valid as an

apodeictic (practical) principle.

              Whatever is possible only by the power of some rational being may

also be conceived as a possible purpose of some will; and therefore the

principles of action as regards the means necessary to attain some possible

purpose are in fact infinitely numerous. All sciences have a practical part,

consisting of problems expressing that some end is possible for us and of

imperatives directing how it may be attained. These may, therefore, be called

in general imperatives of skill. Here there is no question whether the end is

rational and good, but only what one must do in order to attain it. The

precepts for the physician to make his patient thoroughly healthy, and for a

poisoner to ensure certain death, are of equal value in this respect, that each

serves to effect its purpose perfectly. Since in early youth it cannot be known

what ends are likely to occur to us in the course of life, parents seek to have

their children taught a great many things, and provide for their skill in the use

of means for all sorts of arbitrary ends, of none of which can they determine

whether it may not perhaps hereafter be an object to their pupil, but which it

is at all events possible that he might aim at; and this anxiety is so great that

they commonly neglect to form and correct their judgement on the value of

the things which may be chosen as ends.

              There is one end, however, which may be assumed to be actually

such to all rational beings (so far as imperatives apply to them, viz., as

dependent beings), and, therefore, one purpose which they not merely may

have, but which we may with certainty assume that they all actually have by a

natural necessity, and this is happiness. The hypothetical imperative which

expresses the practical necessity of an action as means to the advancement of

happiness is assertorial. We are not to present it as necessary for an uncertain

and merely possible purpose, but for a purpose which we may presuppose

with certainty and a priori in every man, because it belongs to his being. Now

skill in the choice of means to his own greatest well-being may be called

prudence,* in the narrowest sense. And thus the imperative which refers tothe choice of means to one's own happiness, i.e., the precept of prudence, is

still always hypothetical; the action is not commanded absolutely, but only as

means to another purpose.

              * The word prudence is taken in two senses: in the one it may bear

the name of knowledge of the world, in the other that of private prudence.

The former is a man's ability to influence others so as to use them for his own

purposes. The latter is the sagacity to combine all these purposes for his own

lasting benefit. This latter is properly that to which the value even of the

former is reduced, and when a man is prudent in the former sense, but not in

the latter, we might better say of him that he is clever and cunning, but, on

the whole, imprudent.

              Finally, there is an imperative which commands a certain conduct

immediately, without having as its condition any other purpose to be attained

by it. This imperative is categorical. It concerns not the matter of the action,

or its intended result, but its form and the principle of which it is itself a

result; and what is essentially good in it consists in the mental disposition, let

the consequence be what it may. This imperative may be called that of

morality.

              There is a marked distinction also between the volitions on these

three sorts of principles in the dissimilarity of the obligation of the will. In

order to mark this difference more clearly, I think they would be most

suitably named in their order if we said they are either rules of skill, or

counsels of prudence, or commands (laws) of morality. For it is law only that

involves the conception of an unconditional and objective necessity, which is

consequently universally valid; and commands are laws which must be

obeyed, that is, must be followed, even in opposition to inclination. Counsels,

indeed, involve necessity, but one which can only hold under a contingent

subjective condition, viz., they depend on whether this or that man reckons

this or that as part of his happiness; the categorical imperative, on the

contrary, is not limited by any condition, and as being absolutely, although

practically, necessary, may be quite properly called a command. We might

also call the first kind of imperatives technical (belonging to art), the second

pragmatic* (to welfare), the third moral (belonging to free conduct generally,

that is, to morals).

              * It seems to me that the proper signification of the word pragmaticmay be most accurately defined in this way. For sanctions are called

pragmatic which flow properly not from the law of the states as necessary

enactments, but from precaution for the general welfare. A history is

composed pragmatically when it teaches prudence, i.e., instructs the world

how it can provide for its interests better, or at least as well as, the men of

former time.

              Now arises the question, how are all these imperatives possible?

This question does not seek to know how we can conceive the

accomplishment of the action which the imperative ordains, but merely how

we can conceive the obligation of the will which the imperative expresses.

No special explanation is needed to show how an imperative of skill is

possible. Whoever wills the end, wills also (so far as reason decides his

conduct) the means in his power which are indispensably necessary thereto.

This proposition is, as regards the volition, analytical; for, in willing an object

as my effect, there is already thought the causality of myself as an acting

cause, that is to say, the use of the means; and the imperative educes from the

conception of volition of an end the conception of actions necessary to this

end. Synthetical propositions must no doubt be employed in defining the

means to a proposed end; but they do not concern the principle, the act of the

will, but the object and its realization. E.g., that in order to bisect a line on an

unerring principle I must draw from its extremities two intersecting arcs; this

no doubt is taught by mathematics only in synthetical propositions; but if I

know that it is only by this process that the intended operation can be

performed, then to say that, if I fully will the operation, I also will the action

required for it, is an analytical proposition; for it is one and the same thing to

conceive something as an effect which I can produce in a certain way, and to

conceive myself as acting in this way.

              If it were only equally easy to give a definite conception of

happiness, the imperatives of prudence would correspond exactly with those

of skill, and would likewise be analytical. For in this case as in that, it could

be said: "Whoever wills the end, wills also (according to the dictate of reason

necessarily) the indispensable means thereto which are in his power." But,

unfortunately, the notion of happiness is so indefinite that although every

man wishes to at. it, yet he never can say definitely and consistently what it is

that he really wishes and wills. The reason of this is that all the elements

which belong to the notion of happiness are altogether empirical, i.e., theymust be borrowed from experience, and nevertheless the idea of happiness

requires an absolute whole, a maximum of welfare in my present and all

future circumstances. Now it is impossible that the most clear-sighted and at

the same time most powerful being (supposed finite) should frame to himself

a definite conception of what he really wills in this. Does he will riches, how

much anxiety, envy, and snares might he not thereby draw upon his

shoulders? Does he will knowledge and discernment, perhaps it might prove

to be only an eye so much the sharper to show him so much the more

fearfully the evils that are now concealed from him, and that cannot be

avoided, or to impose more wants on his desires, which already give him

concern enough. Would he have long life? who guarantees to him that it

would not be a long misery? would he at least have health? how often has

uneasiness of the body restrained from excesses into which perfect health

would have allowed one to fall? and so on. In short, he is unable, on any

principle, to determine with certainty what would make him truly happy;

because to do so he would need to be omniscient. We cannot therefore act on

any definite principles to secure happiness, but only on empirical counsels,

e.g. of regimen, frugality, courtesy, reserve, etc., which experience teaches

do, on the average, most promote well-being. Hence it follows that the

imperatives of prudence do not, strictly speaking, command at all, that is,

they cannot present actions objectively as practically necessary; that they are

rather to be regarded as counsels (consilia) than precepts precepts of reason,

that the problem to determine certainly and universally what action would

promote the happiness of a rational being is completely insoluble, and

consequently no imperative respecting it is possible which should, in the

strict sense, command to do what makes happy; because happiness is not an

ideal of reason but of imagination, resting solely on empirical grounds, and it

is vain to expect that these should define an action by which one could attain

the totality of a series of consequences which is really endless. This

imperative of prudence would however be an analytical proposition if we

assume that the means to happiness could be certainly assigned; for it is

distinguished from the imperative of skill only by this, that in the latter the

end is merely possible, in the former it is given; as however both only ordain

the means to that which we suppose to be willed as an end, it follows that the

imperative which ordains the willing of the means to him who wills the end is

in both cases analytical. Thus there is no difficulty in regard to the possibility

of an imperative of this kind either.              On the other hand, the question how the imperative of morality is

possible, is undoubtedly one, the only one, demanding a solution, as this is

not at all hypothetical, and the objective necessity which it presents cannot

rest on any hypothesis, as is the case with the hypothetical imperatives. Only

here we must never leave out of consideration that we cannot make out by

any example, in other words empirically, whether there is such an imperative

at all, but it is rather to be feared that all those which seem to be categorical

may yet be at bottom hypothetical. For instance, when the precept is: "Thou

shalt not promise deceitfully"; and it is assumed that the necessity of this is

not a mere counsel to avoid some other evil, so that it should mean: "Thou

shalt not make a lying promise, lest if it become known thou shouldst destroy

thy credit," but that an action of this kind must be regarded as evil in itself, so

that the imperative of the prohibition is categorical; then we cannot show

with certainty in any example that the will was determined merely by the law,

without any other spring of action, although it may appear to be so. For it is

always possible that fear of disgrace, perhaps also obscure dread of other

dangers, may have a secret influence on the will. Who can prove by

experience the non-existence of a cause when all that experience tells us is

that we do not perceive it? But in such a case the so-called moral imperative,

which as such appears to be categorical and unconditional, would in reality

be only a pragmatic precept, drawing our attention to our own interests and

merely teaching us to take these into consideration.

              We shall therefore have to investigate a priori the possibility of a

categorical imperative, as we have not in this case the advantage of its reality

being given in experience, so that [the elucidation of] its possibility should be

requisite only for its explanation, not for its establishment. In the meantime it

may be discerned beforehand that the categorical imperative alone has the

purport of a practical law; all the rest may indeed be called principles of the

will but not laws, since whatever is only necessary for the attainment of some

arbitrary purpose may be considered as in itself contingent, and we can at any

time be free from the precept if we give up the purpose; on the contrary, the

unconditional command leaves the will no liberty to choose the opposite;

consequently it alone carries with it that necessity which we require in a law.

              Secondly, in the case of this categorical imperative or law of

morality, the difficulty (of discerning its possibility) is a very profound one.

It is an a priori synthetical practical proposition;* and as there is so muchdifficulty in discerning the possibility of speculative propositions of this kind,

it may readily be supposed that the difficulty will be no less with the

practical.

              * I connect the act with the will without presupposing any condition

resulting from any inclination, but a priori, and therefore necessarily (though

only objectively, i.e., assuming the idea of a reason possessing full power

over all subjective motives). This is accordingly a practical proposition which

does not deduce the willing of an action by mere analysis from another

already presupposed (for we have not such a perfect will), but connects it

immediately with the conception of the will of a rational being, as something

not contained in it.

              In this problem we will first inquire whether the mere conception of

a categorical imperative may not perhaps supply us also with the formula of

it, containing the proposition which alone can be a categorical imperative; for

even if we know the tenor of such an absolute command, yet how it is

possible will require further special and laborious study, which we postpone

to the last section.

              When I conceive a hypothetical imperative, in general I do not know

beforehand what it will contain until I am given the condition. But when I

conceive a categorical imperative, I know at once what it contains. For as the

imperative contains besides the law only the necessity that the maxims* shall

conform to this law, while the law contains no conditions restricting it, there

remains nothing but the general statement that the maxim of the action should

conform to a universal law, and it is this conformity alone that the imperative

properly represents as necessary.

              * A maxim is a subjective principle of action, and must be

distinguished from the objective principle, namely, practical law. The former

contains the practical rule set by reason according to the conditions of the

subject (often its ignorance or its inclinations), so that it is the principle on

which the subject acts; but the law is the objective principle valid for every

rational being, and is the principle on which it ought to act that is an

imperative.

              There is therefore but one categorical imperative, namely, this: Act

only on that maxim whereby thou canst at the same time will that it should

become a universal law.              Now if all imperatives of duty can be deduced from this one

imperative as from their principle, then, although it should remain undecided

what is called duty is not merely a vain notion, yet at least we shall be able to

show what we understand by it and what this notion means.

              Since the universality of the law according to which effects are

produced constitutes what is properly called nature in the most general sense

(as to form), that is the existence of things so far as it is determined by

general laws, the imperative of duty may be expressed thus: Act as if the

maxim of thy action were to become by thy will a universal law of nature.

              We will now enumerate a few duties, adopting the usual division of

them into duties to ourselves and ourselves and to others, and into perfect and

imperfect duties.*

              * It must be noted here that I reserve the division of duties for a

future metaphysic of morals; so that I give it here only as an arbitrary one (in

order to arrange my examples). For the rest, I understand by a perfect duty

one that admits no exception in favour of inclination and then I have not

merely external but also internal perfect duties. This is contrary to the use of

the word adopted in the schools; but I do not intend to justify there, as it is all

one for my purpose whether it is admitted or not.

              1. A man reduced to despair by a series of misfortunes feels wearied

of life, but is still so far in possession of his reason that he can ask himself

whether it would not be contrary to his duty to himself to take his own life.

Now he inquires whether the maxim of his action could become a universal

law of nature. His maxim is: "From self-love I adopt it as a principle to

shorten my life when its longer duration is likely to bring more evil than

satisfaction." It is asked then simply whether this principle founded on self-

love can become a universal law of nature. Now we see at once that a system

of nature of which it should be a law to destroy life by means of the very

feeling whose special nature it is to impel to the improvement of life would

contradict itself and, therefore, could not exist as a system of nature; hence

that maxim cannot possibly exist as a universal law of nature and,

consequently, would be wholly inconsistent with the supreme principle of all

duty.

              2. Another finds himself forced by necessity to borrow money. He

knows that he will not be able to repay it, but sees also that nothing will belent to him unless he promises stoutly to repay it in a definite time. He desires

to make this promise, but he has still so much conscience as to ask himself:

"Is it not unlawful and inconsistent with duty to get out of a difficulty in this

way?" Suppose however that he resolves to do so: then the maxim of his

action would be expressed thus: "When I think myself in want of money, I

will borrow money and promise to repay it, although I know that I never can

do so." Now this principle of self-love or of one's own advantage may

perhaps be consistent with my whole future welfare; but the question now is,

"Is it right?" I change then the suggestion of self-love into a universal law,

and state the question thus: "How would it be if my maxim were a universal

law?" Then I see at once that it could never hold as a universal law of nature,

but would necessarily contradict itself. For supposing it to be a universal law

that everyone when he thinks himself in a difficulty should be able to promise

whatever he pleases, with the purpose of not keeping his promise, the

promise itself would become impossible, as well as the end that one might

have in view in it, since no one would consider that anything was promised to

him, but would ridicule all such statements as vain pretences.

              3. A third finds in himself a talent which with the help of some

culture might make him a useful man in many respects. But he finds himself

in comfortable circumstances and prefers to indulge in pleasure rather than to

take pains in enlarging and improving his happy natural capacities. He asks,

however, whether his maxim of neglect of his natural gifts, besides agreeing

with his inclination to indulgence, agrees also with what is called duty. He

sees then that a system of nature could indeed subsist with such a universal

law although men (like the South Sea islanders) should let their talents rest

and resolve to devote their lives merely to idleness, amusement, and

propagation of their species — in a word, to enjoyment; but he cannot

possibly will that this should be a universal law of nature, or be implanted in

us as such by a natural instinct. For, as a rational being, he necessarily wills

that his faculties be developed, since they serve him and have been given

him, for all sorts of possible purposes.

              4. A fourth, who is in prosperity, while he sees that others have to

contend with great wretchedness and that he could help them, thinks: "What

concern is it of mine? Let everyone be as happy as Heaven pleases, or as be

can make himself; I will take nothing from him nor even envy him, only I do

not wish to contribute anything to his welfare or to his assistance in distress!"Now no doubt if such a mode of thinking were a universal law, the human

race might very well subsist and doubtless even better than in a state in which

everyone talks of sympathy and good-will, or even takes care occasionally to

put it into practice, but, on the other side, also cheats when he can, betrays the

rights of men, or otherwise violates them. But although it is possible that a

universal law of nature might exist in accordance with that maxim, it is

impossible to will that such a principle should have the universal validity of a

law of nature. For a will which resolved this would contradict itself,

inasmuch as many cases might occur in which one would have need of the

love and sympathy of others, and in which, by such a law of nature, sprung

from his own will, he would deprive himself of all hope of the aid he desires.

              These are a few of the many actual duties, or at least what we regard

as such, which obviously fall into two classes on the one principle that we

have laid down. We must be able to will that a maxim of our action should be

a universal law. This is the canon of the moral appreciation of the action

generally. Some actions are of such a character that their maxim cannot

without contradiction be even conceived as a universal law of nature, far

from it being possible that we should will that it should be so. In others this

intrinsic impossibility is not found, but still it is impossible to will that their

maxim should be raised to the universality of a law of nature, since such a

will would contradict itself It is easily seen that the former violate strict or

rigorous (inflexible) duty; the latter only laxer (meritorious) duty. Thus it has

been completely shown how all duties depend as regards the nature of the

obligation (not the object of the action) on the same principle.

              If now we attend to ourselves on occasion of any transgression of

duty, we shall find that we in fact do not will that our maxim should be a

universal law, for that is impossible for us; on the contrary, we will that the

opposite should remain a universal law, only we assume the liberty of making

an exception in our own favour or (just for this time only) in favour of our

inclination. Consequently if we considered all cases from one and the same

point of view, namely, that of reason, we should find a contradiction in our

own will, namely, that a certain principle should be objectively necessary as a

universal law, and yet subjectively should not be universal, but admit of

exceptions. As however we at one moment regard our action from the point

of view of a will wholly conformed to reason, and then again look at the

same action from the point of view of a will affected by inclination, there isnot really any contradiction, but an antagonism of inclination to the precept

of reason, whereby the universality of the principle is changed into a mere

generality, so that the practical principle of reason shall meet the maxim half

way. Now, although this cannot be justified in our own impartial judgement,

yet it proves that we do really recognise the validity of the categorical

imperative and (with all respect for it) only allow ourselves a few exceptions,

which we think unimportant and forced from us.

              We have thus established at least this much, that if duty is a

conception which is to have any import and real legislative authority for our

actions, it can only be expressed in categorical and not at all in hypothetical

imperatives. We have also, which is of great importance, exhibited clearly

and definitely for every practical application the content of the categorical

imperative, which must contain the principle of all duty if there is such a

thing at all. We have not yet, however, advanced so far as to prove a priori

that there actually is such an imperative, that there is a practical law which

commands absolutely of itself and without any other impulse, and that the

following of this law is duty.

              With the view of attaining to this, it is of extreme importance to

remember that we must not allow ourselves to think of deducing the reality of

this principle from the particular attributes of human nature. For duty is to be

a practical, unconditional necessity of action; it must therefore hold for all

rational beings (to whom an imperative can apply at all), and for this reason

only be also a law for all human wills. On the contrary, whatever is deduced

from the particular natural characteristics of humanity, from certain feelings

and propensions, nay, even, if possible, from any particular tendency proper

to human reason, and which need not necessarily hold for the will of every

rational being; this may indeed supply us with a maxim, but not with a law;

with a subjective principle on which we may have a propension and

inclination to act, but not with an objective principle on which we should be

enjoined to act, even though all our propensions, inclinations, and natural

dispositions were opposed to it. In fact, the sublimity and intrinsic dignity of

the command in duty are so much the more evident, the less the subjective

impulses favour it and the more they oppose it, without being able in the

slightest degree to weaken the obligation of the law or to diminish its

validity.

              Here then we see philosophy brought to a critical position, since ithas to be firmly fixed, notwithstanding that it has nothing to support it in

heaven or earth. Here it must show its purity as absolute director of its own

laws, not the herald of those which are whispered to it by an implanted sense

or who knows what tutelary nature. Although these may be better than

nothing, yet they can never afford principles dictated by reason, which must

have their source wholly a priori and thence their commanding authority,

expecting everything from the supremacy of the law and the due respect for

it, nothing from inclination, or else condemning the man to self-contempt and

inward abhorrence.

              Thus every empirical element is not only quite incapable of being an

aid to the principle of morality, but is even highly prejudicial to the purity of

morals, for the proper and inestimable worth of an absolutely good will

consists just in this, that the principle of action is free from all influence of

contingent grounds, which alone experience can furnish. We cannot too much

or too often repeat our warning against this lax and even mean habit of

thought which seeks for its principle amongst empirical motives and laws; for

human reason in its weariness is glad to rest on this pillow, and in a dream of

sweet illusions (in which, instead of Juno, it embraces a cloud) it substitutes

for morality a bastard patched up from limbs of various derivation, which

looks like anything one chooses to see in it, only not like virtue to one who

has once beheld her in her true form.*

              * To behold virtue in her proper form is nothing else but to

contemplate morality stripped of all admixture of sensible things and of every

spurious ornament of reward or self-love. How much she then eclipses

everything else that appears charming to the affections, every one may

readily perceive with the least exertion of his reason, if it be not wholly

spoiled for abstraction.

              The question then is this: "Is it a necessary law for all rational beings

that they should always judge of their actions by maxims of which they can

themselves will that they should serve as universal laws?" If it is so, then it

must be connected (altogether a priori) with the very conception of the will of

a rational being generally. But in order to discover this connexion we must,

however reluctantly, take a step into metaphysic, although into a domain of it

which is distinct from speculative philosophy, namely, the metaphysic of

morals. In a practical philosophy, where it is not the reasons of what happens

that we have to ascertain, but the laws of what ought to happen, evenalthough it never does, i.e., objective practical laws, there it is not necessary

to inquire into the reasons why anything pleases or displeases, how the

pleasure of mere sensation differs from taste, and whether the latter is distinct

from a general satisfaction of reason; on what the feeling of pleasure or pain

rests, and how from it desires and inclinations arise, and from these again

maxims by the co-operation of reason: for all this belongs to an empirical

psychology, which would constitute the second part of physics, if we regard

physics as the philosophy of nature, so far as it is based on empirical laws.

But here we are concerned with objective practical laws and, consequently,

with the relation of the will to itself so far as it is determined by reason alone,

in which case whatever has reference to anything empirical is necessarily

excluded; since if reason of itself alone determines the conduct (and it is the

possibility of this that we are now investigating), it must necessarily do so a

priori.

              The will is conceived as a faculty of determining oneself to action in

accordance with the conception of certain laws. And such a faculty can be

found only in rational beings. Now that which serves the will as the objective

ground of its self-determination is the end, and, if this is assigned by reason

alone, it must hold for all rational beings. On the other hand, that which

merely contains the ground of possibility of the action of which the effect is

the end, this is called the means. The subjective ground of the desire is the

spring, the objective ground of the volition is the motive; hence the

distinction between subjective ends which rest on springs, and objective ends

which depend on motives valid for every rational being. Practical principles

are formal when they abstract from all subjective ends; they are material

when they assume these, and therefore particular springs of action. The ends

which a rational being proposes to himself at pleasure as effects of his actions

(material ends) are all only relative, for it is only their relation to the

particular desires of the subject that gives them their worth, which therefore

cannot furnish principles universal and necessary for all rational beings and

for every volition, that is to say practical laws. Hence all these relative ends

can give rise only to hypothetical imperatives.

              Supposing, however, that there were something whose existence has

in itself an absolute worth, something which, being an end in itself, could be

a source of definite laws; then in this and this alone would lie the source of a

possible categorical imperative, i.e., a practical law.              Now I say: man and generally any rational being exists as an end in

himself, not merely as a means to be arbitrarily used by this or that will, but

in all his actions, whether they concern himself or other rational beings, must

be always regarded at the same time as an end. All objects of the inclinations

have only a conditional worth, for if the inclinations and the wants founded

on them did not exist, then their object would be without value. But the

inclinations, themselves being sources of want, are so far from having an

absolute worth for which they should be desired that on the contrary it must

be the universal wish of every rational being to be wholly free from them.

Thus the worth of any object which is to be acquired by our action is always

conditional. Beings whose existence depends not on our will but on nature's,

have nevertheless, if they are irrational beings, only a relative value as means,

and are therefore called things; rational beings, on the contrary, are called

persons, because their very nature points them out as ends in themselves, that

is as something which must not be used merely as means, and so far therefore

restricts freedom of action (and is an object of respect). These, therefore, are

not merely subjective ends whose existence has a worth for us as an effect of

our action, but objective ends, that is, things whose existence is an end in

itself; an end moreover for which no other can be substituted, which they

should subserve merely as means, for otherwise nothing whatever would

possess absolute worth; but if all worth were conditioned and therefore

contingent, then there would be no supreme practical principle of reason

whatever.

              If then there is a supreme practical principle or, in respect of the

human will, a categorical imperative, it must be one which, being drawn from

the conception of that which is necessarily an end for everyone because it is

an end in itself, constitutes an objective principle of will, and can therefore

serve as a universal practical law. The foundation of this principle is: rational

nature exists as an end in itself. Man necessarily conceives his own existence

as being so; so far then this is a subjective principle of human actions. But

every other rational being regards its existence similarly, just on the same

rational principle that holds for me:* so that it is at the same time an objective

principle, from which as a supreme practical law all laws of the will must be

capable of being deduced. Accordingly the practical imperative will be as

follows: So act as to treat humanity, whether in thine own person or in that of

any other, in every case as an end withal, never as means only. We will now

inquire whether this can be practically carried out.              * This proposition is here stated as a postulate. The ground of it will

be found in the concluding section.

              To abide by the previous examples:

              Firstly, under the head of necessary duty to oneself: He who

contemplates suicide should ask himself whether his action can be consistent

with the idea of humanity as an end in itself. If he destroys himself in order to

escape from painful circumstances, he uses a person merely as a mean to

maintain a tolerable condition up to the end of life. But a man is not a thing,

that is to say, something which can be used merely as means, but must in all

his actions be always considered as an end in himself. I cannot, therefore,

dispose in any way of a man in my own person so as to mutilate him, to

damage or kill him. (It belongs to ethics proper to define this principle more

precisely, so as to avoid all misunderstanding, e. g., as to the amputation of

the limbs in order to preserve myself, as to exposing my life to danger with a

view to preserve it, etc. This question is therefore omitted here.)

              Secondly, as regards necessary duties, or those of strict obligation,

towards others: He who is thinking of making a lying promise to others will

see at once that he would be using another man merely as a mean, without the

latter containing at the same time the end in himself. For he whom I propose

by such a promise to use for my own purposes cannot possibly assent to my

mode of acting towards him and, therefore, cannot himself contain the end of

this action. This violation of the principle of humanity in other men is more

obvious if we take in examples of attacks on the freedom and property of

others. For then it is clear that he who transgresses the rights of men intends

to use the person of others merely as a means, without considering that as

rational beings they ought always to be esteemed also as ends, that is, as

beings who must be capable of containing in themselves the end of the very

same action.*

              * Let it not be thought that the common "quod tibi non vis fieri, etc."

could serve here as the rule or principle. For it is only a deduction from the

former, though with several limitations; it cannot be a universal law, for it

does not contain the principle of duties to oneself, nor of the duties of

benevolence to others (for many a one would gladly consent that others

should not benefit him, provided only that he might be excused from showing

benevolence to them), nor finally that of duties of strict obligation to oneanother, for on this principle the criminal might argue against the judge who

punishes him, and so on.

              Thirdly, as regards contingent (meritorious) duties to oneself: It is

not enough that the action does not violate humanity in our own person as an

end in itself, it must also harmonize with it. Now there are in humanity

capacities of greater perfection, which belong to the end that nature has in

view in regard to humanity in ourselves as the subject: to neglect these might

perhaps be consistent with the maintenance of humanity as an end in itself,

but not with the advancement of this end.

              Fourthly, as regards meritorious duties towards others: The natural

end which all men have is their own happiness. Now humanity might indeed

subsist, although no one should contribute anything to the happiness of

others, provided he did not intentionally withdraw anything from it; but after

all this would only harmonize negatively not positively with humanity as an

end in itself, if every one does not also endeavour, as far as in him lies, to

forward the ends of others. For the ends of any subject which is an end in

himself ought as far as possible to be my ends also, if that conception is to

have its full effect with me.

              This principle, that humanity and generally every rational nature is

an end in itself (which is the supreme limiting condition of every man's

freedom of action), is not borrowed from experience, firstly, because it is

universal, applying as it does to all rational beings whatever, and experience

is not capable of determining anything about them; secondly, because it does

not present humanity as an end to men (subjectively), that is as an object

which men do of themselves actually adopt as an end; but as an objective

end, which must as a law constitute the supreme limiting condition of all our

subjective ends, let them be what we will; it must therefore spring from pure

reason. In fact the objective principle of all practical legislation lies

(according to the first principle) in the rule and its form of universality which

makes it capable of being a law (say, e. g., a law of nature); but the subjective

principle is in the end; now by the second principle the subject of all ends is

each rational being, inasmuch as it is an end in itself. Hence follows the third

practical principle of the will, which is the ultimate condition of its harmony

with universal practical reason, viz.: the idea of the will of every rational

being as a universally legislative will.              On this principle all maxims are rejected which are inconsistent with

the will being itself universal legislator. Thus the will is not subject simply to

the law, but so subject that it must be regarded as itself giving the law and, on

this ground only, subject to the law (of which it can regard itself as the

author).

              In the previous imperatives, namely, that based on the conception of

the conformity of actions to general laws, as in a physical system of nature,

and that based on the universal prerogative of rational beings as ends in

themselves — these imperatives, just because they were conceived as

categorical, excluded from any share in their authority all admixture of any

interest as a spring of action; they were, however, only assumed to be

categorical, because such an assumption was necessary to explain the

conception of duty. But we could not prove independently that there are

practical propositions which command categorically, nor can it be proved in

this section; one thing, however, could be done, namely, to indicate in the

imperative itself, by some determinate expression, that in the case of volition

from duty all interest is renounced, which is the specific criterion of

categorical as distinguished from hypothetical imperatives. This is done in

the present (third) formula of the principle, namely, in the idea of the will of

every rational being as a universally legislating will.

              For although a will which is subject to laws may be attached to this

law by means of an interest, yet a will which is itself a supreme lawgiver so

far as it is such cannot possibly depend on any interest, since a will so

dependent would itself still need another law restricting the interest of its self-

love by the condition that it should be valid as universal law.

              Thus the principle that every human will is a will which in all its

maxims gives universal laws,* provided it be otherwise justified, would be

very well adapted to be the categorical imperative, in this respect, namely,

that just because of the idea of universal legislation it is not based on interest,

and therefore it alone among all possible imperatives can be unconditional.

Or still better, converting the proposition, if there is a categorical imperative

(i.e., a law for the will of every rational being), it can only command that

everything be done from maxims of one's will regarded as a will which could

at the same time will that it should itself give universal laws, for in that case

only the practical principle and the imperative which it obeys are

unconditional, since they cannot be based on any interest.              * I may be excused from adducing examples to elucidate this

principle, as those which have already been used to elucidate the categorical

imperative and its formula would all serve for the like purpose here.

              Looking back now on all previous attempts to discover the principle

of morality, we need not wonder why they all failed. It was seen that man

was bound to laws by duty, but it was not observed that the laws to which he

is subject are only those of his own giving, though at the same time they are

universal, and that he is only bound to act in conformity with his own will; a

will, however, which is designed by nature to give universal laws. For when

one has conceived man only as subject to a law (no matter what), then this

law required some interest, either by way of attraction or constraint, since it

did not originate as a law from his own will, but this will was according to a

law obliged by something else to act in a certain manner. Now by this

necessary consequence all the labour spent in finding a supreme principle of

duty was irrevocably lost. For men never elicited duty, but only a necessity of

acting from a certain interest. Whether this interest was private or otherwise,

in any case the imperative must be conditional and could not by any means

be capable of being a moral command. I will therefore call this the principle

of autonomy of the will, in contrast with every other which I accordingly

reckon as heteronomy.

              The conception of the will of every rational being as one which must

consider itself as giving in all the maxims of its will universal laws, so as to

judge itself and its actions from this point of viewthis conception leads to

another which depends on it and is very fruitful, namely that of a kingdom of

ends.

              By a kingdom I understand the union of different rational beings in a

system by common laws. Now since it is by laws that ends are determined as

regards their universal validity, hence, if we abstract from the personal

differences of rational beings and likewise from all the content of their

private ends, we shall be able to conceive all ends combined in a systematic

whole (including both rational beings as ends in themselves, and also the

special ends which each may propose to himself), that is to say, we can

conceive a kingdom of ends, which on the preceding principles is possible.

              For all rational beings come under the law that each of them must

treat itself and all others never merely as means, but in every case at the sametime as ends in themselves. Hence results a systematic union of rational being

by common objective laws, i.e., a kingdom which may be called a kingdom

of ends, since what these laws have in view is just the relation of these beings

to one another as ends and means. It is certainly only an ideal.

              A rational being belongs as a member to the kingdom of ends when,

although giving universal laws in it, he is also himself subject to these laws.

He belongs to it as sovereign when, while giving laws, he is not subject to the

will of any other.

              A rational being must always regard himself as giving laws either as

member or as sovereign in a kingdom of ends which is rendered possible by

the freedom of will. He cannot, however, maintain the latter position merely

by the maxims of his will, but only in case he is a completely independent

being without wants and with unrestricted power adequate to his will.

              Morality consists then in the reference of all action to the legislation

which alone can render a kingdom of ends possible. This legislation must be

capable of existing in every rational being and of emanating from his will, so

that the principle of this will is never to act on any maxim which could not

without contradiction be also a universal law and, accordingly, always so to

act that the will could at the same time regard itself as giving in its maxims

universal laws. If now the maxims of rational beings are not by their own

nature coincident with this objective principle, then the necessity of acting on

it is called practical necessitation, i.e., duty. Duty does not apply to the

sovereign in the kingdom of ends, but it does to every member of it and to all

in the same degree.

              The practical necessity of acting on this principle, i.e., duty, does not

rest at all on feelings, impulses, or inclinations, but solely on the relation of

rational beings to one another, a relation in which the will of a rational being

must always be regarded as legislative, since otherwise it could not be

conceived as an end in itself. Reason then refers every maxim of the will,

regarding it as legislating universally, to every other will and also to every

action towards oneself; and this not on account of any other practical motive

or any future advantage, but from the idea of the dignity of a rational being,

obeying no law but that which he himself also gives.

              In the kingdom of ends everything has either value or dignity.

Whatever has a value can be replaced by something else which is equivalent;whatever, on the other hand, is above all value, and therefore admits of no

equivalent, has a dignity.

              Whatever has reference to the general inclinations and wants of

mankind has a market value; whatever, without presupposing a want,

corresponds to a certain taste, that is to a satisfaction in the mere purposeless

play of our faculties, has a fancy value; but that which constitutes the

condition under which alone anything can be an end in itself, this has not

merely a relative worth, i.e., value, but an intrinsic worth, that is, dignity.

              Now morality is the condition under which alone a rational being

can be an end in himself, since by this alone is it possible that he should be a

legislating member in the kingdom of ends. Thus morality, and humanity as

capable of it, is that which alone has dignity. Skill and diligence in labour

have a market value; wit, lively imagination, and humour, have fancy value;

on the other hand, fidelity to promises, benevolence from principle (not from

instinct), have an intrinsic worth. Neither nature nor art contains anything

which in default of these it could put in their place, for their worth consists

not in the effects which spring from them, not in the use and advantage which

they secure, but in the disposition of mind, that is, the maxims of the will

which are ready to manifest themselves in such actions, even though they

should not have the desired effect. These actions also need no

recommendation from any subjective taste or sentiment, that they may be

looked on with immediate favour and satisfaction: they need no immediate

propension or feeling for them; they exhibit the will that performs them as an

object of an immediate respect, and nothing but reason is required to impose

them on the will; not to flatter it into them, which, in the case of duties,

would be a contradiction. This estimation therefore shows that the worth of

such a disposition is dignity, and places it infinitely above all value, with

which it cannot for a moment be brought into comparison or competition

without as it were violating its sanctity.

              What then is it which justifies virtue or the morally good disposition,

in making such lofty claims? It is nothing less than the privilege it secures to

the rational being of participating in the giving of universal laws, by which it

qualifies him to be a member of a possible kingdom of ends, a privilege to

which he was already destined by his own nature as being an end in himself

and, on that account, legislating in the kingdom of ends; free as regards all

laws of physical nature, and obeying those only which he himself gives, andby which his maxims can belong to a system of universal law, to which at the

same time he submits himself. For nothing has any worth except what the law

assigns it. Now the legislation itself which assigns the worth of everything

must for that very reason possess dignity, that is an unconditional

incomparable worth; and the word respect alone supplies a becoming

expression for the esteem which a rational being must have for it. Autonomy

then is the basis of the dignity of human and of every rational nature.

              The three modes of presenting the principle of morality that have

been adduced are at bottom only so many formulae of the very same law, and

each of itself involves the other two. There is, however, a difference in them,

but it is rather subjectively than objectively practical, intended namely to

bring an idea of the reason nearer to intuition (by means of a certain analogy)

and thereby nearer to feeling. All maxims, in fact, have:

              1. A form, consisting in universality; and in this view the formula of

the moral imperative is expressed thus, that the maxims must be so chosen as

if they were to serve as universal laws of nature.

              2. A matter, namely, an end, and here the formula says that the

rational being, as it is an end by its own nature and therefore an end in itself,

must in every maxim serve as the condition limiting all merely relative and

arbitrary ends.

              3. A complete characterization of all maxims by means of that

formula, namely, that all maxims ought by their own legislation to harmonize

with a possible kingdom of ends as with a kingdom of nature.* There is a

progress here in the order of the categories of unity of the form of the will (its

universality), plurality of the matter (the objects, i.e., the ends), and totality of

the system of these. In forming our moral judgement of actions, it is better to

proceed always on the strict method and start from the general formula of the

categorical imperative: Act according to a maxim which can at the same time

make itself a universal law. If, however, we wish to gain an entrance for the

moral law, it is very useful to bring one and the same action under the three

specified conceptions, and thereby as far as possible to bring it nearer to

intuition.

              * Teleology considers nature as a kingdom of ends; ethics regards a

possible kingdom of ends as a kingdom nature. In the first case, the kingdom

of ends is a theoretical idea, adopted to explain what actually is. In the latterit is a practical idea, adopted to bring about that which is not yet, but which

can be realized by our conduct, namely, if it conforms to this idea.

              We can now end where we started at the beginning, namely, with the

conception of a will unconditionally good. That will is absolutely good which

cannot be evil — in other words, whose maxim, if made a universal law,

could never contradict itself. This principle, then, is its supreme law: "Act

always on such a maxim as thou canst at the same time will to be a universal

law"; this is the sole condition under which a will can never contradict itself;

and such an imperative is categorical. Since the validity of the will as a

universal law for possible actions is analogous to the universal connexion of

the existence of things by general laws, which is the formal notion of nature

in general, the categorical imperative can also be expressed thus: Act on

maxims which can at the same time have for their object themselves as

universal laws of nature. Such then is the formula of an absolutely good will.

              Rational nature is distinguished from the rest of nature by this, that it

sets before itself an end. This end would be the matter of every good will. But

since in the idea of a will that is absolutely good without being limited by any

condition (of attaining this or that end) we must abstract wholly from every

end to be effected (since this would make every will only relatively good), it

follows that in this case the end must be conceived, not as an end to be

effected, but as an independently existing end. Consequently it is conceived

only negatively, i.e., as that which we must never act against and which,

therefore, must never be regarded merely as means, but must in every

volition be esteemed as an end likewise. Now this end can be nothing but the

subject of all possible ends, since this is also the subject of a possible

absolutely good will; for such a will cannot without contradiction be

postponed to any other object. The principle: "So act in regard to every

rational being (thyself and others), that he may always have place in thy

maxim as an end in himself," is accordingly essentially identical with this

other: "Act upon a maxim which, at the same time, involves its own universal

validity for every rational being." For that in using means for every end I

should limit my maxim by the condition of its holding good as a law for

every subject, this comes to the same thing as that the fundamental principle

of all maxims of action must be that the subject of all ends, i.e., the rational

being himself, be never employed merely as means, but as the supreme

condition restricting the use of all means, that is in every case as an endlikewise.

              It follows incontestably that, to whatever laws any rational being

may be subject, he being an end in himself must be able to regard himself as

also legislating universally in respect of these same laws, since it is just this

fitness of his maxims for universal legislation that distinguishes him as an

end in himself; also it follows that this implies his dignity (prerogative) above

all mere physical beings, that he must always take his maxims from the point

of view which regards himself and, likewise, every other rational being as

law-giving beings (on which account they are called persons). In this way a

world of rational beings (mundus intelligibilis) is possible as a kingdom of

ends, and this by virtue of the legislation proper to all persons as members.

Therefore every rational being must so act as if he were by his maxims in

every case a legislating member in the universal kingdom of ends. The formal

principle of these maxims is: "So act as if thy maxim were to serve likewise

as the universal law (of all rational beings)." A kingdom of ends is thus only

possible on the analogy of a kingdom of nature, the former however only by

maxims, that is self-imposed rules, the latter only by the laws of efficient

causes acting under necessitation from without. Nevertheless, although the

system of nature is looked upon as a machine, yet so far as it has reference to

rational beings as its ends, it is given on this account the name of a kingdom

of nature. Now such a kingdom of ends would be actually realized by means

of maxims conforming to the canon which the categorical imperative

prescribes to all rational beings, if they were universally followed. But

although a rational being, even if he punctually follows this maxim himself,

cannot reckon upon all others being therefore true to the same, nor expect

that the kingdom of nature and its orderly arrangements shall be in harmony

with him as a fitting member, so as to form a kingdom of ends to which he

himself contributes, that is to say, that it shall favour his expectation of

happiness, still that law: "Act according to the maxims of a member of a

merely possible kingdom of ends legislating in it universally," remains in its

full force, inasmuch as it commands categorically. And it is just in this that

the paradox lies; that the mere dignity of man as a rational creature, without

any other end or advantage to be attained thereby, in other words, respect for

a mere idea, should yet serve as an inflexible precept of the will, and that it is

precisely in this independence of the maxim on all such springs of action that

its sublimity consists; and it is this that makes every rational subject worthy

to be a legislative member in the kingdom of ends: for otherwise he wouldhave to be conceived only as subject to the physical law of his wants. And

although we should suppose the kingdom of nature and the kingdom of ends

to be united under one sovereign, so that the latter kingdom thereby ceased to

be a mere idea and acquired true reality, then it would no doubt gain the

accession of a strong spring, but by no means any increase of its intrinsic

worth. For this sole absolute lawgiver must, notwithstanding this, be always

conceived as estimating the worth of rational beings only by their

disinterested behaviour, as prescribed to themselves from that idea [the

dignity of man] alone. The essence of things is not altered by their external

relations, and that which, abstracting from these, alone constitutes the

absolute worth of man, is also that by which he must be judged, whoever the

judge may be, and even by the Supreme Being. Morality, then, is the relation

of actions to the relation of actions will, that is, to the autonomy of potential

universal legislation by its maxims. An action that is consistent with the

autonomy of the will is permitted; one that does not agree therewith is

forbidden. A will whose maxims necessarily coincide with the laws of

autonomy is a holy will, good absolutely. The dependence of a will not

absolutely good on the principle of autonomy (moral necessitation) is

obligation. This, then, cannot be applied to a holy being. The objective

necessity of actions from obligation is called duty.

              From what has just been said, it is easy to see how it happens that,

although the conception of duty implies subjection to the law, we yet ascribe

a certain dignity and sublimity to the person who fulfils all his duties. There

is not, indeed, any sublimity in him, so far as he is subject to the moral law;

but inasmuch as in regard to that very law he is likewise a legislator, and on

that account alone subject to it, he has sublimity. We have also shown above

that neither fear nor inclination, but simply respect for the law, is the spring

which can give actions a moral worth. Our own will, so far as we suppose it

to act only under the condition that its maxims are potentially universal laws,

this ideal will which is possible to us is the proper object of respect; and the

dignity of humanity consists just in this capacity of being universally

legislative, though with the condition that it is itself subject to this same

legislation.

      The Autonomy of the Will as the Supreme Principle of Morality

 

              Autonomy of the will is that property of it by which it is a law toitself (independently of any property of the objects of volition). The principle

of autonomy then is: "Always so to choose that the same volition shall

comprehend the maxims of our choice as a universal law." We cannot prove

that this practical rule is an imperative, i.e., that the will of every rational

being is necessarily bound to it as a condition, by a mere analysis of the

conceptions which occur in it, since it is a synthetical proposition; we must

advance beyond the cognition of the objects to a critical examination of the

subject, that is, of the pure practical reason, for this synthetic proposition

which commands apodeictically must be capable of being cognized wholly a

priori. This matter, however, does not belong to the present section. But that

the principle of autonomy in question is the sole principle of morals can be

readily shown by mere analysis of the conceptions of morality. For by this

analysis we find that its principle must be a categorical imperative and that

what this commands is neither more nor less than this very autonomy.

Heteronomy of the Will as the Source of all spurious Principles of Morality

 

              If the will seeks the law which is to determine it anywhere else than

in the fitness of its maxims to be universal laws of its own dictation,

consequently if it goes out of itself and seeks this law in the character of any

of its objects, there always results heteronomy. The will in that case does not

give itself the law, but it is given by the object through its relation to the will.

This relation, whether it rests on inclination or on conceptions of reason, only

admits of hypothetical imperatives: "I ought to do something because I wish

for something else." On the contrary, the moral, and therefore categorical,

imperative says: "I ought to do so and so, even though I should not wish for

anything else." E.g., the former says: "I ought not to lie, if I would retain my

reputation"; the latter says: "I ought not to lie, although it should not bring me

the least discredit." The latter therefore must so far abstract from all objects

that they shall have no influence on the will, in order that practical reason

(will) may not be restricted to administering an interest not belonging to it,

but may simply show its own commanding authority as the supreme

legislation. Thus, e.g., I ought to endeavour to promote the happiness of

others, not as if its realization involved any concern of mine (whether by

immediate inclination or by any satisfaction indirectly gained through

reason), but simply because a maxim which excludes it cannot be

comprehended as a universal law in one and the same volition.  Classification of all Principles of Morality which can be founded on the

                              Conception of Heteronomy

 

              Here as elsewhere human reason in its pure use, so long as it was not

critically examined, has first tried all possible wrong ways before it

succeeded in finding the one true way.

              All principles which can be taken from this point of view are either

empirical or rational. The former, drawn from the principle of happiness, are

built on physical or moral feelings; the latter, drawn from the principle of

perfection, are built either on the rational conception of perfection as a

possible effect, or on that of an independent perfection (the will of God) as

the determining cause of our will.

              Empirical principles are wholly incapable of serving as a foundation

for moral laws. For the universality with which these should hold for all

rational beings without distinction, the unconditional practical necessity

which is thereby imposed on them, is lost when their foundation is taken

from the particular constitution of human nature, or the accidental

circumstances in which it is placed. The principle of private happiness,

however, is the most objectionable, not merely because it is false, and

experience contradicts the supposition that prosperity is always proportioned

to good conduct, nor yet merely because it contributes nothing to the

establishment of morality — since it is quite a different thing to make a

prosperous man and a good man, or to make one prudent and sharp-sighted

for his own interests and to make him virtuous — but because the springs it

provides for morality are such as rather undermine it and destroy its

sublimity, since they put the motives to virtue and to vice in the same class

and only teach us to make a better calculation, the specific difference

between virtue and vice being entirely extinguished. On the other hand, as to

moral feeling, this supposed special sense,* the appeal to it is indeed

superficial when those who cannot think believe that feeling will help them

out, even in what concerns general laws: and besides, feelings, which

naturally differ infinitely in degree, cannot furnish a uniform standard of

good and evil, nor has anyone a right to form judgements for others by his

own feelings: nevertheless this moral feeling is nearer to morality and its

dignity in this respect, that it pays virtue the honour of ascribing to her

immediately the satisfaction and esteem we have for her and does not, as itwere, tell her to her face that we are not attached to her by her beauty but by

profit.

              * I class the principle of moral feeling under that of happiness,

because every empirical interest promises to contribute to our well-being by

the agreeableness that a thing affords, whether it be immediately and without

a view to profit, or whether profit be regarded. We must likewise, with

Hutcheson, class the principle of sympathy with the happiness of others

under his assumed moral sense.

              Amongst the rational principles of morality, the ontological

conception of perfection, notwithstanding its defects, is better than the

theological conception which derives morality from a Divine absolutely

perfect will. The former is, no doubt, empty and indefinite and consequently

useless for finding in the boundless field of possible reality the greatest

amount suitable for us; moreover, in attempting to distinguish specifically the

reality of which we are now speaking from every other, it inevitably tends to

turn in a circle and cannot avoid tacitly presupposing the morality which it is

to explain; it is nevertheless preferable to the theological view, first, because

we have no intuition of the divine perfection and can only deduce it from our

own conceptions, the most important of which is that of morality, and our

explanation would thus be involved in a gross circle; and, in the next place, if

we avoid this, the only notion of the Divine will remaining to us is a

conception made up of the attributes of desire of glory and dominion,

combined with the awful conceptions of might and vengeance, and any

system of morals erected on this foundation would be directly opposed to

morality.

              However, if I had to choose between the notion of the moral sense

and that of perfection in general (two systems which at least do not weaken

morality, although they are totally incapable of serving as its foundation),

then I should decide for the latter, because it at least withdraws the decision

of the question from the sensibility and brings it to the court of pure reason;

and although even here it decides nothing, it at all events preserves the

indefinite idea (of a will good in itself free from corruption, until it shall be

more precisely defined.

              For the rest I think I may be excused here from a detailed refutation

of all these doctrines; that would only be superfluous labour, since it is soeasy, and is probably so well seen even by those whose office requires them

to decide for one of these theories (because their hearers would not tolerate

suspension of judgement). But what interests us more here is to know that the

prime foundation of morality laid down by all these principles is nothing but

heteronomy of the will, and for this reason they must necessarily miss their

aim.

              In every case where an object of the will has to be supposed, in order

that the rule may be prescribed which is to determine the will, there the rule is

simply heteronomy; the imperative is conditional, namely, if or because one

wishes for this object, one should act so and so: hence it can never command

morally, that is, categorically. Whether the object determines the will by

means of inclination, as in the principle of private happiness, or by means of

reason directed to objects of our possible volition generally, as in the

principle of perfection, in either case the will never determines itself

immediately by the conception of the action, but only by the influence which

the foreseen effect of the action has on the will; I ought to do something, on

this account, because I wish for something else; and here there must be yet

another law assumed in me as its subject, by which I necessarily will this

other thing, and this law again requires an imperative to restrict this maxim.

For the influence which the conception of an object within the reach of our

faculties can exercise on the will of the subject, in consequence of its natural

properties, depends on the nature of the subject, either the sensibility

(inclination and taste), or the understanding and reason, the employment of

which is by the peculiar constitution of their nature attended with satisfaction.

It follows that the law would be, properly speaking, given by nature, and, as

such, it must be known and proved by experience and would consequently be

contingent and therefore incapable of being an apodeictic practical rule, such

as the moral rule must be. Not only so, but it is inevitably only heteronomy;

the will does not give itself the law, but is given by a foreign impulse by

means of a particular natural constitution of the subject adapted to receive it.

An absolutely good will, then, the principle of which must be a categorical

imperative, will be indeterminate as regards all objects and will contain

merely the form of volition generally, and that as autonomy, that is to say, the

capability of the maxims of every good will to make themselves a universal

law, is itself the only law which the will of every rational being imposes on

itself, without needing to assume any spring or interest as a foundation.              How such a synthetical practical a priori proposition is possible, and

why it is necessary, is a problem whose solution does not lie within the

bounds of the metaphysic of morals; and we have not here affirmed its truth,

much less professed to have a proof of it in our power. We simply showed by

the development of the universally received notion of morality that an

autonomy of the will is inevitably connected with it, or rather is its

foundation. Whoever then holds morality to be anything real, and not a

chimerical idea without any truth, must likewise admit the principle of it that

is here assigned. This section then, like the first, was merely analytical. Now

to prove that morality is no creation of the brain, which it cannot be if the

categorical imperative and with it the autonomy of the will is true, and as an a

priori principle absolutely necessary, this supposes the possibility of a

synthetic use of pure practical reason, which however we cannot venture on

without first giving a critical examination of this faculty of reason. In the

concluding section we shall give the principal outlines of this critical

examination as far as is sufficient for our purpose.

 

 

                                     Third Section

 

 

    Transition from the Metaphysic of Morals to the Critique of Pure

                                  Practical Reason

 

 

The Concept of Freedom is the Key that explains the Autonomy of the Will

 

              The will is a kind of causality belonging to living beings in so far as

they are rational, and freedom would be this property of such causality that it

can be efficient, independently of foreign causes determining it; just as

physical necessity is the property that the causality of all irrational beings has

of being determined to activity by the influence of foreign causes.

              The preceding definition of freedom is negative and therefore

unfruitful for the discovery of its essence, but it leads to a positive conception

which is so much the more full and fruitful.

              Since the conception of causality involves that of laws, according to

which, by something that we call cause, something else, namely the effect,

must be produced; hence, although freedom is not a property of the will

depending on physical laws, yet it is not for that reason lawless; on the

contrary it must be a causality acting according to immutable laws, but of a

peculiar kind; otherwise a free will would be an absurdity. Physical necessity

is a heteronomy of the efficient causes, for every effect is possible only

according to this law, that something else determines the efficient cause to

exert its causality. What else then can freedom of the will be but autonomy,

that is, the property of the will to be a law to itself? But the proposition: "The

will is in every action a law to itself," only expresses the principle: "To act on

no other maxim than that which can also have as an object itself as a

universal law." Now this is precisely the formula of the categorical

imperative and is the principle of morality, so that a free will and a will

subject to moral laws are one and the same.

              On the hypothesis, then, of freedom of the will, morality togetherwith its principle follows from it by mere analysis of the conception.

However, the latter is a synthetic proposition; viz., an absolutely good will is

that whose maxim can always include itself regarded as a universal law; for

this property of its maxim can never be discovered by analysing the

conception of an absolutely good will. Now such synthetic propositions are

only possible in this way: that the two cognitions are connected together by

their union with a third in which they are both to be found. The positive

concept of freedom furnishes this third cognition, which cannot, as with

physical causes, be the nature of the sensible world (in the concept of which

we find conjoined the concept of something in relation as cause to something

else as effect). We cannot now at once show what this third is to which

freedom points us and of which we have an idea a priori, nor can we make

intelligible how the concept of freedom is shown to be legitimate from

principles of pure practical reason and with it the possibility of a categorical

imperative; but some further preparation is required.

  Freedom must be presupposed as a Property of the Will of all Rational

                                        Beings

 

              It is not enough to predicate freedom of our own will, from

Whatever reason, if we have not sufficient grounds for predicating the same

of all rational beings. For as morality serves as a law for us only because we

are rational beings, it must also hold for all rational beings; and as it must be

deduced simply from the property of freedom, it must be shown that freedom

also is a property of all rational beings. It is not enough, then, to prove it from

certain supposed experiences of human nature (which indeed is quite

impossible, and it can only be shown a priori), but we must show that it

belongs to the activity of all rational beings endowed with a will. Now I say

every being that cannot act except under the idea of freedom is just for that

reason in a practical point of view really free, that is to say, all laws which are

inseparably connected with freedom have the same force for him as if his will

had been shown to be free in itself by a proof theoretically conclusive.* Now

I affirm that we must attribute to every rational being which has a will that it

has also the idea of freedom and acts entirely under this idea. For in such a

being we conceive a reason that is practical, that is, has causality in reference

to its objects. Now we cannot possibly conceive a reason consciously

receiving a bias from any other quarter with respect to its judgements, for

then the subject would ascribe the determination of its judgement not to itsown reason, but to an impulse. It must regard itself as the author of its

principles independent of foreign influences. Consequently as practical

reason or as the will of a rational being it must regard itself as free, that is to

say, the will of such a being cannot be a will of its own except under the idea

of freedom. This idea must therefore in a practical point of view be ascribed

to every rational being.

              * I adopt this method of assuming freedom merely as an idea which

rational beings suppose in their actions, in order to avoid the necessity of

proving it in its theoretical aspect also. The former is sufficient for my

purpose; for even though the speculative proof should not be made out, yet a

being that cannot act except with the idea of freedom is bound by the same

laws that would oblige a being who was actually free. Thus we can escape

here from the onus which presses on the theory.

                Of the Interest attaching to the Ideas of Morality

 

              We have finally reduced the definite conception of morality to the

idea of freedom. This latter, however, we could not prove to be actually a

property of ourselves or of human nature; only we saw that it must be

presupposed if we would conceive a being as rational and conscious of its

causality in respect of its actions, i.e., as endowed with a will; and so we find

that on just the same grounds we must ascribe to every being endowed with

reason and will this attribute of determining itself to action under the idea of

its freedom.

              Now it resulted also from the presupposition of these ideas that we

became aware of a law that the subjective principles of action, i.e., maxims,

must always be so assumed that they can also hold as objective, that is,

universal principles, and so serve as universal laws of our own dictation. But

why then should I subject myself to this principle and that simply as a

rational being, thus also subjecting to it all other being endowed with reason?

I will allow that no interest urges me to this, for that would not give a

categorical imperative, but I must take an interest in it and discern how this

comes to pass; for this properly an "I ought" is properly an "I would," valid

for every rational being, provided only that reason determined his actions

without any hindrance. But for beings that are in addition affected as we are

by springs of a different kind, namely, sensibility, and in whose case that is

not always done which reason alone would do, for these that necessity isexpressed only as an "ought," and the subjective necessity is different from

the objective.

              It seems then as if the moral law, that is, the principle of autonomy

of the will, were properly speaking only presupposed in the idea of freedom,

and as if we could not prove its reality and objective necessity independently.

In that case we should still have gained something considerable by at least

determining the true principle more exactly than had previously been done;

but as regards its validity and the practical necessity of subjecting oneself to

it, we should not have advanced a step. For if we were asked why the

universal validity of our maxim as a law must be the condition restricting our

actions, and on what we ground the worth which we assign to this manner of

acting — a worth so great that there cannot be any higher interest; and if we

were asked further how it happens that it is by this alone a man believes he

feels his own personal worth, in comparison with which that of an agreeable

or disagreeable condition is to be regarded as nothing, to these questions we

could give no satisfactory answer.

              We find indeed sometimes that we can take an interest in a personal

quality which does not involve any interest of external condition, provided

this quality makes us capable of participating in the condition in case reason

were to effect the allotment; that is to say, the mere being worthy of

happiness can interest of itself even without the motive of participating in this

happiness. This judgement, however, is in fact only the effect of the

importance of the moral law which we before presupposed (when by the idea

of freedom we detach ourselves from every empirical interest); but that we

ought to detach ourselves from these interests, i.e., to consider ourselves as

free in action and yet as subject to certain laws, so as to find a worth simply

in our own person which can compensate us for the loss of everything that

gives worth to our condition; this we are not yet able to discern in this way,

nor do we see how it is possible so to act — in other words, whence the

moral law derives its obligation.

              It must be freely admitted that there is a sort of circle here from

which it seems impossible to escape. In the order of efficient causes we

assume ourselves free, in order that in the order of ends we may conceive

ourselves as subject to moral laws: and we afterwards conceive ourselves as

subject to these laws, because we have attributed to ourselves freedom of

will: for freedom and self-legislation of will are both autonomy and,therefore, are reciprocal conceptions, and for this very reason one must not be

used to explain the other or give the reason of it, but at most only logical

purposes to reduce apparently different notions of the same object to one

single concept (as we reduce different fractions of the same value to the

lowest terms).

              One resource remains to us, namely, to inquire whether we do not

occupy different points of view when by means of freedom we think

ourselves as causes efficient a priori, and when we form our conception of

ourselves from our actions as effects which we see before our eyes.

              It is a remark which needs no subtle reflection to make, but which

we may assume that even the commonest understanding can make, although

it be after its fashion by an obscure discernment of judgement which it calls

feeling, that all the "ideas" that come to us involuntarily (as those of the

senses) do not enable us to know objects otherwise than as they affect us; so

that what they may be in themselves remains unknown to us, and

consequently that as regards "ideas" of this kind even with the closest

attention and clearness that the understanding can apply to them, we can by

them only attain to the knowledge of appearances, never to that of things in

themselves. As soon as this distinction has once been made (perhaps merely

in consequence of the difference observed between the ideas given us from

without, and in which we are passive, and those that we produce simply from

ourselves, and in which we show our own activity), then it follows of itself

that we must admit and assume behind the appearance something else that is

not an appearance, namely, the things in themselves; although we must admit

that as they can never be known to us except as they affect us, we can come

no nearer to them, nor can we ever know what they are in themselves. This

must furnish a distinction, however crude, between a world of sense and the

world of understanding, of which the former may be different according to

the difference of the sensuous impressions in various observers, while the

second which is its basis always remains the same, Even as to himself, a man

cannot pretend to know what he is in himself from the knowledge he has by

internal sensation. For as he does not as it were create himself, and does not

come by the conception of himself a priori but empirically, it naturally

follows that he can obtain his knowledge even of himself only by the inner

sense and, consequently, only through the appearances of his nature and the

way in which his consciousness is affected. At the same time beyond thesecharacteristics of his own subject, made up of mere appearances, he must

necessarily suppose something else as their basis, namely, his ego, whatever

its characteristics in itself may be. Thus in respect to mere perception and

receptivity of sensations he must reckon himself as belonging to the world of

sense; but in respect of whatever there may be of pure activity in him (that

which reaches consciousness immediately and not through affecting the

senses), he must reckon himself as belonging to the intellectual world, of

which, however, he has no further knowledge. To such a conclusion the

reflecting man must come with respect to all the things which can be

presented to him: it is probably to be met with even in persons of the

commonest understanding, who, as is well known, are very much inclined to

suppose behind the objects of the senses something else invisible and acting

of itself. They spoil it, however, by presently sensualizing this invisible

again; that is to say, wanting to make it an object of intuition, so that they do

not become a whit the wiser.

              Now man really finds in himself a faculty by which he distinguishes

himself from everything else, even from himself as affected by objects, and

that is reason. This being pure spontaneity is even elevated above the

understanding. For although the latter is a spontaneity and does not, like

sense, merely contain intuitions that arise when we are affected by things

(and are therefore passive), yet it cannot produce from its activity any other

conceptions than those which merely serve to bring the intuitions of sense

under rules and, thereby, to unite them in one consciousness, and without this

use of the sensibility it could not think at all; whereas, on the contrary, reason

shows so pure a spontaneity in the case of what I call ideas [ideal

conceptions] that it thereby far transcends everything that the sensibility can

give it, and exhibits its most important function in distinguishing the world of

sense from that of understanding, and thereby prescribing the limits of the

understanding itself.

              For this reason a rational being must regard himself qua intelligence

(not from the side of his lower faculties) as belonging not to the world of

sense, but to that of understanding; hence he has two points of view from

which he can regard himself, and recognise laws of the exercise of his

faculties, and consequently of all his actions: first, so far as he belongs to the

world of sense, he finds himself subject to laws of nature (heteronomy);

secondly, as belonging to the intelligible world, under laws which beingindependent of nature have their foundation not in experience but in reason

alone.

              As a rational being, and consequently belonging to the intelligible

world, man can never conceive the causality of his own will otherwise than

on condition of the idea of freedom, for independence of the determinate

causes of the sensible world (an independence which reason must always

ascribe to itself) is freedom. Now the idea of freedom is inseparably

connected with the conception of autonomy, and this again with the universal

principle of morality which is ideally the foundation of all actions of rational

beings, just as the law of nature is of all phenomena.

              Now the suspicion is removed which we raised above, that there was

a latent circle involved in our reasoning from freedom to autonomy, and from

this to the moral law, viz.: that we laid down the idea of freedom because of

the moral law only that we might afterwards in turn infer the latter from

freedom, and that consequently we could assign no reason at all for this law,

but could only [present] it as a petitio principii which well disposed minds

would gladly concede to us, but which we could never put forward as a

provable proposition. For now we see that, when we conceive ourselves as

free, we transfer ourselves into the world of understanding as members of it

and recognise the autonomy of the will with its consequence, morality;

whereas, if we conceive ourselves as under obligation, we consider ourselves

as belonging to the world of sense and at the same time to the world of

understanding.

                    How is a Categorical Imperative Possible?

 

              Every rational being reckons himself qua intelligence as belonging

to the world of understanding, and it is simply as an efficient cause belonging

to that world that he calls his causality a will. On the other side he is also

conscious of himself as a part of the world of sense in which his actions,

which are mere appearances [phenomena] of that causality, are displayed; we

cannot, however, discern how they are possible from this causality which we

do not know; but instead of that, these actions as belonging to the sensible

world must be viewed as determined by other phenomena, namely, desires

and inclinations. If therefore I were only a member of the world of

understanding, then all my actions would perfectly conform to the principle

of autonomy of the pure will; if I were only a part of the world of sense, theywould necessarily be assumed to conform wholly to the natural law of desires

and inclinations, in other words, to the heteronomy of nature. (The former

would rest on morality as the supreme principle, the latter on happiness.)

Since, however, the world of understanding contains the foundation of the

world of sense, and consequently of its laws also, and accordingly gives the

law to my will (which belongs wholly to the world of understanding) directly,

and must be conceived as doing so, it follows that, although on the one side I

must regard myself as a being belonging to the world of sense, yet on the

other side I must recognize myself as subject as an intelligence to the law of

the world of understanding, i.e., to reason, which contains this law in the idea

of freedom, and therefore as subject to the autonomy of the will:

consequently I must regard the laws of the world of understanding as

imperatives for me and the actions which conform to them as duties.

              And thus what makes categorical imperatives possible is this, that

the idea of freedom makes me a member of an intelligible world, in

consequence of which, if I were nothing else, all my actions would always

conform to the autonomy of the will; but as I at the same time intuite myself

as a member of the world of sense, they ought so to conform, and this

categorical "ought" implies a synthetic a priori proposition, inasmuch as

besides my will as affected by sensible desires there is added further the idea

of the same will but as belonging to the world of the understanding, pure and

practical of itself, which contains the supreme condition according to reason

of the former will; precisely as to the intuitions of sense there are added

concepts of the understanding which of themselves signify nothing but

regular form in general and in this way synthetic a priori propositions become

possible, on which all knowledge of physical nature rests.

              The practical use of common human reason confirms this reasoning.

There is no one, not even the most consummate villain, provided only that be

is otherwise accustomed to the use of reason, who, when we set before him

examples of honesty of purpose, of steadfastness in following good maxims,

of sympathy and general benevolence (even combined with great sacrifices of

advantages and comfort), does not wish that he might also possess these

qualities. Only on account of his inclinations and impulses he cannot attain

this in himself, but at the same time he wishes to be free from such

inclinations which are burdensome to himself. He proves by this that he

transfers himself in thought with a will free from the impulses of thesensibility into an order of things wholly different from that of his desires in

the field of the sensibility; since he cannot expect to obtain by that wish any

gratification of his desires, nor any position which would satisfy any of his

actual or supposable inclinations (for this would destroy the pre-eminence of

the very idea which wrests that wish from him): he can only expect a greater

intrinsic worth of his own person. This better person, however, he imagines

himself to be when be transfers himself to the point of view of a member of

the world of the understanding, to which he is involuntarily forced by the

idea of freedom, i.e., of independence on determining causes of the world of

sense; and from this point of view he is conscious of a good will, which by

his own confession constitutes the law for the bad will that he possesses as a

member of the world of sense — a law whose authority he recognizes while

transgressing it. What he morally "ought" is then what he necessarily

"would," as a member of the world of the understanding, and is conceived by

him as an "ought" only inasmuch as he likewise considers himself as a

member of the world of sense.

              Of the Extreme Limits of all Practical Philosophy.

 

              All men attribute to themselves freedom of will. Hence come all

judgements upon actions as being such as ought to have been done, although

they have not been done. However, this freedom is not a conception of

experience, nor can it be so, since it still remains, even though experience

shows the contrary of what on supposition of freedom are conceived as its

necessary consequences. On the other side it is equally necessary that

everything that takes place should be fixedly determined according to laws of

nature. This necessity of nature is likewise not an empirical conception, just

for this reason, that it involves the motion of necessity and consequently of a

priori cognition. But this conception of a system of nature is confirmed by

experience; and it must even be inevitably presupposed if experience itself is

to be possible, that is, a connected knowledge of the objects of sense resting

on general laws. Therefore freedom is only an idea of reason, and its

objective reality in itself is doubtful; while nature is a concept of the

understanding which proves, and must necessarily prove, its reality in

examples of experience.

              There arises from this a dialectic of reason, since the freedom

attributed to the will appears to contradict the necessity of nature, and placedbetween these two ways reason for speculative purposes finds the road of

physical necessity much more beaten and more appropriate than that of

freedom; yet for practical purposes the narrow footpath of freedom is the

only one on which it is possible to make use of reason in our conduct; hence

it is just as impossible for the subtlest philosophy as for the commonest

reason of men to argue away freedom. Philosophy must then assume that no

real contradiction will be found between freedom and physical necessity of

the same human actions, for it cannot give up the conception of nature any

more than that of freedom.

              Nevertheless, even though we should never be able to comprehend

how freedom is possible, we must at least remove this apparent contradiction

in a convincing manner. For if the thought of freedom contradicts either itself

or nature, which is equally necessary, it must in competition with physical

necessity be entirely given up.

              It would, however, be impossible to escape this contradiction if the

thinking subject, which seems to itself free, conceived itself in the same sense

or in the very same relation when it calls itself free as when in respect of the

same action it assumes itself to be subject to the law of nature. Hence it is an

indispensable problem of speculative philosophy to show that its illusion

respecting the contradiction rests on this, that we think of man in a different

sense and relation when we call him free and when we regard him as subject

to the laws of nature as being part and parcel of nature. It must therefore

show that not only can both these very well co-exist, but that both must be

thought as necessarily united in the same subject, since otherwise no reason

could be given why we should burden reason with an idea which, though it

may possibly without contradiction be reconciled with another that is

sufficiently established, yet entangles us in a perplexity which sorely

embarrasses reason in its theoretic employment. This duty, however, belongs

only to speculative philosophy. The philosopher then has no option whether

he will remove the apparent contradiction or leave it untouched; for in the

latter case the theory respecting this would be bonum vacans, into the

possession of which the fatalist would have a right to enter and chase all

morality out of its supposed domain as occupying it without title.

              We cannot however as yet say that we are touching the bounds of

practical philosophy. For the settlement of that controversy does not belong

to it; it only demands from speculative reason that it should put an end to thediscord in which it entangles itself in theoretical questions, so that practical

reason may have rest and security from external attacks which might make

the ground debatable on which it desires to build.

              The claims to freedom of will made even by common reason are

founded on the consciousness and the admitted supposition that reason is

independent of merely subjectively determined causes which together

constitute what belongs to sensation only and which consequently come

under the general designation of sensibility. Man considering himself in this

way as an intelligence places himself thereby in a different order of things

and in a relation to determining grounds of a wholly different kind when on

the one hand he thinks of himself as an intelligence endowed with a will, and

consequently with causality, and when on the other he perceives himself as a

phenomenon in the world of sense (as he really is also), and affirms that his

causality is subject to external determination according to laws of nature.

Now he soon becomes aware that both can hold good, nay, must hold good at

the same time. For there is not the smallest contradiction in saying that a

thing in appearance (belonging to the world of sense) is subject to certain

laws, of which the very same as a thing or being in itself is independent, and

that he must conceive and think of himself in this twofold way, rests as to the

first on the consciousness of himself as an object affected through the senses,

and as to the second on the consciousness of himself as an intelligence, i.e.,

as independent on sensible impressions in the employment of his reason (in

other words as belonging to the world of understanding).

              Hence it comes to pass that man claims the possession of a will

which takes no account of anything that comes under the head of desires and

inclinations and, on the contrary, conceives actions as possible to him, nay,

even as necessary which can only be done by disregarding all desires and

sensible inclinations. The causality of such actions lies in him as an

intelligence and in the laws of effects and actions [which depend] on the

principles of an intelligible world, of which indeed he knows nothing more

than that in it pure reason alone independent of sensibility gives the law;

moreover since it is only in that world, as an intelligence, that he is his proper

self (being as man only the appearance of himself), those laws apply to him

directly and categorically, so that the incitements of inclinations and appetites

(in other words the whole nature of the world of sense) cannot impair the

laws of his volition as an intelligence. Nay, he does not even hold himselfresponsible for the former or ascribe them to his proper self, i.e., his will: he

only ascribes to his will any indulgence which he might yield them if he

allowed them to influence his maxims to the prejudice of the rational laws of

the will.

              When practical reason thinks itself into a world of understanding, it

does not thereby transcend its own limits, as it would if it tried to enter it by

intuition or sensation. The former is only a negative thought in respect of the

world of sense, which does not give any laws to reason in determining the

will and is positive only in this single point that this freedom as a negative

characteristic is at the same time conjoined with a (positive) faculty and even

with a causality of reason, which we designate a will, namely a faculty of so

acting that the principle of the actions shall conform to the essential character

of a rational motive, i.e., the condition that the maxim have universal validity

as a law. But were it to borrow an object of will, that is, a motive, from the

world of understanding, then it would overstep its bounds and pretend to be

acquainted with something of which it knows nothing. The conception of a

world of the understanding is then only a point of view which reason finds

itself compelled to take outside the appearances in order to conceive itself as

practical, which would not be possible if the influences of the sensibility had

a determining power on man, but which is necessary unless he is to be denied

the consciousness of himself as an intelligence and, consequently, as a

rational cause, energizing by reason, that is, operating freely. This thought

certainly involves the idea of an order and a system of laws different from

that of the mechanism of nature which belongs to the sensible world; and it

makes the conception of an intelligible world necessary (that is to say, the

whole system of rational beings as things in themselves). But it does not in

the least authorize us to think of it further than as to its formal condition only,

that is, the universality of the maxims of the will as laws, and consequently

the autonomy of the latter, which alone is consistent with its freedom;

whereas, on the contrary, all laws that refer to a definite object give

heteronomy, which only belongs to laws of nature and can only apply to the

sensible world.

              But reason would overstep all its bounds if it undertook to explain

how pure reason can be practical, which would be exactly the same problem

as to explain how freedom is possible.

              For we can explain nothing but that which we can reduce to laws,the object of which can be given in some possible experience. But freedom is

a mere idea, the objective reality of which can in no wise be shown according

to laws of nature, and consequently not in any possible experience; and for

this reason it can never be comprehended or understood, because we cannot

support it by any sort of example or analogy. It holds good only as a

necessary hypothesis of reason in a being that believes itself conscious of a

will, that is, of a faculty distinct from mere desire (namely, a faculty of

determining itself to action as an intelligence, in other words, by laws of

reason independently on natural instincts). Now where determination

according to laws of nature ceases, there all explanation ceases also, and

nothing remains but defence, i.e., the removal of the objections of those who

pretend to have seen deeper into the nature of things, and thereupon boldly

declare freedom impossible. We can only point out to them that the supposed

contradiction that they have discovered in it arises only from this, that in

order to be able to apply the law of nature to human actions, they must

necessarily consider man as an appearance: then when we demand of them

that they should also think of him qua intelligence as a thing in itself, they

still persist in considering him in this respect also as an appearance. In this

view it would no doubt be a contradiction to suppose the causality of the

same subject (that is, his will) to be withdrawn from all the natural laws of

the sensible world. But this contradiction disappears, if they would only

bethink themselves and admit, as is reasonable, that behind the appearances

there must also lie at their root (although hidden) the things in themselves,

and that we cannot expect the laws of these to be the same as those that

govern their appearances.

              The subjective impossibility of explaining the freedom of the will is

identical with the impossibility of discovering and explaining an interest*

which man can take in the moral law. Nevertheless he does actually take an

interest in it, the basis of which in us we call the moral feeling, which some

have falsely assigned as the standard of our moral judgement, whereas it must

rather be viewed as the subjective effect that the law exercises on the will, the

objective principle of which is furnished by reason alone.

              * Interest is that by which reason becomes practical, i.e., a cause

determining the will. Hence we say of rational beings only that they take an

interest in a thing; irrational beings only feel sensual appetites. Reason takes

a direct interest in action then only when the universal validity of its maximsis alone sufficient to determine the will. Such an interest alone is pure. But if

it can determine the will only by means of another object of desire or on the

suggestion of a particular feeling of the subject, then reason takes only an

indirect interest in the action, and, as reason by itself without experience

cannot discover either objects of the will or a special feeling actuating it, this

latter interest would only be empirical and not a pure rational interest. The

logical interest of reason (namely, to extend its insight) is never direct, but

presupposes purposes for which reason is employed.

              In order indeed that a rational being who is also affected through the

senses should will what reason alone directs such beings that they ought to

will, it is no doubt requisite that reason should have a power to infuse a

feeling of pleasure or satisfaction in the fulfilment of duty, that is to say, that

it should have a causality by which it determines the sensibility according to

its own principles. But it is quite impossible to discern, i.e., to make it

intelligible a priori, how a mere thought, which itself contains nothing

sensible, can itself produce a sensation of pleasure or pain; for this is a

particular kind of causality of which as of every other causality we can

determine nothing whatever a priori; we must only consult experience about

it. But as this cannot supply us with any relation of cause and effect except

between two objects of experience, whereas in this case, although indeed the

effect produced lies within experience, yet the cause is supposed to be pure

reason acting through mere ideas which offer no object to experience, it

follows that for us men it is quite impossible to explain how and why the

universality of the maxim as a law, that is, morality, interests. This only is

certain, that it is not because it interests us that it has validity for us (for that

would be heteronomy and dependence of practical reason on sensibility,

namely, on a feeling as its principle, in which case it could never give moral

laws), but that it interests us because it is valid for us as men, inasmuch as it

had its source in our will as intelligences, in other words, in our proper self,

and what belongs to mere appearance is necessarily subordinated by reason to

the nature of the thing in itself.

              The question then, "How a categorical imperative is possible," can

be answered to this extent, that we can assign the only hypothesis on which it

is possible, namely, the idea of freedom; and we can also discern the

necessity of this hypothesis, and this is sufficient for the practical exercise of

reason, that is, for the conviction of the validity of this imperative, and henceof the moral law; but how this hypothesis itself is possible can never be

discerned by any human reason. On the hypothesis, however, that the will of

an intelligence is free, its autonomy, as the essential formal condition of its

determination, is a necessary consequence. Moreover, this freedom of will is

not merely quite possible as a hypothesis (not involving any contradiction to

the principle of physical necessity in the connexion of the phenomena of the

sensible world) as speculative philosophy can show: but further, a rational

being who is conscious of causality through reason, that is to say, of a will

(distinct from desires), must of necessity make it practically, that is, in idea,

the condition of all his voluntary actions. But to explain how pure reason can

be of itself practical without the aid of any spring of action that could be

derived from any other source, i.e., how the mere principle of the universal

validity of all its maxims as laws (which would certainly be the form of a

pure practical reason) can of itself supply a spring, without any matter

(object) of the will in which one could antecedently take any interest; and

how it can produce an interest which would be called purely moral; or in

other words, how pure reason can be practicalto explain this is beyond the

power of human reason, and all the labour and pains of seeking an

explanation of it are lost an

              It is just the same as if I sought to find out how freedom itself is

possible as the causality of a will. For then I quit the ground of philosophical

explanation, and I have no other to go upon. I might indeed revel in the world

of intelligences which still remains to me, but although I have an idea of it

which is well founded, yet I have not the least knowledge of it, nor an I ever

attain to such knowledge with all the efforts of my natural faculty of reason.

It signifies only a something that remains over when I have eliminated

everything belonging to the world of sense from the actuating principles of

my will, serving merely to keep in bounds the principle of motives taken

from the field of sensibility; fixing its limits and showing that it does not

contain all in all within itself, but that there is more beyond it; but this

something more I know no further. Of pure reason which frames this ideal,

there remains after the abstraction of all matter, i.e., knowledge of objects,

nothing but the form, namely, the practical law of the universality of the

maxims, and in conformity with this conception of reason in reference to a

pure world of understanding as a possible efficient cause, that is a cause

determining the will. There must here be a total absence of springs; unless

this idea of an intelligible world is itself the spring, or that in which reasonprimarily takes an interest; but to make this intelligible is precisely the

problem that we cannot solve.

              Here now is the extreme limit of all moral inquiry, and it is of great

importance to determine it even on this account, in order that reason may not

on the one band, to the prejudice of morals, seek about in the world of sense

for the supreme motive and an interest comprehensible but empirical; and on

the other hand, that it may not impotently flap its wings without being able to

move in the (for it) empty space of transcendent concepts which we call the

intelligible world, and so lose itself amidst chimeras. For the rest, the idea of

a pure world of understanding as a system of all intelligences, and to which

we ourselves as rational beings belong (although we are likewise on the other

side members of the sensible world), this remains always a useful and

legitimate idea for the purposes of rational belief, although all knowledge

stops at its threshold, useful, namely, to produce in us a lively interest in the

moral law by means of the noble ideal of a universal kingdom of ends in

themselves (rational beings), to which we can belong as members then only

when we carefully conduct ourselves according to the maxims of freedom as

if they were laws of nature.

                                  Concluding Remark

 

              The speculative employment of reason with respect to nature leads

to the absolute necessity of some supreme cause of the world: the practical

employment of reason with a view to freedom leads also to absolute

necessity, but only of the laws of the actions of a rational being as such. Now

it is an essential principle of reason, however employed, to push its

knowledge to a consciousness of its necessity (without which it would not be

rational knowledge). It is, however, an equally essential restriction of the

same reason that it can neither discern the necessity of what is or what

happens, nor of what ought to happen, unless a condition is supposed on

which it is or happens or ought to happen. In this way, however, by the

constant inquiry for the condition, the satisfaction of reason is only further

and further postponed. Hence it unceasingly seeks the unconditionally

necessary and finds itself forced to assume it, although without any means of

making it comprehensible to itself, happy enough if only it can discover a

conception which agrees with this assumption. It is therefore no fault in our

deduction of the supreme principle of morality, but an objection that shouldbe made to human reason in general, that it cannot enable us to conceive the

absolute necessity of an unconditional practical law (such as the categorical

imperative must be). It cannot be blamed for refusing to explain this necessity

by a condition, that is to say, by means of some interest assumed as a basis,

since the law would then cease to be a supreme law of reason. And thus while

we do not comprehend the practical unconditional necessity of the moral

imperative, we yet comprehend its incomprehensibility, and this is all that

can be fairly demanded of a philosophy which strives to carry its principles

up to the very limit of human reason.

 

 

 

 

 

             The Metaphysical Elements of Ethics

                    Translated by Thomas Kingsmill Abbott                                    CONTENTS

 

PREFACE
INTRODUCTION TO THE METAPHYSICAL ELEMENTS OF ETHICS
I. EXPOSITION OF THE CONCEPTION OF ETHICS
II. EXPOSITION OF THE NOTION OF AN END WHICH IS ALSO A DUTY
III. OF THE REASON FOR CONCEIVING AN END WHICH IS ALSO A DUTY
IV. WHAT ARE THE ENDS WHICH ARE ALSO DUTIES?
V. EXPLANATION OF THESE TWO NOTIONS
VI. ETHICS DOES NOT SUPPLY LAWS FOR ACTIONS (WHICH IS DONE BY JURISPRUDENCE), BUT ONLY FOR THE
MAXIMS OF ACTION
VII. ETHICAL DUTIES ARE OF INDETERMINATE, JURIDICAL DUTIES OF STRICT, OBLIGATION
VIII. EXPOSITION OF THE DUTIES OF VIRTUE AS INTERMEDIATE DUTIES
IX. WHAT IS A DUTY OF VIRTUE?
X. THE SUPREME PRINCIPLE OF JURISPRUDENCE WAS ANALYTICAL; THAT OF ETHICS IS SYNTHETICAL
XI. ACCORDING TO THE PRECEDING PRINCIPLES, THE SCHEME OF DUTIES OF VIRTUE MAY BE THUS EXHIBITED
XII. PRELIMINARY NOTIONS OF THE SUSCEPTIBILITY OF THE MIND FOR NOTIONS OF DUTY GENERALLY
XIII. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS IN THE TREATMENT OF PURE ETHICS
XIV. OF VIRTUE IN GENERAL
XV. OF THE PRINCIPLE ON WHICH ETHICS IS SEPARATED FROM JURISPRUDENCE
XVI. VIRTUE REQUIRES, FIRST OF ALL, COMMAND OVER ONESELF
XVII. VIRTUE NECESSARILY PRESUPPOSES APATHY (CONSIDERED AS STRENGTH)                                        Preface

 

 

              If there exists on any subject a philosophy (that is, a system of

rational knowledge based on concepts), then there must also be for this

philosophy a system of pure rational concepts, independent of any condition

of intuition, in other words, a metaphysic. It may be asked whether

metaphysical elements are required also for every practical philosophy, which

is the doctrine of duties, and therefore also for Ethics, in order to be able to

present it as a true science (systematically), not merely as an aggregate of

separate doctrines (fragmentarily). As regards pure jurisprudence, no one will

question this requirement; for it concerns only what is formal in the elective

will, which has to be limited in its external relations according to laws of

freedom; without regarding any end which is the matter of this will. Here,

therefore, deontology is a mere scientific doctrine (doctrina scientiae).*

              * One who is acquainted with practical philosophy is not, therefore,

a practical philosopher. The latter is he who makes the rational end the

principle of his actions, while at the same time he joins with this the

necessary knowledge which, as it aims at action, must not be spun out into

the most subtile threads of metaphysic, unless a legal duty is in question; in

which case meum and tuum must be accurately determined in the balance of

justice, on the principle of equality of action and action, which requires

something like mathematical proportion, but not in the case of a mere ethical

duty. For in this case the question is not only to know what it is a duty to do

(a thing which on account of the ends that all men naturally have can be

easily decided), but the chief point is the inner principle of the will namely

that the consciousness of this duty be also the spring of action, in order that

we may be able to say of the man who joins to his knowledge this principle

of wisdom that he is a practical philosopher.

              Now in this philosophy (of ethics) it seems contrary to the idea of it

that we should go back to metaphysical elements in order to make the notion

of duty purified from everything empirical (from every feeling) a motive of

action. For what sort of notion can we form of the mighty power and

herculean strength which would be sufficient to overcome the vice-breeding

inclinations, if Virtue is to borrow her "arms from the armoury ofmetaphysics," which is a matter of speculation that only few men can handle?

Hence all ethical teaching in lecture rooms, pulpits, and popular books, when

it is decked out with fragments of metaphysics, becomes ridiculous. But it is

not, therefore, useless, much less ridiculous, to trace in metaphysics the first

principles of ethics; for it is only as a philosopher that anyone can reach the

first principles of this conception of duty, otherwise we could not look for

either certainty or purity in the ethical teaching. To rely for this reason on a

certain feeling which, on account of the effect expected from it, is called

moral, may, perhaps, even satisfy the popular teacher, provided he desires as

the criterion of a moral duty to consider the problem: "If everyone in every

case made your maxim the universal law, how could this law be consistent

with itself?" But if it were merely feeling that made it our duty to take this

principle as a criterion, then this would not be dictated by reason, but only

adopted instinctively and therefore blindly.

              But in fact, whatever men imagine, no moral principle is based on

any feeling, but such a principle is really nothing else than an obscurely

conceived metaphysic which inheres in every man's reasoning faculty; as the

teacher will easily find who tries to catechize his pupils in the Socratic

method about the imperative of duty and its application to the moral

judgement of his actions. The mode of stating it need not be always

metaphysical, and the language need not necessarily be scholastic, unless the

pupil is to be trained to be a philosopher. But the thought must go back to the

elements of metaphysics, without which we cannot expect any certainty or

purity, or even motive power in ethics.

              If we deviate from this principle and begin from pathological, or

purely sensitive, or even moral feeling (from what is subjectively practical

instead of what is objective), that is, from the matter of the will, the end, not

from its form that is the law, in order from thence to determine duties; then,

certainly, there are no metaphysical elements of ethics, for feeling by

whatever it may be excited is always physical. But then ethical teaching,

whether in schools, or lecture-rooms, etc., is corrupted in its source. For it is

not a matter of indifference by what motives or means one is led to a good

purpose (the obedience to duty). However disgusting, then, metaphysics may

appear to those pretended philosophers who dogmatize oracularly, or even

brilliantly, about the doctrine of duty, it is, nevertheless, an indispensable

duty for those who oppose it to go back to its principles even in ethics, and tobegin by going to school on its benches.

              We may fairly wonder how, after all previous explanations of the

principles of duty, so far as it is derived from pure reason, it was still possible

to reduce it again to a doctrine of happiness; in such a way, however, that a

certain moral happiness not resting on empirical causes was ultimately

arrived at, a self-contradictory nonentity. In fact, when the thinking man has

conquered the temptations to vice, and is conscious of having done his (often

hard) duty, he finds himself in a state of peace and satisfaction which may

well be called happiness, in which virtue is her own reward. Now, says the

eudaemonist, this delight, this happiness, is the real motive of his acting

virtuously. The notion of duty, says be, does not immediately determine his

will; it is only by means of the happiness in prospect that he is moved to his

duty. Now, on the other hand, since he can promise himself this reward of

virtue only from the consciousness of having done his duty, it is clear that the

latter must have preceded: that is, be must feel himself bound to do his duty

before he thinks, and without thinking, that happiness will be the

consequence of obedience to duty. He is thus involved in a circle in his

assignment of cause and effect. He can only hope to be happy if he is

conscious of his obedience to duty: and he can only be moved to obedience to

duty if be foresees that he will thereby become happy. But in this reasoning

there is also a contradiction. For, on the one side, he must obey his duty,

without asking what effect this will have on his happiness, consequently,

from a moral principle; on the other side, he can only recognize something as

his duty when he can reckon on happiness which will accrue to him thereby,

and consequently on a pathological principle, which is the direct opposite of

the former.

              I have in another place (the Berlin Monatsschrift), reduced, as I

believe, to the simplest expressions the distinction between pathological and

moral pleasure. The pleasure, namely, which must precede the obedience to

the law in order that one may act according to the law is pathological, and the

process follows the physical order of nature; that which must be preceded by

the law in order that it may be felt is in the moral order. If this distinction is

not observed; if eudaemonism (the principle of happiness) is adopted as the

principle instead of eleutheronomy (the principle of freedom of the inner

legislation), the consequence is the euthanasia (quiet death) of all morality.

              The cause of these mistakes is no other than the following: Thosewho are accustomed only to physiological explanations will not admit into

their heads the categorical imperative from which these laws dictatorially

proceed, notwithstanding that they feel themselves irresistibly forced by it.

Dissatisfied at not being able to explain what lies wholly beyond that sphere,

namely, freedom of the elective will, elevating as is this privilege, that man

has of being capable of such an idea. They are stirred up by the proud claims

of speculative reason, which feels its power so strongly in the fields, just as if

they were allies leagued in defence of the omnipotence of theoretical reason

and roused by a general call to arms to resist that idea; and thus they are at

present, and perhaps for a long time to come, though ultimately in vain, to

attack the moral concept of freedom and if possible render it doubtful.

       Introduction to the Metaphysical Elements of Ethics

 

 

              Ethics in ancient times signified moral philosophy (philosophia

moral is) generally, which was also called the doctrine of duties.

Subsequently it was found advisable to confine this name to a part of moral

philosophy, namely, to the doctrine of duties which are not subject to external

laws (for which in German the name Tugendlehre was found suitable). Thus

the system of general deontology is divided into that of jurisprudence

(jurisprudentia), which is capable of external laws, and of ethics, which is not

thus capable, and we may let this division stand.                  I. Exposition of the Conception of Ethics

 

 

              The notion of duty is in itself already the notion of a constraint of the

free elective will by the law; whether this constraint be an external one or be

self-constraint. The moral imperative, by its categorical (the unconditional

ought) announces this constraint, which therefore does not apply to all

rational beings (for there may also be holy beings), but applies to men as

rational physical beings who are unholy enough to be seduced by pleasure to

the transgression of the moral law, although they themselves recognize its

authority; and when they do obey it, to obey it unwillingly (with resistance of

their inclination); and it is in this that the constraint properly consists.* Now,

as man is a free (moral) being, the notion of duty can contain only self-

constraint (by the idea of the law itself), when we look to the internal

determination of the will (the spring), for thus only is it possible to combine

that constraint (even if it were external) with the freedom of the elective will.

The notion of duty then must be an ethical one.

              * Man, however, as at the same time a moral being, when he

considers himself objectively, which he is qualified to do by his pure

practical reason, (i.e., according to humanity in his own person). finds

himself holy enough to transgress the law only unwillingly; for there is no

man so depraved who in this transgression would not feel a resistance and an

abhorrence of himself, so that he must put a force on himself. It is impossible

to explain the phenomenon that at this parting of the ways (where the

beautiful fable places Hercules between virtue and sensuality) man shows

more propensity to obey inclination than the law. For, we can only explain

what happens by tracing it to a cause according to physical laws; but then we

should not be able to conceive the elective will as free. Now this mutually

opposed self-constraint and the inevitability of it makes us recognize the

incomprehensible property of freedom.

              The impulses of nature, then, contain hindrances to the fulfilment of

duty in the mind of man, and resisting forces, some of them powerful; and he

must judge himself able to combat these and to conquer them by means of

reason, not in the future, but in the present, simultaneously with the thought;he must judge that he can do what the law unconditionally commands that be

ought.

              Now the power and resolved purpose to resist a strong but unjust

opponent is called fortitude (fortitudo), and when concerned with the

opponent of the moral character within us, it is virtue (virtus, fortitudo

moralis). Accordingly, general deontology, in that part which brings not

external, but internal, freedom under laws is the doctrine of virtue.

              Jurisprudence had to do only with the formal condition of external

freedom (the condition of consistency with itself, if its maxim became a

universal law), that is, with law. Ethics, on the contrary, supplies us with a

matter (an object of the free elective will), an end of pure reason which is at

the same time conceived as an objectively necessary end, i.e., as duty for all

men. For, as the sensible inclinations mislead us to ends (which are the matter

of the elective will) that may contradict duty, the legislating reason cannot

otherwise guard against their influence than by an opposite moral end, which

therefore must be given a priori independently on inclination.

              An end is an object of the elective will (of a rational being) by the

idea of which this will is determined to an action for the production of this

object. Now I may be forced by others to actions which are directed to an end

as means, but I cannot be forced to have an end; I can only make something

an end to myself. If, however, I am also bound to make something which lies

in the notions of practical reason an end to myself, and therefore besides the

formal determining principle of the elective will (as contained in law) to have

also a material principle, an end which can be opposed to the end derived

from sensible impulses; then this gives the notion of an end which is in itself

a duty. The doctrine of this cannot belong to jurisprudence, but to ethics,

since this alone includes in its conception self-constraint according to moral

laws.

              For this reason, ethics may also be defined as the system of the ends

of the pure practical reason. The two parts of moral philosophy are

distinguished as treating respectively of ends and of duties of constraint. That

ethics contains duties to the observance of which one cannot be (physically)

forced by others, is merely the consequence of this, that it is a doctrine of

ends, since to be forced to have ends or to set them before one's self is a

contradiction.              Now that ethics is a doctrine of virtue (doctrina officiorum virtutis)

follows from the definition of virtue given above compared with the

obligation, the peculiarity of which has just been shown. There is in fact no

other determination of the elective will, except that to an end, which in the

very notion of it implies that I cannot even physically be forced to it by the

elective will of others. Another may indeed force me to do something which

is not my end (but only means to the end of another), but he cannot force me

to make it my own end, and yet I can have no end except of my own making.

The latter supposition would be a contradiction- an act of freedom which yet

at the same time would not be free. But there is no contradiction in setting

before one's self an end which is also a duty: for in this case I constrain

myself, and this is quite consistent with freedom.* But how is such an end

possible? That is now the question. For the possibility of the notion of the

thing (viz., that it is not self-contradictory) is not enough to prove the

possibility of the thing itself (the objective reality of the notion).

              * The less a man can be physically forced, and the more he can be

morally forced (by the mere idea of duty), so much the freer he is. The man,

for example, who is of sufficiently firm resolution and strong mind not to

give up an enjoyment which he has resolved on, however much loss is shown

as resulting therefrom, and who yet desists from his purpose unhesitatingly,

though very reluctantly, when he finds that it would cause him to neglect an

official duty or a sick father; this man proves his freedom in the highest

degree by this very thing, that he cannot resist the voice of duty.        II. Exposition of the Notion of an End which is also a Duty

 

 

              We can conceive the relation of end to duty in two ways; either

starting from the end to find the maxim of the dutiful actions; or conversely,

setting out from this to find the end which is also duty. jurisprudence

proceeds in the former way. It is left to everyone's free elective will what end

he will choose for his action. But its maxim is determined a priori; namely,

that the freedom of the agent must be consistent with the freedom of every

other according to a universal law.

              Ethics, however, proceeds in the opposite way. It cannot start from

the ends which the man may propose to himself, and hence give directions as

to the maxims he should adopt, that is, as to his duty; for that would be to

take empirical principles of maxims, and these could not give any notion of

duty; since this, the categorical ought, has its root in pure reason alone.

Indeed, if the maxims were to be adopted in accordance with those ends

(which are all selfish), we could not properly speak of the notion of duty at

all. Hence in ethics the notion of duty must lead to ends, and must on moral

principles give the foundation of maxims with respect to the ends which we

ought to propose to ourselves.

              Setting aside the question what sort of end that is which is in itself a

duty, and how such an end is possible, it is here only necessary to show that a

duty of this kind is called a duty of virtue, and why it is so called.

              To every duty corresponds a right of action (facultas moral is

generatim), but all duties do not imply a corresponding right (facultas

juridica) of another to compel any one, but only the duties called legal duties.

Similarly to all ethical obligation corresponds the notion of virtue, but it does

not follow that all ethical duties are duties of virtue. Those, in fact, are not so

which do not concern so much a certain end (matter, object of the elective

will), but merely that which is formal in the moral determination of the will

(e.g., that the dutiful action must also be done from duty). It is only an end

which is also duty that can be called a duty of virtue. Hence there are several

of the latter kind (and thus there are distinct virtues); on the contrary, there is

only one duty of the former kind, but it is one which is valid for all actions(only one virtuous disposition).

              The duty of virtue is essentially distinguished from the duty of

justice in this respect; that it is morally possible to be externally compelled to

the latter, whereas the former rests on free self-constraint only. For finite holy

beings (which cannot even be tempted to the violation of duty) there is no

doctrine of virtue, but only moral philosophy, the latter being an autonomy of

practical reason, whereas the former is also an autocracy of it. That is, it

includes a consciousness- not indeed immediately perceived, but rightly

concluded, from the moral categorical imperative- of the power to become

master of one's inclinations which resist the law; so that human morality in its

highest stage can yet be nothing more than virtue; even if it were quite pure

(perfectly free from the influence of a spring foreign to duty), a state which is

poetically personified under the name of the wise man (as an ideal to which

one should continually approximate).

              Virtue, however, is not to be defined and esteemed merely as habit,

and (as it is expressed in the prize essay of Cochius) as a long custom

acquired by practice of morally good actions. For, if this is not an effect of

well-resolved and firm principles ever more and more purified, then, like any

other mechanical arrangement brought about by technical practical reason, it

is neither armed for all circumstances nor adequately secured against the

change that may be wrought by new allurements.

              REMARK

              To virtue = + a is opposed as its logical contradictory (contradictorie

oppositum) the negative lack of virtue (moral weakness) = o; but vice = a is

its contrary (contrarie s. realiter oppositum); and it is not merely a needless

question but an offensive one to ask whether great crimes do not perhaps

demand more strength of mind than great virtues. For by strength of mind we

understand the strength of purpose of a man, as a being endowed with

freedom, and consequently so far as he is master of himself (in his senses)

and therefore in a healthy condition of mind. But great crimes are paroxysms,

the very sight of which makes the man of healthy mind shudder. The question

would therefore be something like this: whether a man in a fit of madness can

have more physical strength than if he is in his senses; and we may admit this

without on that account ascribing to him more strength of mind, if by mind

we understand the vital principle of man in the free use of his powers. Forsince those crimes have their ground merely in the power of the inclinations

that weaken reason, which does not prove strength of mind, this question

would be nearly the same as the question whether a man in a fit of illness can

show more strength than in a healthy condition; and this may be directly

denied, since the want of health, which consists in the proper balance of all

the bodily forces of the man, is a weakness in the system of these forces, by

which system alone we can estimate absolute health.      III. Of the Reason for conceiving an End which is also a Duty

 

 

              An end is an object of the free elective will, the idea of which

determines this will to an action by which the object is produced.

Accordingly every action has its end, and as no one can have an end without

himself making the object of his elective will his end, hence to have some

end of actions is an act of the freedom of the agent, not an affect of physical

nature. Now, since this act which determines an end is a practical principle

which commands not the means (therefore not conditionally) but the end

itself (therefore unconditionally), hence it is a categorical imperative of pure

practical reason and one, therefore, which combines a concept of duty with

that of an end in general.

              Now there must be such an end and a categorical imperative

corresponding to it. For since there are free actions, there must also be ends

to which as an object those actions are directed. Amongst these ends there

must also be some which are at the same time (that is, by their very notion)

duties. For if there were none such, then since no actions can be without an

end, all ends which practical reason might have would be valid only as means

to other ends, and a categorical imperative would be impossible; a

supposition which destroys all moral philosophy.

              Here, therefore, we treat not of ends which man actually makes to

himself in accordance with the sensible impulses of his nature, but of objects

of the free elective will under its own laws- objects which he ought to make

his end. We may call the former technical (subjective), properly pragmatical,

including the rules of prudence in the choice of its ends; but the latter we

must call the moral (objective) doctrine of ends. This distinction is, however,

superfluous here, since moral philosophy already by its very notion is clearly

separated from the doctrine of physical nature (in the present instance,

anthropology). The latter resting on empirical principles, whereas the moral

doctrine of ends which treats of duties rests on principles given a priori in

pure practical reason.                IV. What are the Ends which are also Duties?

 

 

              They are: A. OUR OWN PERFECTION, B. HAPPINESS OF

OTHERS.

              We cannot invert these and make on one side our own happiness,

and on the other the perfection of others, ends which should be in themselves

duties for the same person.

              For one's own happiness is, no doubt, an end that all men have (by

virtue of the impulse of their nature), but this end cannot without

contradiction be regarded as a duty. What a man of himself inevitably wills

does not come under the notion of duty, for this is a constraint to an end

reluctantly adopted. It is, therefore, a contradiction to say that a man is in

duty bound to advance his own happiness with all his power.

              It is likewise a contradiction to make the perfection of another my

end, and to regard myself as in duty bound to promote it. For it is just in this

that the perfection of another man as a person consists, namely, that he is able

of himself to set before him his own end according to his own notions of

duty; and it is a contradiction to require (to make it a duty for me) that I

should do something which no other but himself can do.                      V. Explanation of these two Notions

 

 

              A. OUR OWN PERFECTION

              The word perfection is liable to many misconceptions. It is

sometimes understood as a notion belonging to transcendental philosophy;

viz., the notion of the totality of the manifold which taken together

constitutes a thing; sometimes, again, it is understood as belonging to

teleology, so that it signifies the correspondence of the properties of a thing

to an end. Perfection in the former sense might be called quantitative

(material), in the latter qualitative (formal) perfection. The former can be one

only, for the whole of what belongs to the one thing is one. But of the latter

there may be several in one thing; and it is of the latter property that we here

treat.

              When it is said of the perfection that belongs to man generally

(properly speaking, to humanity), that it is in itself a duty to make this our

end, it must be placed in that which may be the effect of one's deed, not in

that which is merely an endowment for which we have to thank nature; for

otherwise it would not be duty. Consequently, it can be nothing else than the

cultivation of one's power (or natural capacity) and also of one's will (moral

disposition) to satisfy the requirement of duty in general. The supreme

element in the former (the power) is the understanding, it being the faculty of

concepts, and, therefore, also of those concepts which refer to duty. First it is

his duty to labour to raise himself out of the rudeness of his nature, out of his

animal nature more and more to humanity, by which alone he is capable of

setting before him ends to supply the defects of his ignorance by instruction,

and to correct his errors; he is not merely counselled to do this by reason as

technically practical, with a view to his purposes of other kinds (as art), but

reason, as morally practical, absolutely commands him to do it, and makes

this end his duty, in order that he may be worthy of the humanity that dwells

in him. Secondly, to carry the cultivation of his will up to the purest virtuous

disposition, that, namely, in which the law is also the spring of his dutiful

actions, and to obey it from duty, for this is internal morally practical

perfection. This is called the moral sense (as it were a special sense, sensusmoralis), because it is a feeling of the effect which the legislative will within

himself exercises on the faculty of acting accordingly. This is, indeed, often

misused fanatically, as though (like the genius of Socrates) it preceded

reason, or even could dispense with judgement of reason; but still it is a

moral perfection, making every special end, which is also a duty, one's own

end.

              B. HAPPINESS OF OTHERS

              It is inevitable for human nature that a should wish and seek for

happiness, that is, satisfaction with his condition, with certainty of the

continuance of this satisfaction. But for this very reason it is not an end that is

also a duty. Some writers still make a distinction between moral and physical

happiness (the former consisting in satisfaction with one's person and moral

behaviour, that is, with what one does; the other in satisfaction with that

which nature confers, consequently with what one enjoys as a foreign gift).

Without at present censuring the misuse of the word (which even involves a

contradiction), it must be observed that the feeling of the former belongs

solely to the preceding head, namely, perfection. For he who is to feel

himself happy in the mere consciousness of his uprightness already possesses

that perfection which in the previous section was defined as that end which is

also duty.

              If happiness, then, is in question, which it is to be my duty to

promote as my end, it must be the happiness of other men whose (permitted)

end I hereby make also mine. It still remains left to themselves to decide what

they shall reckon as belonging to their happiness; only that it is in my power

to decline many things which they so reckon, but which I do not so regard,

supposing that they have no right to demand it from me as their own. A

plausible objection often advanced against the division of duties above

adopted consists in setting over against that end a supposed obligation to

study my own (physical) happiness, and thus making this, which is my

natural and merely subjective end, my duty (and objective end). This requires

to be cleared up.

              Adversity, pain, and want are great temptations to transgression of

one's duty; accordingly it would seem that strength, health, a competence,

and welfare generally, which are opposed to that influence, may also be

regarded as ends that are also duties; that is, that it is a duty to promote ourown happiness not merely to make that of others our end. But in that case the

end is not happiness but the morality of the agent; and happiness is only the

means of removing the hindrances to morality; permitted means, since no one

bas a right to demand from me the sacrifice of my not immoral ends. It is not

directly a duty to seek a competence for one's self; but indirectly it may be so;

namely, in order to guard against poverty which is a great temptation to vice.

But then it is not my happiness but my morality, to maintain which in its

integrity is at once my end and my duty.      VI. Ethics does not supply Laws for Actions (which is done by

              Jurisprudence), but only for the Maxims of Action

 

 

              The notion of duty stands in immediate relation to a law (even

though I abstract from every end which is the matter of the law); as is shown

by the formal principle of duty in the categorical imperative: "Act so that the

maxims of thy action might become a universal law." But in ethics this is

conceived as the law of thy own will, not of will in general, which might be

that of others; for in the latter case it would give rise to a judicial duty which

does not belong to the domain of ethics. In ethics, maxims are regarded as

those subjective laws which merely have the specific character of universal

legislation, which is only a negative principle (not to contradict a law in

general). How, then, can there be further a law for the maxims of actions?

              It is the notion of an end which is also a duty, a notion peculiar to

ethics, that alone is the foundation of a law for the maxims of actions; by

making the subjective end (that which every one has) subordinate to the

objective end (that which every one ought to make his own). The imperative:

"Thou shalt make this or that thy end (e. g., the happiness of others)" applies

to the matter of the elective will (an object). Now since no free action is

possible, without the agent having in view in it some end (as matter of his

elective will), it follows that, if there is an end which is also a duty, the

maxims of actions which are means to ends must contain only the condition

of fitness for a possible universal legislation: on the other hand, the end

which is also a duty can make it a law that we should have such a maxim,

whilst for the maxim itself the possibility of agreeing with a universal

legislation is sufficient.

              For maxims of actions may be arbitrary, and are only limited by the

condition of fitness for a universal legislation, which is the formal principle

of actions. But a law abolishes the arbitrary character of actions, and is by

this distinguished from recommendation (in which one only desires to know

the best means to an end).  VII. Ethical Duties are of indeterminate, Juridical Duties of strict,

                                      Obligation

 

 

              This proposition is a consequence of the foregoing; for if the law can

only command the maxim of the actions, not the actions themselves, this is a

sign that it leaves in the observance of it a latitude (latitudo) for the elective

will; that is, it cannot definitely assign how and how much we should do by

the action towards the end which is also duty. But by an indeterminate duty is

not meant a permission to make exceptions from the maxim of the actions,

but only the permission to limit one maxim of duty by another (e. g., the

general love of our neighbour by the love of parents); and this in fact enlarges

the field for the practice of virtue. The more indeterminate the duty, and the

more imperfect accordingly the obligation of the man to the action, and the

closer he nevertheless brings this maxim of obedience thereto (in his own

mind) to the strict duty (of justice), so much the more perfect is his virtuous

action.

              Hence it is only imperfect duties that are duties of virtue. The

fulfilment of them is merit (meritum) = + a; but their transgression is not

necessarily demerit (demeritum) = - a, but only moral unworth = o, unless the

agent made it a principle not to conform to those duties. The strength of

purpose in the former case is alone properly called virtue [Tugend] (virtus);

the weakness in the latter case is not vice (vitium), but rather only lack of

virtue [Untugend], a want of moral strength (defectus moralis). (As the word

Tugend is derived from taugen [to be good for something], Untugend by its

etymology signifies good for nothing.) Every action contrary to duty is called

transgression (peccatum). Deliberate transgression which has become a

principle is what properly constitutes what is called vice (vitium).

              Although the conformity of actions to justice (i.e., to be an upright

man) is nothing meritorious, yet the conformity of the maxim of such actions

regarded as duties, that is, reverence for justice is meritorious. For by this the

man makes the right of humanity or of men his own end, and thereby

enlarges his notion of duty beyond that of indebtedness (officium debiti),

since although another man by virtue of his rights can demand that myactions shall conform to the law, he cannot demand that the law shall also

contain the spring of these actions. The same thing is true of the general

ethical command, "Act dutifully from a sense of duty." To fix this disposition

firmly in one's mind and to quicken it is, as in the former case, meritorious,

because it goes beyond the law of duty in actions and makes the law in itself

the spring.

              But just for or reason, those duties also must be reckoned as of

indeterminate obligation, in respect of which there exists a subjective

principle which ethically rewards them; or to bring them as near as possible

to the notion of a strict obligation, a principle of susceptibility of this reward

according to the law of virtue; namely, a moral pleasure which goes beyond

mere satisfaction with oneself (which may be merely negative), and of which

it is proudly said that in this consciousness virtue is its own reward.

              When this merit is a merit of the man in respect of other men of

promoting their natural ends, which are recognized as such by all men

(making their happiness his own), we might call it the sweet merit, the

consciousness of which creates a moral enjoyment in which men are by

sympathy inclined to revel; whereas the bitter merit of promoting the true

welfare of other men, even though they should not recognize it as such (in the

case of the unthankful and ungrateful), has commonly no such reaction, but

only produces a satisfaction with one's self, although in the latter case this

would be even greater.    VIII. Exposition of the Duties of Virtue as Intermediate Duties

 

 

              (1) OUR OWN PERFECTION as an end which is also a duty

              (a) Physical perfection; that is, cultivation of all our faculties

generally for the promotion of the ends set before us by reason. That this is a

duty, and therefore an end in itself, and that the effort to effect this even

without regard to the advantage that it secures us, is based, not on a

conditional (pragmatic), but an unconditional (moral) imperative, may be

seen from the following consideration. The power of proposing to ourselves

an end is the characteristic of humanity (as distinguished from the brutes).

With the end of humanity in our own person is therefore combined the

rational will, and consequently the duty of deserving well of humanity by

culture generally, by acquiring or advancing the power to carry out all sorts

of possible ends, so far as this power is to be found in man; that is, it is a duty

to cultivate the crude capacities of our nature, since it is by that cultivation

that the animal is raised to man, therefore it is a duty in itself.

              This duty, however, is merely ethical, that is, of indeterminate

obligation. No principle of reason prescribes how far one must go in this

effort (in enlarging or correcting his faculty of understanding, that is, in

acquisition of knowledge or technical capacity); and besides the difference in

the circumstances into which men may come makes the choice of the kind of

employment for which he should cultivate his talent very arbitrary. Here,

therefore, there is no law of reason for actions, but only for the maxim of

actions, viz.: "Cultivate thy faculties of mind and body so as to be effective

for all ends that may come in thy way, uncertain which of them may become

thy own."

              (b) Cultivation of Morality in ourselves. The greatest moral

perfection of man is to do his duty, and that from duty (that the law be not

only the rule but also the spring of his actions). Now at first sight this seems

to be a strict obligation, and as if the principle of duty commanded not merely

the legality of every action, but also the morality, i.e., the mental disposition,

with the exactness and strictness of a law; but in fact the law commands even

here only the maxim of the action, namely, that we should seek the ground ofobligation, not in the sensible impulses (advantage or disadvantage), but

wholly in the law; so that the action itself is not commanded. For it is not

possible to man to see so far into the depth of his own heart that he could ever

be thoroughly certain of the purity of his moral purpose and the sincerity of

his mind even in one single action, although he has no doubt about the

legality of it. Nay, often the weakness which deters a man from the risk of a

crime is regarded by him as virtue (which gives the notion of strength). And

how many there are who may have led a long blameless life, who are only

fortunate in having escaped so many temptations. How much of the element

of pure morality in their mental disposition may have belonged to each deed

remains hidden even from themselves.

              Accordingly, this duty to estimate the worth of one's actions not

merely by their legality, but also by their morality (mental disposition), is

only of indeterminate obligation; the law does not command this internal

action in the human mind itself, but only the maxim of the action, namely,

that we should strive with all our power that for all dutiful actions the thought

of duty should be of itself an adequate spring.

              (2) HAPPINESS OF OTHERS as an end which is also a duty

              (a) Physical Welfare. Benevolent wishes may be unlimited, for they

do not imply doing anything. But the case is more difficult with benevolent

action, especially when this is to be done, not from friendly inclination (love)

to others, but from duty, at the expense of the sacrifice and mortification of

many of our appetites. That this beneficence is a duty results from this: that

since our self-love cannot be separated from the need to be loved by others

(to obtain help from them in case of necessity), we therefore make ourselves

an end for others; and this maxim can never be obligatory except by having

the specific character of a universal law, and consequently by means of a will

that we should also make others our ends. Hence the happiness of others is an

end that is also a duty.

              I am only bound then to sacrifice to others a part of my welfare

without hope of recompense: because it is my duty, and it is impossible to

assign definite limits how far that may go. Much depends on what would be

the true want of each according to his own feelings, and it must be left to

each to determine this for himself. For that one should sacrifice his own

happiness, his true wants, in order to promote that of others, would be a self-contradictory maxim if made a universal law. This duty, therefore, is only

indeterminate; it has a certain latitude within which one may do more or less

without our being able to assign its limits definitely. The law holds only for

the maxims, not for definite actions.

              (b) Moral well-being of others (salus moral is) also belongs to the

happiness of others, which it is our duty to promote, but only a negative duty.

The pain that a man feels from remorse of conscience, although its origin is

moral, is yet in its operation physical, like grief, fear, and every other

diseased condition. To take care that he should not be deservedly smitten by

this inward reproach is not indeed my duty but his business; nevertheless, it is

my duty to do nothing which by the nature of man might seduce him to that

for which his conscience may hereafter torment him, that is, it is my duty not

to give him occasion of stumbling. But there are no definite limits within

which this care for the moral satisfaction of others must be kept; therefore it

involves only an indeterminate obligation.                          IX. What is a Duty of Virtue?

 

 

              Virtue is the strength of the man's maxim in his obedience to duty.

All strength is known only by the obstacles that it can overcome; and in the

case of virtue the obstacles are the natural inclinations which may come into

conflict with the moral purpose; and as it is the man who himself puts these

obstacles in the way of his maxims, hence virtue is not merely a self-

constraint (for that might be an effort of one inclination to constrain another),

but is also a constraint according to a principle of inward freedom, and

therefore by the mere idea of duty, according to its formal law.

              All duties involve a notion of necessitation by the law, and ethical

duties involve a necessitation for which only an internal legislation is

possible; juridical duties, on the other hand, one for which external legislation

also is possible. Both, therefore, include the notion of constraint, either self-

constraint or constraint by others. The moral power of the former is virtue,

and the action springing from such a disposition (from reverence for the law)

may be called a virtuous action (ethical), although the law expresses a

juridical duty. For it is the doctrine of virtue that commands us to regard the

rights of men as holy.

              But it does not follow that everything the doing of which is virtue, is,

properly speaking, a duty of virtue. The former may concern merely the form

of the maxims; the latter applies to the matter of them, namely, to an end

which is also conceived as duty. Now, as the ethical obligation to ends, of

which there may be many, is only indeterminate, because it contains only a

law for the maxim of actions, and the end is the matter (object) of elective

will; hence there are many duties, differing according to the difference of

lawful ends, which may be called duties of virtue (officia honestatis), just

because they are subject only to free self-constraint, not to the constraint of

other men, and determine the end which is also a duty.

              Virtue, being a coincidence of the rational will, with every duty

firmly settled in the character, is, like everything formal, only one and the

same. But, as regards the end of actions, which is also duty, that is, as regards

the matter which one ought to make an end, there may be several virtues; andas the obligation to its maxim is called a duty of virtue, it follows that there

are also several duties of virtue.

              The supreme principle of ethics (the doctrine of virtue) is: "Act on a

maxim, the ends of which are such as it might be a universal law for

everyone to have." On this principle a man is an end to himself as well as

others, and it is not enough that he is not permitted to use either himself or

others merely as means (which would imply that be might be indifferent to

them), but it is in itself a duty of every man to make mankind in general his

end.

              The principle of ethics being a categorical imperative does not admit

of proof, but it admits of a justification from principles of pure practical

reason. Whatever in relation to mankind, to oneself, and others, can be an

end, that is an end for pure practical reason: for this is a faculty of assigning

ends in general; and to be indifferent to them, that is, to take no interest in

them, is a contradiction; since in that case it would not determine the maxims

of actions (which always involve an end), and consequently would cease to

be practical reasons. Pure reason, however, cannot command any ends a

priori, except so far as it declares the same to be also a duty, which duty is

then cared a duty of virtue.  X. The Supreme Principle of Jurisprudence was Analytical; that of

                                Ethics is Synthetical

 

 

              That external constraint, so far as it withstands that which hinders

the external freedom that agrees with general laws (as an obstacle of the

obstacle thereto), can be consistent with ends generally, is clear on the

principle of contradiction, and I need not go beyond the notion of freedom in

order to see it, let the end which each may be what he will. Accordingly, the

supreme principle of jurisprudence is an analytical principle. On the contrary

the principle of ethics goes beyond the notion of external freedom and, by

general laws, connects further with it an end which it makes a duty. This

principle, therefore, is synthetic. The possibility of it is contained in the

deduction (SS ix).

              This enlargement of the notion of duty beyond that of external

freedom and of its limitation by the merely formal condition of its constant

harmony; this, I say, in which, instead of constraint from without, there is set

up freedom within, the power of self-constraint, and that not by the help of

other inclinations, but by pure practical reason (which scorns all such help),

consists in this fact, which raises it above juridical duty; that by it ends are

proposed from which jurisprudence altogether abstracts. In the case of the

moral imperative, and the supposition of freedom which it necessarily

involves, the law, the power (to fulfil it) and the rational will that determines

the maxim, constitute all the elements that form the notion of juridical duty.

But in the imperative, which commands the duty of virtue, there is added,

besides the notion of self-constraint, that of an end; not one that we have, but

that we ought to have, which, therefore, pure practical reason has in itself,

whose highest, unconditional end (which, however, continues to be duty)

consists in this: that virtue is its own end and, by deserving well of men, is

also its own reward. Herein it shines so brightly as an ideal to human

perceptions, it seems to cast in the shade even holiness itself, which is never

tempted to transgression.* This, however, is an illusion arising from the fact

that as we have no measure for the degree of strength, except the greatness of

the obstacles which might have been overcome (which in our case are the

inclinations), we are led to mistake the subjective conditions of estimation ofa magnitude for the objective conditions of the magnitude itself. But when

compared with human ends, all of which have their obstacles to be overcome,

it is true that the worth of virtue itself, which is its own end, far outweighs the

worth of all the utility and all the empirical ends and advantages which it may

have as consequences.

              * So that one might very two well-known lines of Haller thus:

              With all his failings, man is still

 

              Better than angels void of will.

 

              We may, indeed, say that man is obliged to virtue (as a moral

strength). For although the power (facultas) to overcome all imposing

sensible impulses by virtue of his freedom can and must be presupposed, yet

this power regarded as strength (robur) is something that must be acquired by

the moral spring (the idea of the law) being elevated by contemplation of the

dignity of the pure law of reason in us, and at the same time also by exercise.  XI. According to the preceding Principles, the Scheme of Duties of

                          Virtue may be thus exhibited

 

                  The Material Element of the Duty of Virtue

                                            1

                              Internal Duty of Virtue 2

  External Virtue of Duty My Own End, which is also my Duty The End of

Others, the promotion of which is also my Duty (My own Perfection) (The

                                Happiness of Others) 3

                          The Law which is also Spring 4

The End which is also Spring On which the Morality On which the LegalityXII. Preliminary Notions of the Susceptibility of the Mind for Notions of

                                    Duty generally

 

 

              These are such moral qualities as, when a man does not possess

them, he is not bound to acquire them. They are: the moral feeling,

conscience, love of one's neighbour, and respect for ourselves (self-esteem).

There is no obligation to have these, since they are subjective conditions of

susceptibility for the notion of duty, not objective conditions of morality.

They are all sensitive and antecedent, but natural capacities of mind

(praedispositio) to be affected by notions of duty; capacities which it cannot

be regarded as a duty to have, but which every man has, and by virtue of

which he can be brought under obligation. The consciousness of them is not

of empirical origin, but can only follow on that of a moral law, as an effect of

the same on the mind.

                          A. THE MORAL FEELING

 

 

              This is the susceptibility for pleasure or displeasure, merely from the

consciousness of the agreement or disagreement of our action with the law of

duty. Now, every determination of the elective will proceeds from the idea of

the possible action through the feeling of pleasure or displeasure in taking an

interest in it or its effect to the deed; and here the sensitive state (the affection

of the internal sense) is either a pathological or a moral feeling. The former is

the feeling that precedes the idea of the law, the latter that which may follow

it.

              Now it cannot be a duty to have a moral feeling, or to acquire it; for

all consciousness of obligation supposes this feeling in order that one may

become conscious of the necessitation that lies in the notion of duty; but

every man (as a moral being) has it originally in himself; the obligation, then,

can only extend to the cultivation of it and the strengthening of it even by

admiration of its inscrutable origin; and this is effected by showing how it is

just, by the mere conception of reason, that it is excited most strongly, in its

own purity and apart from every pathological stimulus; and it is improper tocall this feeling a moral sense; for the word sense generally means a

theoretical power of perception directed to an object; whereas the moral

feeling (like pleasure and displeasure in general) is something merely

subjective, which supplies no knowledge. No man is wholly destitute of

moral feeling, for if he were totally unsusceptible of this sensation he would

be morally dead; and, to speak in the language of physicians, if the moral

vital force could no longer produce any effect on this feeling, then his

humanity would be dissolved (as it were by chemical laws) into mere

animality and be irrevocably confounded with the mass of other physical

beings. But we have no special sense for (moral) good and evil any more than

for truth, although such expressions are often used; but we have a

susceptibility of the free elective will for being moved by pure practical

reason and its law; and it is this that we call the moral feeling.

                              B. OF CONSCIENCE

 

 

              Similarly, conscience is not a thing to be acquired, and it is not a

duty to acquire it; but every man, as a moral being, has it originally within

him. To be bound to have a conscience would be as much as to say to be

under a duty to recognize duties. For conscience is practical reason which, in

every case of law, holds before a man his duty for acquittal or condemnation;

consequently it does not refer to an object, but only to the subject (affecting

the moral feeling by its own act); so that it is an inevitable fact, not an

obligation and duty. When, therefore, it is said, "This man has no

conscience," what is meant is that he pays no heed to its dictates. For if he

really had none, he would not take credit to himself for anything done

according to duty, nor reproach himself with violation of duty, and therefore

he would be unable even to conceive the duty of having a conscience.

              I pass by the manifold subdivisions of conscience, and only observe

what follows from what has just been said, namely, that there is no such thing

as an erring conscience. No doubt it is possible sometimes to err in the

objective judgement whether something is a duty or not; but I cannot err in

the subjective whether I have compared it with my practical (here judicially

acting) reason for the purpose of that judgement: for if I erred I would not

have exercised practical judgement at all, and in that case there is neither

truth nor error. Unconscientiousness is not want of conscience, but thepropensity not to heed its judgement. But when a man is conscious of having

acted according to his conscience, then, as far as regards guilt or innocence,

nothing more can be required of him, only he is bound to enlighten his

understanding as to what is duty or not; but when it comes or has come to

action, then conscience speaks involuntarily and inevitably. To act

conscientiously can, therefore, not be a duty, since otherwise it would be

necessary to have a second conscience, in order to be conscious of the act of

the first.

              The duty here is only to cultivate our con. science, to quicken our

attention to the voice of the internal judge, and to use all means to secure

obedience to it, and is thus our indirect duty.

                              C. OF LOVE TO MEN

 

 

              Love is a matter of feeling, not of will or volition, and I cannot love

because I will to do so, still less because I ought (I cannot be necessitated to

love); hence there is no such thing as a duty to love. Benevolence, however

(amor benevolentiae), as a mode of action, may be subject to a law of duty.

Disinterested benevolence is often called (though very improperly) love; even

where the happiness of the other is not concerned, but the complete and free

surrender of all one's own ends to the ends of another (even a superhuman)

being, love is spoken of as being also our duty. But all duty is necessitation or

constraint, although it may be self-constraint according to a law. But what is

done from constraint is not done from love.

              It is a duty to do good to other men according to our power, whether

we love them or not, and this duty loses nothing of its weight, although we

must make the sad remark that our species, alas! is not such as to be found

particularly worthy of love when we know it more closely. Hatred of men,

however, is always hateful: even though without any active hostility it

consists only in complete aversion from mankind (the solitary misanthropy).

For benevolence still remains a duty even towards the manhater, whom one

cannot love, but to whom we can show kindness.

              To hate vice in men is neither duty nor against duty, but a mere

feeling of horror of vice, the will having no influence on the feeling nor the

feeling on the will. Beneficence is a duty. He who often practises this, andsees his beneficent purpose succeed, comes at last really to love him whom

he has benefited. When, therefore, it is said: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour

as thyself," this does not mean, "Thou shalt first of all love, and by means of

this love (in the next place) do him good"; but: "Do good to thy neighbour,

and this beneficence will produce in thee the love of men (as a settled habit of

inclination to beneficence)."

              The love of complacency (amor complacentiae,) would therefore

alone be direct. This is a pleasure immediately connected with the idea of the

existence of an object, and to have a duty to this, that is, to be necessitated to

find pleasure in a thing, is a contradiction.

                                  D. OF RESPECT

 

 

              Respect (reverentia) is likewise something merely subjective; a

feeling of a peculiar kind not a judgement about an object which it would be

a duty to effect or to advance. For if considered as duty it could only be

conceived as such by means of the respect which we have for it. To have a

duty to this, therefore, would be as much as to say to be bound in duty to

have a duty. When, therefore, it is said: "Man has a duty of self-esteem," this

is improperly stated, and we ought rather to say: "The law within him

inevitably forces from him respect for his own being, and this feeling (which

is of a peculiar kind) is a basis of certain duties, that is, of certain actions

which may be consistent with his duty to himself." But we cannot say that he

has a duty of respect for himself; for he must have respect for the law within

himself, in order to be able to conceive duty at all.

 XIII. General Principles of the Metaphysics of Morals in the treatment

                                    of Pure Ethics

 

 

              First. A duty can have only a single ground of obligation; and if two

or more proof of it are adduced, this is a certain mark that either no valid

proof has yet been given, or that there are several distinct duties which have

been regarded as one.

              For all moral proofs, being philosophical, can only be drawn by

means of rational knowledge from concepts, not like mathematics, through

the construction of concepts. The latter science admits a variety of proofs of

one and the same theorem; because in intuition a priori there may be several

properties of an object, all of which lead back to the very same principle. If,

for instance, to prove the duty of veracity, an argument is drawn first from

the harm that a lie causes to other men; another from the worthlessness of a

liar and the violation of his own self-respect, what is proved in the former

argument is a duty of benevolence, not of veracity, that is to say, not the duty

which required to be proved, but a different one. Now, if, in giving a variety

of proof for one and the same theorem, we flatter ourselves that the multitude

of reasons will compensate the lack of weight in each taken separately, this is

a very unphilosophical resource, since it betrays trickery and dishonesty; for

several insufficient proofs placed beside one another do not produce

certainty, nor even probability. They should advance as reason and

consequence in a series, up to the sufficient reason, and it is only in this way

that they can have the force of proof. Yet the former is the usual device of the

rhetorician.

              Secondly. The difference between virtue and vice cannot be sought

in the degree in which certain maxims are followed, but only in the specific

quality of the maxims (their relation to the law). In other words, the vaunted

principle of Aristotle, that virtue is the mean between two vices, is false.* For

instance, suppose that good management is given as the mean between two

vices, prodigality and avarice; then its origin as a virtue can neither be

defined as the gradual diminution of the former vice (by saving), nor as the

increase of the expenses of the miserly. These vices, in fact, cannot be viewedas if they, proceeding as it were in opposite directions, met together in good

management; but each of them has its own maxim, which necessarily

contradicts that of the other.

              * The common classical formulae of ethics- medio tutissimus ibis;

omne mimium vertitur in vitium; est modus in rebus, etc., medium tenuere

beati; virtus est medium vitiorum et utrinque reductum["You will go most

safely in the middle" (Virgil); "Every excess develops into a vice"; "There is

a mean in all things, etc." (Horace); "Happy they who steadily pursue a

middle course"; "Virtue is the mean between two vices and equally removed

from either" (Horace).]- contain a poor sort of wisdom, which has no definite

principles; for this mean between two extremes, who will assign it for me?

Avarice (as a vice) is not distinguished from frugality (as a virtue) by merely

being the lat pushed too far; but has a quite different principle; (maxim),

namely placing the end of economy not in the enjoyment of one's means, but

in the mere possession of them, renouncing enjoyment; just as the vice of

prodigality is not to be sought in the excessive enjoyment of one's means, but

in the bad maxim which makes the use of them, without regard to their

maintenance, the sole end.

              For the same reason, no vice can be defined as an excess in the

practice of certain actions beyond what is proper (e.g., Prodigalitas est

excessus in consumendis opibus); or, as a less exercise of them than is fitting

(Avaritia est defectus, etc.). For since in this way the degree is left quite

undefined, and the question whether conduct accords with duty or not, turns

wholly on this, such an account is of no use as a definition.

              Thirdly. Ethical virtue must not be estimated by the power we

attribute to man of fulfilling the law; but, conversely, the moral power must

be estimated by the law, which commands categorically; not, therefore, by

the empirical knowledge that we have of men as they are, but by the rational

knowledge how, according to the ideas of humanity, they ought to be. These

three maxims of the scientific treatment of ethics are opposed to the older

apophthegms:

              1. There is only one virtue and only one vice.

              2. Virtue is the observance of the mean path between two opposite

vices.              3. Virtue (like prudence) must be learned from experience.                            XIV. Of Virtue in General

 

 

              Virtue signifies a moral strength of will. But this does not exhaust

the notion; for such strength might also belong to a holy (superhuman) being,

in whom no opposing impulse counteracts the law of his rational will; who

therefore willingly does everything in accordance with the law. Virtue then is

the moral strength of a man's will in his obedience to duty; and this is a moral

necessitation by his own law giving reason, inasmuch as this constitutes itself

a power executing the law. It is not itself a duty, nor is it a duty to possess it

(otherwise we should be in duty bound to have a duty), but it commands, and

accompanies its command with a moral constraint (one possible by laws of

internal freedom). But since this should be irresistible, strength is requisite,

and the degree of this strength can be estimated only by the magnitude of the

hindrances which man creates for himself, by his inclinations. Vices, the

brood of unlawful dispositions, are the monsters that he has to combat;

wherefore this moral strength as fortitude (fortitudo moral is) constitutes the

greatest and only true martial glory of man; it is also called the true wisdom,

namely, the practical, because it makes the ultimate end of the existence of

man on earth its own end. Its possession alone makes man free, healthy, rich,

a king, etc., nor either chance or fate deprive him of this, since he possesses

himself, and the virtuous cannot lose his virtue.

              All the encomiums bestowed on the ideal of humanity in its moral

perfection can lose nothing of their practical reality by the examples of what

men now are, have been, or will probably be hereafter; anthropology which

proceeds from mere empirical knowledge cannot impair anthroponomy

which is erected by the unconditionally legislating reason; and although

virtue may now and then be called meritorious (in relation to men, not to the

law), and be worthy of reward, yet in itself, as it is its own end, so also it

must be regarded as its own reward.

              Virtue considered in its complete perfection is, therefore, regarded

not as if man possessed virtue, but as if virtue possessed the man, since in the

former case it would appear as though he had still had the choice (for which

he would then require another virtue, in order to select virtue from all otherwares offered to him). To conceive a plurality of virtues (as we unavoidably

must) is nothing else but to conceive various moral objects to which the

(rational) will is led by the single principle of virtue; and it is the same with

the opposite vices. The expression which personifies both is a contrivance for

affecting the sensibility, pointing, however, to a moral sense. Hence it

follows that an aesthetic of morals is not a part, but a subjective exposition of

the Metaphysic of Morals; in which the emotions that accompany the force of

the moral law make the that force to be felt; for example: disgust, horror, etc.,

which gives a sensible moral aversion in order to gain the precedence from

the merely sensible incitement.XV. Of the Principle on which Ethics is separated from Jurisprudence

 

 

              This separation on which the subdivision of moral philosophy in

general rests, is founded on this: that the notion of freedom, which is

common to both, makes it necessary to divide duties into those of external

and those of internal freedom; the latter of which alone are ethical. Hence this

internal freedom which is the condition of all ethical duty must be discussed

as a preliminary (discursus praeliminaris), just as above the doctrine of

conscience was discussed as the condition of all duty.

                                        Remarks

 

      Of the Doctrine of Virtue on the Principle Of Internal Freedom.

 

 

              Habit (habitus) is a facility of action and a subjective perfection of

the elective will. But not every such facility is a free habit (habitus libertatis);

for if it is custom (assuetudo), that is, a uniformity of action which, by

frequent repetition, has become a necessity, then it is not a habit proceeding

from freedom, and therefore not a moral habit. Virtue therefore cannot be

defined as a habit of free law-abiding actions, unless indeed we add

"determining itself in its action by the idea of the law"; and then this habit is

not a property of the elective will, but of the rational will, which is a faculty

that in adopting a rule also declares it to be a universal law, and it is only

such a habit that can be reckoned as virtue. Two things are required for

internal freedom: to be master of oneself in a given case (animus sui compos)

and to have command over oneself (imperium in semetipsum), that is to

subdue his emotions and to govern his passions. With these conditions, the

character (indoles) is noble (erecta); in the opposite case, it is ignoble

(indoles abjecta serva).        XVI. Virtue requires, first of all, Command over Oneself

 

 

              Emotions and passions are essentially distinct; the former belong to

feeling in so far as this coming before reflection makes it more difficult or

even impossible. Hence emotion is called hasty (animus praeceps). And

reason declares through the notion of virtue that a man should collect

himself; but this weakness in the life of one's understanding, joined with the

strength of a mental excitement, is only a lack of virtue (Untugend), and as it

were a weak and childish thing, which may very well consist with the best

will, and has further this one good thing in it, that this storm soon subsides. A

propensity to emotion (e.g., resentment) is therefore not so closely related to

vice as passion is. Passion, on the other hand, is the sensible appetite grown

into a permanent inclination (e. g., hatred in contrast to resentment). The

calmness with which one indulges it leaves room for reflection and allows the

mind to frame principles thereon for itself; and thus when the inclination falls

upon what contradicts the law, to brood on it, to allow it to root itself deeply,

and thereby to take up evil (as of set purpose) into one's maxim; and this is

then specifically evil, that is, it is a true vice.

              Virtue, therefore, in so far as it is based on internal freedom,

contains a positive command for man, namely, that he should bring all his

powers and inclinations under his rule (that of reason); and this is a positive

precept of command over himself which is additional to the prohibition,

namely, that he should not allow himself to be governed by his feelings and

inclinations (the duty of apathy); since, unless reason takes the reins of

government into its own hands, the feelings and inclinations play the master

over the man.XVII. Virtue necessarily presupposes Apathy (considered as Strength)

 

 

              This word (apathy) has come into bad repute, just as if it meant want

of feeling, and therefore subjective indifference with respect to the objects of

the elective will; it is supposed to be a weakness. This misconception may be

avoided by giving the name moral apathy to that want of emotion which is to

be distinguished from indifference. In the former, the feelings arising from

sensible impressions lose their influence on the moral feeling only because

the respect for the law is more powerful than all of them together. It is only

the apparent strength of a fever patient that makes even the lively sympathy

with good rise to an emotion, or rather degenerate into it. Such an emotion is

called enthusiasm, and it is with reference to this that we are to explain the

moderation which is usually recommended in virtuous practices:

              Insani sapiens nomen ferat, aequus uniqui

 

              Ultra quam satis est virtutem si petat ipsam.*

 

              * Horace. ["Let the wise man bear the name of fool, and the just of

unjust, if he pursue virtue herself beyond the proper bounds."]

              For otherwise it is absurd to imagine that one could be too wise or

too virtuous. The emotion always belongs to the sensibility, no matter by

what sort of object it may be excited. The true strength of virtue is the mind

at rest, with a firm, deliberate resolution to bring its law into practice. That is

the state of health in the moral life; on the contrary, the emotion, even when it

is excited by the idea of the good, is a momentary glitter which leaves

exhaustion after it. We may apply the term fantastically virtuous to the man

who will admit nothing to be indifferent in respect of morality (adiaphora),

and who strews all his steps with duties, as with traps, and will not allow it to

be indifferent whether a man eats fish or flesh, drink beer or wine, when both

agree with him; a micrology which, if adopted into the doctrine of virtue,

would make its rule a tyranny.                                        Remark

 

              Virtue is always in progress, and yet always begins from the

beginning. The former follows from the fact that, objectively considered, it is

an ideal and unattainable, and yet it is a duty constantly to approximate to it.

The second is founded subjectively on the nature of man which is affected by

inclinations, under the influence of which virtue, with its maxims adopted

once for all, can never settle in a position of rest; but, if it is not rising,

inevitably falls; because moral maxims cannot, like technical, be based on

custom (for this belongs to the physical character of the determination of

will); but even if the practice of them become a custom, the agent would

thereby lose the freedom in the choice of his maxims, which freedom is the

character of an action done from duty.

                                    On Conscience

 

              The consciousness of an internal tribunal in man (before which "his

thoughts accuse or excuse one another") is CONSCIENCE.

              Every man has a conscience, and finds himself observed by an

inward judge which threatens and keeps him in awe (reverence combined

with fear); and this power which watches over the laws within him is not

something which he himself (arbitrarily) makes, but it is incorporated in his

being. It follows him like his shadow, when he thinks to escape. He may

indeed stupefy himself with pleasures and distractions, but cannot avoid now

and then coming to himself or awaking, and then he at once perceives its

awful voice. In his utmost depravity, he may, indeed, pay no attention to it,

but he cannot avoid hearing it.

              Now this original intellectual and (as a conception of duty) moral

capacity, called conscience, has this peculiarity in it, that although its

business is a business of man with himself, yet he finds himself compelled by

his reason to transact it as if at the command of another person. For the

transaction here is the conduct of a trial (causa) before a tribunal. But that he

who is accused by his conscience should be conceived as one and the same

person with the judge is an absurd conception of a judicial court; for then the

complainant would always lose his case. Therefore, in all duties the

conscience of the man must regard another than himself as the judge of his

actions, if it is to avoid self-contradiction. Now this other may be an actual ora merely ideal person which reason frames to itself. Such an idealized person

(the authorized judge of conscience) must be one who knows the heart; for

the tribunal is set up in the inward part of man; at the same time he must also

be all-obliging, that is, must be or be conceived as a person in respect of

whom all duties are to be regarded as his commands; since conscience is the

inward judge of all free actions. Now, since such a moral being must at the

same time possess all power (in heaven and earth), since otherwise he could

not give his commands their proper effect (which the office of judge

necessarily requires), and since such a moral being possessing power over all

is called GOD, hence conscience must be conceived as the subjective

principle of a responsibility for one's deeds before God; nay, this latter

concept is contained (though it be only obscurely) in every moral self-

consciousness.

 

 

                           The Science of Right

                                Translated by W. Hastie

 

                                     CONTENTS

 

INTRODUCTION TO THE SCIENCE OF RIGHT.
GENERAL DEFINITIONS, AND DIVISIONS.
A. WHAT THE SCIENCE OF RIGHT IS.
B. WHAT IS RIGHT?
C. UNIVERSAL PRINCIPLE OF RIGHT.
D. RIGHT IS CONJOINED WITH THE TITLE OR AUTHORITY TO COMPEL.
E. STRICT RIGHT MAY BE ALSO REPRESENTED AS THE POSSIBILITY OF A UNIVERSAL RECIPROCAL COMPULSION IN
HARMONY WITH THE FREEDOM OF ALL ACCORDING TO UNIVERSAL LAWS.
F. SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS ON EQUIVOCAL RIGHT. (JUS AEQUIVOCUM).
DIVISION OF THE SCIENCE OF RIGHT.
A. GENERAL DIVISION OF THE DUTIES OF RIGHT. (JURIDICAL DUTIES).
B. UNIVERSAL DIVISION OF RIGHTS.
C. METHODICAL DIVISION OF THE SCIENCE OF RIGHT.
FIRST PART. PRIVATE RIGHT.
THE SYSTEM OF THOSE LAWS WHICH REQUIRE NO EXTERNAL PROMULGATION.
CHAPTER I. OF THE MODE OF HAVING ANYTHING EXTERNAL AS ONE’S OWN.
1. THE MEANING OF “MINE” IN RIGHT (MEUM JURIS).
2. JURIDICAL POSTULATE OF THE PRACTICAL REASON.
3. POSSESSION AND OWNERSHIP.
4. EXPOSITION OF THE CONCEPTION OF THE. EXTERNAL MINE AND THINE.
5. DEFINITION OF THE CONCEPTION OF THE EXTERNAL MINE AND THINE.
6. DEDUCTION OF THE CONCEPTION OF A PURELY JURIDICAL POSSESSION OF AN EXTERNAL OBJECT (POSSESSIO
NOUMENON).
7. APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF AN EXTERNAL MINE AND THINE TO OBJECTS OF
EXPERIENCE.
8. TO HAVE ANYTHING EXTERNAL AS ONE’S OWN IS ONLY POSSIBLE IN A JURIDICAL OR CIVIL STATE OF
SOCIETY UNDER THE REGULATION OF A PUBLIC LEGISLATIVE POWER.
9. THERE MAY, HOWEVER, BE AN EXTERNAL MINE AND THINE FOUND AS A FACT IN THE STATE OF NATURE,
BUT IT IS ONLY PROVISORY.
CHAPTER II. THE MODE OF ACQUIRING ANYTHING EXTERNAL.
10. THE GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF EXTERNAL ACQUISITION.
SECTION I.  PRINCIPLES OF REAL RIGHT.
11. WHAT IS A REAL RIGHT?
12. THE FIRST ACQUISITION OF A THING CAN ONLY BE THAT OF THE SOIL.
13. EVERY PART OF THE SOIL MAY BE ORIGINALLY ACQUIRED; AND THE PRINCIPLE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
ACQUISITION IS THE ORIGINAL COMMUNITY OF THE SOIL GENERALLY.
14. THE JURIDICAL ACT OF THIS ORIGINAL ACQUISITION IS OCCUPANCY.
15. IT IS ONLY WITHIN A CIVIL CONSTITUTION THAT ANYTHING CAN BE ACQUIRED PEREMPTORILY, WHEREAS IN
THE STATE OF NATURE ACQUISITION CAN ONLY BE PROVISORY.
16. EXPOSITION OF THE CONCEPTION OF A PRIMARY ACQUISITION OF THE SOIL.
17. DEDUCTION OF THE CONCEPTION OF THE ORIGINAL PRIMARY ACQUISITION.
SECTION II.  PRINCIPLES OF PERSONAL RIGHT.
18. NATURE AND ACQUISITION OF PERSONAL RIGHT.
19. ACQUISITION BY CONTRACT.20. WHAT IS ACQUIRED BY CONTRACT.
21. ACCEPTANCE AND DELIVERY.
SECTION III.  PRINCIPLES OF PERSONAL RIGHT THAT IS REAL IN KIND. (JUS REALITER PERSONALE).
22. NATURE OF PERSONAL RIGHT OF A REAL KIND.
23. WHAT IS ACQUIRED IN THE HOUSEHOLD.
THE RIGHTS OF THE FAMILY AS A DOMESTIC SOCIETY
TITLE I. CONJUGAL RIGHT. (HUSBAND AND WIFE)
24. THE NATURAL BASIS OF MARRIAGE.
25. THE RATIONAL RIGHT OF MARRIAGE.
26. MONOGAMY AND EQUALITY IN MARRIAGE.
27. FULFILLMENT OF THE CONTRACT OF MARRIAGE.
TITLE II. PARENTAL RIGHT. (PARENT AND CHILD).
28. THE RELATION OF PARENT AND CHILD.
29. THE RIGHTS OF THE PARENT.
TITLE III. HOUSEHOLD RIGHT. (MASTER AND SERVANT)
30. RELATION AND RIGHT OF THE MASTER OF A HOUSEHOLD.
SYSTEMATIC DIVISION OF ALL THE RIGHTS CAPABLE OF BEING ACQUIRED BY
CONTRACT.
31. DIVISION OF CONTRACTS: JURIDICAL CONCEPTIONS OF MONEY AND A BOOK.
ILLUSTRATION OF RELATIONS OF CONTRACT BY THE CONCEPTIONS OF MONEY AND A BOOK
I. WHAT IS MONEY?
II. WHAT IS A BOOK?
THE UNAUTHORIZED PUBLISHING OF BOOKS IS CONTRARY TO THE PRINCIPLES OF RIGHT, AND IS RIGHTLY
PROHIBITED.
CONFUSION OF PERSONAL RIGHT AND REAL RIGHT.
EPISODICAL SECTION. THE IDEAL ACQUISITION OF EXTERNAL OBJECTS OF THE WILL.
32. THE NATURE AND MODES OF IDEAL ACQUISITION.
33. I. ACQUISITION BY USUCAPION. (ACQUISITIO PER USUCAPIONEM).
34. II. ACQUISITION BY INHERITANCE. (ACQUISITIO HAEREDITATIS).
35. III. THE CONTINUING RIGHT OF A GOOD NAME AFTER DEATH. (BONA FAMA DEFUNCTI).
CHAPTER III.  ACQUISITION CONDITIONED BY THE SENTENCE OF A PUBLIC JUDICATORY.
36. HOW AND WHAT ACQUISITION IS SUBJECTIVELY CONDITIONED BY THE PRINCIPLE OF A PUBLIC COURT.
37. I. THE CONTRACT OF DONATION. (PACTUM DONATIONIS).
38. II. THE CONTRACT OF LOAN. (COMMODATUM).
39. III. THE REVINDICATION OF WHAT HAS BEEN LOST. (VINDICATIO).
40. IV. ACQUISITION OF SECURITY BY THE TAKING OF AN OATH. (CAUTIO JURATORIA).
TRANSITION FROM THE MINE AND THINE IN THE STATE OF NATURE TO THE MINE AND THINE IN THE JURIDICAL
STATE GENERALLY.
41. PUBLIC JUSTICE AS RELATED TO THE NATURAL AND THE CIVIL STATE.
42. THE POSTULATE OF PUBLIC RIGHT.
SECOND PART. PUBLIC RIGHT.
THE SYSTEM OF THOSE LAWS WHICH REQUIRE PUBLIC PROMULGATION.
THE PRINCIPLES OF RIGHT IN CIVIL SOCIETY.
43. DEFINITION AND DIVISION OF PUBLIC RIGHT.
I. RIGHT OF THE STATE AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW. (JUS CIVITATIS).
44. ORIGIN OF THE CIVIL UNION AND PUBLIC RIGHT.
45. THE FORM OF THE STATE AND ITS THREE POWERS.
46. THE LEGISLATIVE POWER AND THE MEMBERS OF THE STATE.
47. DIGNITIES IN THE STATE AND THE ORIGINAL CONTRACT.
48. MUTUAL RELATIONS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF THE THREE POWERS.49. DISTINCT FUNCTIONS OF THE THREE POWERS. AUTONOMY OF THE STATE
CONSTITUTIONAL AND JURIDICAL CONSEQUENCES ARISING FROM THE NATURE OF THE CIVIL UNION.
50. JURIDICAL RELATIONS OF THE CITIZEN TO HIS COUNTRY AND TO OTHER COUNTRIES. EMIGRATION;
IMMIGRATION; BANISHMENT; EXILE.
51. THE THREE FORMS OF THE STATE: AUTOCRACY; ARISTOCRACY; DEMOCRACY.
52. HISTORICAL ORIGIN AND CHANGES. A PURE REPUBLIC. REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT.
53. NATURE AND DIVISION OF THE RIGHT OF NATIONS.
54. ELEMENTS OF THE RIGHT OF NATIONS.
55. RIGHT OF GOING TO WAR AS RELATED TO THE SUBJECTS OF THE STATE.
56. RIGHT OF GOING TO WAR IN RELATION TO HOSTILE STATES.
57. RIGHT DURING WAR.
58. RIGHT AFTER WAR.
59. THE RIGHTS OF PEACE.
60. RIGHT AS AGAINST AN UNJUST ENEMY.
61. PERPETUAL PEACE AND A PERMANENT CONGRESS OF NATIONS.
III. THE UNIVERSAL RIGHT OF MANKIND. (JUS COSMOPOLITICUM)
62. NATURE AND CONDITIONS OF COSMOPOLITICAL RIGHT.
CONCLUSION.        INTRODUCTION TO THE SCIENCE OF RIGHT.

 

           GENERAL DEFINITIONS, AND DIVISIONS.

 

 

                        A. What the Science of Right is.

 

 

              The Science of Right has for its object the principles of all the laws

which it is possible to promulgate by external legislation. Where there is such

a legislation, it becomes, in actual application to it, a system of positive right

and law; and he who is versed in the knowledge of this system is called a

jurist or jurisconsult (jurisconsultus). A practical jurisconsult (jurisperitus), or

a professional lawyer, is one who is skilled in the knowledge of positive

external laws, and who can apply them to cases that may occur in experience.

Such practical knowledge of positive right, and law, may be regarded as

belonging to jurisprudence (jurisprudentia) in the original sense of the term.

But the theoretical knowledge of right and law in principle, as distinguished

from positive laws and empirical cases, belongs to the pure science of right

(jurisscientia). The science of right thus designates the philosophical and

systematic knowledge of the principles of natural right. And it is from this

science that the immutable principles of all positive legislation must be

derived by practical jurists and lawgivers.                                  B. What is Right?

 

 

              This question may be said to be about as embarrassing to the jurist as

the well-known question, “What is truth?” is to the logician. It is all the more

so, if, on reflection, he strives to avoid tautology in his reply and recognise

the fact that a reference to what holds true merely of the laws of some one

country at a particular time is not a solution of the general problem thus

proposed. It is quite easy to state what may be right in particular cases (quid

sit juris), as being what the laws of a certain place and of a certain time say or

may have said; but it is much more difficult to determine whether what they

have enacted is right in itself, and to lay down a universal criterion by which

right and wrong in general, and what is just and unjust, may be recognised.

All this may remain entirely hidden even from the practical jurist until he

abandon his empirical principles for a time and search in the pure reason for

the sources of such judgements, in order to lay a real foundation for actual

positive legislation. In this search, his empirical laws may, indeed, furnish

him with excellent guidance; but a merely empirical system that is void of

rational principles is, like the wooden head in the fable of Phaedrus, fine

enough in appearance, but unfortunately it wants brain.

              1. The conception of right — as referring to a corresponding

obligation which is the moral aspect of it — in the first place, has regard only

to the external and practical relation of one person to another, in so far as they

can have influence upon each other, immediately or mediately, by their

actions as facts. 2. In the second place, the conception of right does not

indicate the relation of the action of an individual to the wish or the mere

desire of another, as in acts of benevolence or of unkindness, but only the

relation of his free action to the freedom of action of the other. 3. And, in the

third place, in this reciprocal relation of voluntary actions, the conception of

right does not take into consideration the matter of the matter of the act of

will in so far as the end which any one may have in view in willing it is

concerned. In other words, it is not asked in a question of right whether any

one on buying goods for his own business realizes a profit by the transaction

or not; but only the form of the transaction is taken into account, in

considering the relation of the mutual acts of will. Acts of will or voluntarychoice are thus regarded only in so far as they are free, and as to whether the

action of one can harmonize with the freedom of another, according to a

universal law.

              Right, therefore, comprehends the whole of the conditions under

which the voluntary actions of any one person can be harmonized in reality

with the voluntary actions of every other person, according to a universal law

of freedom.                        C. Universal Principle of Right.

 

 

              “Every action is right which in itself, or in the maxim on which it

proceeds, is such that it can coexist along with the freedom of the will of each

and all in action, according to a universal law.”

              If, then, my action or my condition generally can coexist with the

freedom of every other, according to a universal law, any one does me a

wrong who hinders me in the performance of this action, or in the

maintenance of this condition. For such a hindrance or obstruction cannot

coexist with freedom according to universal laws.

              It follows also that it cannot be demanded as a matter of right, that

this universal principle of all maxims shall itself be adopted as my maxim,

that is, that I shall make it the maxim of my actions. For any one may be free,

although his freedom is entirely indifferent to me, or even if I wished in my

heart to infringe it, so long as I do not actually violate that freedom by my

external action. Ethics, however, as distinguished from jurisprudence,

imposes upon me the obligation to make the fulfillment of right a maxim of

my conduct.

              The universal law of right may then be expressed thus: “Act

externally in such a manner that the free exercise of thy will may be able to

coexist with the freedom of all others, according to a universal law.” This is

undoubtedly a law which imposes obligation upon me; but it does not at all

imply and still less command that I ought, merely on account of this

obligation, to limit my freedom to these very conditions. Reason in this

connection says only that it is restricted thus far by its idea, and may be

likewise thus limited in fact by others; and it lays this down as a postulate

which is not capable of further proof. As the object in view is not to teach

virtue, but to explain what right is, thus far the law of right, as thus laid

down, may not and should not be represented as a motive-principle of action.      D. Right is Conjoined with the Title or Authority to Compel.

 

 

              The resistance which is opposed to any hindrance of an effect is in

reality a furtherance of this effect and is in accordance with its

accomplishment. Now, everything that is wrong is a hindrance of freedom,

according to universal laws; and compulsion or constraint of any kind is a

hindrance or resistance made to freedom. Consequently, if a certain exercise

of freedom is itself a hindrance of the freedom that is according to universal

laws, it is wrong; and the compulsion of constraint which is opposed to it is

right, as being a hindering of a hindrance of freedom, and as being in accord

with the freedom which exists in accordance with universal laws. Hence,

according to the logical principle of contradiction, all right is accompanied

with an implied title or warrant to bring compulsion to bear on any one who

may violate it in fact.E. Strict Right may be also Represented as the Possibility of a Universal

Reciprocal Compulsion in harmony with the Freedom of All according

                                to Universal Laws.

 

 

              This proposition means the right is not to be regarded as composed

of two different elements — obligation according to a law, and a title on the

part of one who has bound another by his own free choice to compel him to

perform. But it imports that the conception of right may be viewed as

consisting immediately in the possibility of a universal reciprocal

compulsion, in harmony with the freedom of all. As right in general has for

its object only what is external in actions, strict right, as that with which

nothing ethical is intermingled, requires no other motives of action than those

that are merely external; for it is then pure right and is unmixed with any

prescriptions of virtue. A strict right, then, in the exact sense of the term, is

that which alone can be called wholly external. Now such right is founded, no

doubt, upon the consciousness of the obligation of every individual according

to the law; but if it is to be pure as such, it neither may nor should refer to this

consciousness as a motive by which to determine the free act of the will. For

this purpose, however, it founds upon the principle of the possibility of an

external compulsion, such as may coexist with the freedom of every one

according to universal laws. Accordingly, then, where it is said that a creditor

has a right to demand from a debtor the payment of his debt, this does not

mean merely that he can bring him to feel in his mind that reason obliges him

to do this; but it means that he can apply an external compulsion to force any

such one so to pay, and that this compulsion is quite consistent with the

freedom of all, including the parties in question, according to a universal law.

Right and the title to compel, thus indicate the same thing.

              The law of right, as thus enunciated, is represented as a reciprocal

compulsion necessarily in accordance with the freedom of every one, under

the principle of a universal freedom. It is thus, as it were, a representative

construction of the conception of right, by exhibiting it in a pure intuitive

perception a priori, after the analogy of the possibility of the free motions of

bodies under the physical law of the equality of action and reaction. Now, as

in pure mathematics, we cannot deduce the properties of its objectsimmediately from a mere abstract conception, but can only discover them by

figurative construction or representation of its conceptions; so it is in like

manner with the principle of right. It is not so much the mere formal

conception of right, but rather that of a universal and equal reciprocal

compulsion as harmonizing with it, and reduced under general laws, that

makes representation of that conception possible. But just as those

conceptions presented in dynamics are founded upon a merely formal

representation of pure mathematics as presented in geometry, reason has

taken care also to provide the understanding as far as possible with intuitive

presentations a priori in behoof of a construction of the conception of right.

The right in geometrical lines (rectum) is opposed, as the straight, to that

which is curved and to that which is oblique. In the first opposition, there is

involved an inner quality of the lines of such a nature that there is only one

straight or right line possible between two given points. In the second case,

again, the positions of two intersecting or meeting lines are of such a nature

that there can likewise be only one line called the perpendicular, which is not

more inclined to the one side than the other, and it divides space on either

side into two equal parts. After the manner of this analogy, the science of

right aims at determining what every one shall have as his own with

mathematical exactness; but this is not to be expected in the ethical science of

virtue, as it cannot but allow a certain latitude for exceptions. But, without

passing into the sphere of ethics, there are two cases — known as the

equivocal right of equity and necessity — which claim a juridical decision,

yet for which no one can be found to give such a decision, and which, as

regards their relation to rights, belong, as it were, to the “Intermundia” of

Epicurus. These we must at the outset take apart from the special exposition

of the science of right, to which we are now about to advance; and we may

consider them now by way of supplement to these introductory explanations,

in order that their uncertain conditions may not exert a disturbing influence

on the fixed principles of the proper doctrine of right.  F. Supplementary Remarks on Equivocal Right. (Jus Aequivocum).

 

 

              With every right, in the strict acceptation (jus strictum), there is

conjoined a right to compel. But it is possible to think of other rights of a

wider kind (jus latum) in which the title to compel cannot be determined by

any law. Now there are two real or supposed rights of this kind — equity and

the right of necessity. The first alleges a right that is without compulsion; the

second adopts a compulsion that is without right. This equivocalness,

however, can be easily shown to rest on the peculiar fact that there are cases

of doubtful right, for the decision of which no judge can be appointed.

                                      I. Equity.

 

              Equity (aequitas), regarded objectively, does not properly constitute

a claim upon the moral duty of benevolence or beneficence on the part of

others; but whoever insists upon anything on the ground of equity, founds

upon his right to the same. In this case, however, the conditions are awanting

that are requisite for the function of a judge in order that be might determine

what or what kind of satisfaction can be done to this claim. When one of the

partners of a mercantile company, formed under the condition of equal

profits, has, however, done more than the other members, and in consequence

has also lost more, it is in accordance with equity that he should demand from

the company more than merely an equal share of advantage with the rest. But,

in relation to strict right — if we think of a judge considering his case — he

can furnish no definite data to establish how much more belongs to him by

the contract; and in case of an action at law, such a demand would be

rejected. A domestic servant, again, who might be paid his wages due to the

end of his year of service in a coinage that became depreciated within that

period, so that it would not be of the same value to him as it was when he

entered on his engagement, cannot claim by right to be kept from loss on

account of the unequal value of the money if he receives the due amount of it.

He can only make an appeal on the ground of equity,— a dumb goddess who

cannot claim a bearing of right,— because there was nothing bearing on this

point in the contract of service, and a judge cannot give a decree on the basis

of vague or indefinite conditions.              Hence it follows, that a court of equity, for the decision of disputed

questions of right, would involve a contradiction. It is only where his own

proper rights are concerned, and in matters in which he can decide, that a

judge may or ought to give a hearing to equity. Thus, if the Crown is

supplicated to give an indemnity to certain persons for loss or injury

sustained in its service, it may undertake the burden of doing so, although,

according to strict right, the claim might be rejected on the ground of the

pretext that the parties in question undertook the performance of the service

occasioning the loss, at their own risk.

              The dictum of equity may be put thus: “The strictest right is the

greatest wrong” (summum jus summa injuria). But this evil cannot be

obviated by the forms of right, although it relates to a matter of right; for the

grievance that it gives rise to can only be put before a “court of conscience”

(forum poli), whereas every question of right must be taken before a civil

court (forum soli).

                            II. The Right of Necessity.

 

              The so-called right of necessity (jus necessitatis) is the supposed

right or title, in case of the danger of losing my own life, to take away the life

of another who has, in fact, done me no harm. It is evident that, viewed as a

doctrine of right, this must involve a contradiction, For this is not the case of

a wrongful aggressor making an unjust assault upon my life, and whom I

anticipate by depriving him of his own (jus inculpatae tutelae); nor

consequently is it a question merely of the recommendation of moderation

which belongs to ethics as the doctrine of virtue, and not to jurisprudence as

the doctrine of right. It is a question of the allowableness of using violence

against one who has used none against me.

              It is clear that the assertion of such a right is not to be understood

objectively as being in accordance with what a law would prescribe, but

merely subjectively, as proceeding on the assumption of how a sentence

would be pronounced by a court in the case. There can, in fact, be no criminal

law assigning the penalty of death to a man who, when shipwrecked and

struggling in extreme danger for his life, and in order to save it, may thrust

another from a plank on which he had saved himself. For the punishment

threatened by the law could not possibly have greater power than the fear of

the loss of life in the case in question. Such a penal law would thus failaltogether to exercise its intended effect; for the threat of an evil which is still

uncertain — such as death by a judicial sentencecould not overcome the fear

of an evil which is certain, as drowning is in such circumstances. An act of

violent self-preservation, then, ought not to be considered as altogether

beyond condemnation (inculpabile); it is only to be adjudged as exempt from

punishment (impunibile). Yet this subjective condition of impunity, by a

strange confusion of ideas, has been regarded by jurists as equivalent to

objective lawfulness.

              The dictum of the right of necessity is put in these terms: “Necessity

has no law” (Necessitas non habet legem). And yet there cannot be a

necessity that could make what is wrong lawful.

              It is apparent, then, that in. judgements relating both to “equity” and

“the right of necessity,” the equivocations involved arise from an interchange

of the objective and subjective grounds that enter into the application of the

principles of right, when viewed respectively by reason or by a judicial

tribunal. What one may have good grounds for recognising as right, in itself,

may not find confirmation in a court of justice; and what he must consider to

be wrong, in itself, may obtain recognition in such a court. And the reason of

this is that the conception of right is not taken in the two cases in one and the

same sense.            DIVISION OF THE SCIENCE OF RIGHT.

 

 

      A. General Division of the Duties of Right. (Juridical Duties).

 

 

              In this division we may very conveniently follow Ulpian, if his three

formulae are taken in a general sense, which may not have been quite clearly

in his mind, but which they are capable of being developed into or of

receiving. They are the following:

              1. Honeste vive. “Live rightly.” juridical rectitude, or honour

(honestas juridica), consists in maintaining one’s own worth as a man in

relation to others. This duty may be rendered by the proposition: “Do not

make thyself a mere means for the use of others, but be to them likewise an

end.” This duty will be explained in the next formula as an obligation arising

out of the right of humanity in our own person (lex justi).

              2. Neminem laede. “Do wrong to no one.” This formula may be

rendered so as to mean: “Do no wrong to any one, even if thou shouldst be

under the necessity, in observing this duty, to cease from all connection with

others and to avoid all society” (lex juridica).

              3. Suum cuique tribue. “Assign to every one what is his own.” This

may be rendered, “Enter, if wrong cannot be avoided, into a society with

others in which every one may have secured to him what is his own.” If this

formula were to be simply translated, “Give every one his own,” it would

express an absurdity, for we cannot give any one what he already has. If it is

to have a definite meaning, it must therefore run thus: “Enter into a state in

which every one can have what is his own secured against the action of every

other” (lex justitiae).

              These three classical formulae, at the same time, represent principles

which suggest a division of the system of juridical duties into internal duties,

external duties, and those connecting duties which contain the latter as

deduced from the principle of the former by subsumption.                        B. Universal Division of Rights.

 

 

              I. Natural Right and Positive Right. The system of rights, viewed as

a scientific system of doctrines, is divided into natural right and positive

right. Natural right rests upon pure rational principles a priori; positive or

statutory right is what proceeds from the will of a legislator.

              II. Innate Right and Acquired Right. The system of rights may again

be regarded in reference to the implied powers of dealing morally with others

as bound by obligations, that is, as furnishing a legal title of action in relation

to them. Thus viewed, the system is divided into innate right and acquired

right. Innate right is that right which belongs to every one by nature,

independent of all juridical acts of experience. Acquired right is that right

which is founded upon such juridical acts.

              Innate right may also be called the “internal mine and thine” (meum

vel tuum internum) for external right must always be acquired.

              There is only one Innate Right, the Birthright of Freedom.

              Freedom is independence of the compulsory will of another; and in

so far as it can coexist with the freedom of all according to a universal law, it

is the one sole original, inborn right belonging to every man in virtue of his

humanity. There is, indeed, an innate equality belonging to every man which

consists in his right to be independent of being bound by others to anything

more than that to which he may also reciprocally bind them. It is,

consequently, the inborn quality of every man in virtue of which he ought to

be his own master by right (sui juris). There is, also, the natural quality of

justness attributable to a man as naturally of unimpeachable right (justi),

because be has done no wrong to any one prior to his own juridical actions.

And, further, there is also the innate right of common action on the part of

every man, so that he may do towards others what does not infringe their

rights or take away anything that is theirs unless they are willing to

appropriate it; such merely to communicate thought, to narrate anything, or to

promise something whether truly and honestly, or untruly and dishonestly

(veriloquim aut falsiloquim), for it rests entirely upon these others whether                                        1
they will believe or trust in it or not. But all these rights or titles are already

included in the principle of innate freedom, and are not really distinguished

from it, even as dividing members under a higher species of right.

        1
               It is customary to designate every untruth that is spoken

intentionally as such, although it may be in a frivolous manner a lie, or

falsehood (mendacium), because it may do harm, at least in so far as any one

who repeats it in good faith may be made a laughing-stock of to others on

account of his easy credulity. But in the juridical sense, only that untruth is

called a lie which immediately infringes the right of another, such as a false

allegation of a contract having been concluded, when the allegation is put

forward in order to deprive some one of what is his (falsiloquim dolosum).

This distinction of conceptions so closely allied is not without foundation;

because on the occasion of a simple statement of one’s thoughts, it is always

free for another to take them as he may; and yet the resulting repute, that such

a one is a man whose word cannot be trusted, comes so close to the

opprobrium of directly calling him a liar, that the boundary-line separating

what, in such a case, belongs to jurisprudence, and what is special to ethics,

can hardly be otherwise drawn.

              The reason why such a division into separate rights has been

introduced into the system of natural right, viewed as including all that is

innate, was not without a purpose. Its object was to enable proof to be more

readily put forward in case of any controversy arising about an acquired right,

and questions emerging either with reference to a fact that might be in doubt,

or, if that were established, in reference to a right under dispute. For the party

repudiating an obligation, and on whom the burden of proof (onus probandi)

might be incumbent, could thus methodically refer to his innate right of

freedom as specified under various relations in detail, and could therefore

found upon them equally as different titles of right.

              In the relation of innate right, and consequently of the internal mine

and thine, there is therefore not rights, but only one right. And, accordingly,

this highest division of rights into innate and acquired, which evidently

consists of two members extremely unequal in their contents is properly

placed in the introduction; and the subdivisions of the science of right may be

referred in detail to the external mine and thine.              C. Methodical Division of the Science of Right.

 

 

              The highest division of the system of natural right should not beas it

is frequently put — into “natural right” and “social right,” but into natural

right and civil right. The first constitutes private right; the second, public

right. For it is not the “social state” but the “civil state” that is opposed to the

“state of nature”; for in the “state of nature” there may well be society of

some kind, but there is no “civil” society, as an institution securing the mine

and thine by public laws. It is thus that right, viewed under reference to the

state of nature, is specially called private right. The whole of the principles of

right will therefore fall to be expounded under the two subdivisions of private

right and public right.

 

 

                     FIRST PART. PRIVATE RIGHT.

 

 

The System of those Laws Which Require No External Promulgation.

 

 

CHAPTER I. Of the Mode of Having Anything External as One’s Own.

 

 

            1. The Meaning of “Mine” in Right (Meum Juris).

 

 

              Anything is “Mine” by right, or is rightfully mine, when I am so

connected with it, that if any other person should make use of it without my

consent, he would do me a lesion or injury. The subjective condition of the

use of anything is possession of it.

              An external thing, however as such could only be mine, if I may

assume it to be possible that I can be wronged by the use which another

might make of it when it is not actually in my possession. Hence it would be

a contradiction to have anything external as one’s own, were not the

conception of possession capable of two different meanings, as sensible

possession that is perceivable by the senses, and rational possession that is

perceivable only by the intellect. By the former is to be understood a physical

possession, and by the latter, a purely juridical possession of the same object.

              The description of an object as “external to me” may signify either

that it is merely “different and distinct from me as a subject,” or that it is also

“a thing placed outside of me, and to be found elsewhere in space or time.”

Taken in the first sense, the term possession signifies rational possession;

and, in the second sense, it must mean empirical possession. A rational or

intelligible possession, if such be possible, is possession viewed apart from

physical holding or detention (detentio).

                 2. Juridical Postulate of the Practical Reason.

 

 

              It is possible to have any external object of my will as mine. In other

words, a maxim to this effect — were it to become law — that any object on

which the will can be exerted must remain objectively in itself without an

owner, as res nullius, is contrary to the principle of right.

              For an object of any act of my will, is something that it would be

physically within my power to use. Now, suppose there were things that by

right should absolutely not be in our power, or, in other words, that it would

be wrong or inconsistent with the freedom of all, according to universal law,

to make use of them. On this supposition, freedom would so far be depriving

itself of the use of its voluntary activity, in thus putting useable objects out of

all possibility of use. In practical relations, this would be to annihilate them,

by making them res nullius, notwithstanding the fact act acts of will in

relation to such things would formally harmonize, in the actual use of them,

with the external freedom of all according to universal laws. Now the pure

practical reason lays down only formal laws as principles to regulate the

exercise of the will; and therefore abstracts from the matter of the act of will,

as regards the other qualities of the object, which is considered only in so far

as it is an object of the activity of the will. Hence the practical reason cannot

contain, in reference to such an object, an absolute prohibition of its use,

because this would involve a contradiction of external freedom with itself.

An object of my free will, however, is one which I have the physical

capability of making some use of at will, since its use stands in my power (in

potentia). This is to be distinguished from having the object brought under

my disposal (in postestatem meam reductum), which supposes not a

capability merely, but also a particular act of the free-will. But in order to

consider something merely as an object of my will as such, it is sufficient to

be conscious that I have it in my power. It is therefore an assumption a priori

of the practical reason to regard and treat every object within the range of my

free exercise of will as objectively a possible mine or thine.

              This postulate may be called “a permissive law” of the practical

reason, as giving us a special title which we could not evolve out of the mereconceptions of right generally. And this title constitutes the right to impose

upon all others an obligation, not otherwise laid upon them, to abstain from

the use of certain objects of our free choice, because we have already taken

them into our possession. Reason wills that this shall be recognised as a valid

principle, and it does so as practical reason; and it is enabled by means of this

postulate a priori to enlarge its range of activity in practice.

                           3. Possession and Ownership.

 

 

              Any one who would assert the right to a thing as his must be in

possession of it as an object. Were he not its actual possessor or owner, he

could not be wronged or injured by the use which another might make of it

without his consent. For, should anything external to him, and in no way

connected with him by right, affect this object, it could not affect himself as a

subject, nor do him any wrong, unless he stood in a relation of ownership to

it.

     4. Exposition of the Conception of the. External Mine and Thine.

 

 

              There can only be three external objects of my will in the activity of

choice:

              (1) A corporeal thing external to me;

              (2) The free-will of another in the performance of a particular act

(praestatio);

              (3) The state of another in relation to myself.

              These correspond to the categories of substance, causality, and

reciprocity; and they form the practical relations between me and external

objects, according to the laws of freedom.

              A. I can only call a corporeal thing or an object in space “mine,”

when, even although not in physical possession of it, I am able to assert that I

am in possession of it in another real nonphysical sense. Thus, I am not

entitled to call an apple mine merely because I hold it in my hand or possess

it physically; but only when I am entitled to say, “I possess it, although I have

laid it out of my hand, and wherever it may lie.” In like manner, I am not

entitled to say of the ground, on which I may have laid myself down, that

therefore it is mine; but only when I can rightly assert that it still remains in

my possession, although I may have left the spot. For any one who, in the

former appearances of empirical possession, might wrench the apple out of

my hand, or drag me away from my resting-place, would, indeed, injure me

in respect of the inner “mine” of freedom, but not in respect of the external

“mine,” unless I could assert that I was in the possession of the object, even

when not actually holding it physically. And if I could not do this, neither

could I call the apple or the spot mine.

              B. I cannot call the performance of something by the action of the

will of another “mine,” if I can only say “it has come into my possession at

the same time with a promise” (pactum re initum); but only if I am able to

assert “I am in possession of the will of the other, so as to determine him to

the performance of a particular act, although the time for the performance of

it has not yet come.” In the latter case, the promise belongs to the nature ofthings actually held as possessed, and as an active obligation I can reckon it

mine; and this holds good not only if I have the thing promised — as in the

first case — already in my possession, but even although I do not yet possess

it in fact. Hence, I must be able to regard myself in thought as independent of

that empirical form of possession that is limited by the condition of time and

as being, nevertheless, in possession of the object.

              C. I cannot call a wife, a child, a domestic, or, generally, any other

person “mine” merely because I command them at present as belonging to

my household, or because I have them under control, and in my power and

possession. But I can call them mine, if, although they may have withdrawn

themselves from my control and I do not therefore possess them empirically,

I can still say “I possess them by my mere will, provided they exist anywhere

in space or time; and, consequently, my possession of them is purely

juridical.” They belong, in fact, to my possessions, only when and so far as I

can assert this as a matter of right.

     5. Definition of the Conception of the External Mine and Thine.

 

 

              Definitions are nominal or real. A nominal definition is sufficient

merely to distinguish the object defined from all other objects, and it springs

out of a complete and definite exposition of its conception. A real definition

further suffices for a deduction of the conception defined, so as to furnish a

knowledge of the reality of the object. The nominal definition of the external

“mine” would thus be: “The external mine is anything outside of myself, such

that any hindrance of my use of it at will would be doing me an injury or

wrong as an infringement of that freedom of mine which may coexist with

the freedom of all others according to a universal law.” The real definition of

this conception may be put thus: “The external mine is anything outside of

myself, such that any prevention of my use of it would be a wrong, although I

may not be in possession of it so as to be actually holding it as an object.” I

must be in some kind of possession of an external object, if the object is to be

regarded as mine; for, otherwise, anyone interfering with this object would

not, in doing so, affect me; nor, consequently, would he thereby do me any

wrong. Hence, according to SS 4, a rational possession (possessio noumenon)

must be assumed as possible, if there is to be rightly an external mine and

thine. Empirical possession is thus only phenomenal possession or holding

(detention) of the object in the sphere of sensible appearance (possessio

phenomenon), although the object which I possess is not regarded in this

practical relation as itself a phenomenon — according to the exposition of the

Transcendental Analytic in the Critique of Pure Reason — but as a thing in

itself. For in the Critique of Pure Reason the interest of reason turns upon the

theoretical knowledge of the nature of things and how far reason can go in

such knowledge. But here reason has to deal with the practical determination

of the action of the will according to laws of freedom, whether the object is

perceivable through the senses or merely thinkable by the pure

understanding. And right, as under consideration, is a pure practical

conception of the reason in relation to the exercise of the will under laws of

freedom.

              And, hence, it is not quite correct to speak of “possessing” a right to

this or that object, but it should rather be said that an object is possessed in apurely juridical way; for a right is itself the rational possession of an object,

and to “possess a possession,” would be an expression without meaning.

 6. Deduction of the Conception of a Purely Juridical Possession of an

                    External Object (Possessio Noumenon).

 

 

              The question, “How is an external mine and thine possible?”

resolves itself into this other question: “How is a merely juridical or rational

possession possible?” And this second question resolves itself again into a

third: “How is a synthetic proposition in right possible a priori?”

              All propositions of right — as juridical propositions — are

propositions a priori, for they are practical laws of reason (dictamina

rationis). But the juridical proposition a priori respecting empirical

possession is analytical; for it says nothing more than what follows by the

principle of contradiction, from the conception of such possession; namely,

that if I am the holder of a thing in the way of being physically connected

with it, any one interfering with it without my consent — as, for instance, in

wrenching an apple out of my hand — affects and detracts from my freedom

as that which is internally mine; and consequently the maxim of his action is

in direct contradiction to the axiom of right. The proposition expressing the

principle of an empirical rightful possession does not therefore go beyond the

right of a person in reference to himself.

              On the other hand, the proposition expressing the possibility of the

possession of a thing external to me, after abstraction of all the conditions of

empirical possession in space and time — consequently presenting the

assumption of the possibility of a possessio noumenon — goes beyond these

limiting conditions; and because this proposition asserts a possession even

without physical holding, as necessary to the conception of the external mine

and thine, it is synthetical. And thus it becomes a problem for reason to show

how such a proposition, extending its range beyond the conception of

empirical possession, is possible a priori.

              In this manner, for instance, the act of taking possession of a

particular portion of the soil is a mode exercising the private free-will without

being an act of usurpation. The possessor founds upon the innate right of

common possession of the surface of the earth, and upon the universal will

corresponding a priori to it, which allows a private possession of the soil;because what are mere things would be otherwise made in themselves and by

a law into unappropriable objects. Thus a first appropriator acquires

originally by primary possession a particular portion of the ground; and by

right (jure) he resists every other person who would hinder him in the private

use of it, although, while the “state of nature” continues, this cannot be done

by juridical means (de jure), because a public law does not yet exist.

              And although a piece of ground should be regarded as free, or

declared to be such, so as to be for the public use of all without distinction,

yet it cannot be said that it is thus free by nature and originally so, prior to

any juridical act. For there would be a real relation already incorporated in

such a piece of ground by the very fact that the possession of it was denied to

any particular individual; and as this public freedom of the ground would be a

prohibition of it to every particular individual, this presupposes a common

possession of it which cannot take effect without a contract. A piece of

ground, however, which can only become publicly free by contract, must

actually be in the possession of all those associated together, who mutually

interdict or suspend each other, from any particular or private use of it.

              This original community of the soil and of the things upon it

(communio fundi originaria), is an idea which has objective and practical

juridical reality and is entirely different from the idea of a primitive

community of things, which is a fiction. For the latter would have had to be

founded as a form of society, and must have taken its rise from a contract by

which all renounced the right of private possession, so that by uniting the

property owned by each into a whole, it was thus transformed into a common

possession. But had such an event taken place, history must have presented

some evidence of it. To regard such a procedure as the original mode of

taking possession, and to hold that the particular possessions of every

individual may and ought to be grounded upon it, is evidently a contradiction.

              Possession (possessio) is to be distinguished from habitation as mere

residence (sedes); and the act of taking possession of the soil in the intention

of acquiring it once for all, is also to be distinguished from settlement or

domicile (incolatus), which is a continuous private possession of a place that

is dependent on the presence of the individual upon it. We have not here to

deal with the question of domiciliary settlement, as that is a secondary

juridical act which may follow upon possession, or may not occur at all; for

as such it could not involve an original possession, but only a secondarypossession derived from the consent of others.

              Simple physical possession, or holding of the soil, involves already

certain relations of right to the thing, although it is certainly not sufficient to

enable me to regard it as mine. Relative to others, so far as they know, it

appears as a first possession in harmony with the law of external freedom;

and, at the same time, it is embraced in the universal original possession

which contains a priori the fundamental principle of the possibility of a

private possession. Hence to disturb the first occupier or holder of a portion

of the soil in his use of it is a lesion or wrong done to him. The first taking of

possession has therefore a title of right (titulus possessionis) in its favour,

which is simply the principle of the original common possession; and the

saying that “It is well for those who are in possession” (beati possidentes),

when one is not bound to authenticate his possession, is a principle of natural

right that establishes the juridical act of taking possession, as a ground of

acquisition upon which every first possessor may found.

              It has been shown in the Critique of Pure Reason that in theoretical

principles a priori, an intuitional perception a priori must be supplied in

connection with any given conception; and, consequently, were it a question

of a purely theoretical principle, something would have to be added to the

conception of the possession of an object to make it real. But in respect of the

practical principle under consideration, the procedure is just the converse of

the theoretical process; so that all the conditions of perception which form the

foundation of empirical possession must be abstracted or taken away in order

to extend the range of the juridical conception beyond the empirical sphere,

and in order to be able to apply the postulate, that every external object of the

free activity of my will, so far as I have it in my power, although not in the

possession of it, may be reckoned as juridically mine.

              The possibility of such a possession, with consequent deduction of

the conception of a nonempirical possession, is founded upon the juridical

postulate of the practical reason, that “It is a juridical duty so to act towards

others that what is external and useable may come into the possession or

become the property of some one.” And this postulate is conjoined with the

exposition of the conception that what is externally one’s own is founded

upon a possession, that is not physical. The possibility of such a possession,

thus conceived, cannot, however, be proved or comprehended in itself,

because it is a rational conception for which no empirical perception can befurnished; but it follows as an immediate consequence from the postulate that

has been enunciated. For, if it is necessary to act according to that juridical

principle, the rational or intelligible condition of a purely juridical possession

must also be possible. It need astonish no one, then, that the theoretical aspect

of the principles of the external mine and thine is lost from view in the

rational sphere of pure intelligence and presents no extension of knowledge;

for the conception of freedom upon which they rest does not admit of any

theoretical deduction of its possibility, and it can only be inferred from the

practical law of reason, called the categorical imperative, viewed as a fact.

 7. Application of the Principle of the Possibility of an External Mine and

                        Thine to Objects of Experience.

 

 

              The conception of a purely juridical possession is not an empirical

conception dependent on conditions of space and time, and yet it has practical

reality. As such it must be applicable to objects of experience, the knowledge

of which is independent of the conditions of space and time. The rational

process by which the conception of right is brought into relation to such

objects so as to constitute a possible external mine and thine, is as follows.

The conception of right, being contained merely in reason, cannot be

immediately applied to objects of experience, so as to give the conception of

an empirical possession, but must be applied directly to the mediating

conception, in the understanding, of possession in general; so that, instead of

physical holding (detentio) as an empirical representation of possession, the

formal conception or thought of having, abstracted from all conditions of

space and time, is conceived by the mind, and only as implying that an object

is in my power and at my disposal (in potestate mea positum esse). In this

relation, the term external does not signify existence in another place than

where I am, nor my resolution and acceptance at another time than the

moment in which I have the offer of a thing: it signifies only an object

different from or other than myself. Now the practical reason by its law of

right wills, that I shall think the mine and thine in application to objects, not

according to sensible conditions, but apart from these and from the

possession they indicate; because they refer to determinations of the activity

of the will that are in accordance with the laws of freedom. For it is only a

conception of the understanding that can be brought under the rational

conception of right. I may therefore say that I possess a field, although it is in

quite a different place from that on which I actually find myself. For the

question here is not concerning an intellectual relation to the object, but I

have the thing practically in my power and at my disposal, which is a

conception of possession realized by the understanding and independent of

relations of space; and it is mine, because my will, in determining itself to

any particular use of it, is not in conflict with the law of external freedom.

Now it is just in abstraction from physical possession of the object of myfree-will in the sphere of sense, that the practical reason wills that a rational

possession of it shall be thought, according to intellectual conceptions which

are not empirical, but contain a priori the conditions of rational possession.

Hence it is in this fact, that we found the ground of the validity of such a

rational conception of possession possessio noumenon) as a principle of a

universally valid legislation. For such a legislation is implied and contained

in the expression, “This external object is mine,” because an obligation is

thereby imposed upon all others in respect of it, who would otherwise not

have been obliged to abstain from the use of this object.

              The mode, then, of having something external to myself as mine,

consists in a specially juridical connection of the will of the subject with that

object, independently of the empirical relations to it in space and in time, and

in accordance with the conception of a rational possession. A particular spot

on the earth is not externally mine because I occupy it with my body; for the

question here discussed refers only to my external freedom, and consequently

it affects only the possession of myself, which is not a thing external to me,

and therefore only involves an internal right. But if I continue to be in

possession of the spot, although I have taken myself away from it and gone to

another place, only under that condition is my external right concerned in

connection with it. And to make the continuous possession of this spot by my

person a condition of having it as mine, must either be to assert that it is not

possible at all to have anything external as one’s own, which is contrary to

the postulate in SS 2, or to require, in order that this external possession may

be possible, that I shall be in two places at the same time. But this amounts to

saying that I must be in a place and also not in it, which is contradictory and

absurd.

              This position may be applied to the case in which I have accepted a

promise; for my having and possession in respect of what has been promised

become established on the ground of external right. This right is not to be

annulled by the fact that the promiser having said at one time, “This thing

shall be yours,” again at a subsequent time says, “My will now is that the

thing shall not be yours.” In such relations of rational right, the conditions

hold just the same as if the promiser had, without any interval of time

between them, made the two declarations of his will, “This shall be yours,”

and also “This shall not be yours”; which manifestly contradicts itself.

              The same thing holds, in like manner, of the conception of thejuridical possession of a person as belonging to the Having of a subject,

whether it be a wife, a child, or a servant. The relations of right involved in a

household, and the reciprocal possession of all its members, are not annulled

by the capability of separating from each other in space; because it is by

juridical relations that they are connected, and the external mine and thine, as

in the former cases, rests entirely upon the assumption of the possibility of a

purely rational possession, without the accompaniment of physical detention

or holding of the object.

              Reason is forced to a critique of its juridically practical function in

special reference to the conception of the external mine and thine, by the

antinomy of the propositions enunciated regarding the possibility of such a

form of possession. For these give rise to an inevitable dialectic, in which a

thesis and an antithesis set up equal claims to the validity of two conflicting

conditions. Reason is thus compelled, in its practical function in relation to

right — as it was in its theoretical function — to make a distinction between

possession as a phenomenal appearance presented to the senses, and that

possession which is rational and thinkable only by the understanding.

              Thesis.— The thesis, in this case, is: “It is possible to have

something external as mine, although I am not in possession of it.”

              Antithesis.— The antithesis is: “It is not possible to have anything

external as mine, if I am not in possession of it.”

              Solution.— The solution is: “Both Propositions are true”; the former

when I mean empirical possession (possessio phaenomenon), the latter when

I understand by the same term, a purely rational possession (possessio

noumenon).

              But the possibility of a rational possession, and consequently of an

external mine and thine, cannot be comprehended by direct insight, but must

be deduced from the practical reason. And in this relation it is specially

noteworthy that the practical reason without intuitional perceptions, and even

without requiring such an element a priori, can extend its range by the mere

elimination of empirical conditions, as justified by the law of freedom, and

can thus establish synthetical propositions a priori. The proof of this in the

practical connection, as will be shown afterwards, can be adduced in an

analytical manner.     8. To Have Anything External as One’s Own is only Possible in a

  Juridical or Civil State of Society under the Regulation of a Public

                                  Legislative Power.

 

 

              If, by word or deed, I declare my will that some external thing shall

be mine, I make a declaration that every other person is obliged to abstain

from the use of this object of my exercise of will; and this imposes an

obligation which no one would be under, without such a juridical act on my

part. But the assumption of this act at the same time involves the admission

that I am obliged reciprocally to observe a similar abstention towards every

other in respect of what is externally theirs; for the obligation in question

arises from a universal rule regulating the external juridical relations. Hence I

am not obliged to let alone what another person declares to be externally his,

unless every other person likewise secures me by a guarantee that he will act

in relation to what is mine, upon the same principle. This guarantee of

reciprocal and mutual abstention from what belongs to others does not

require a special juridical act for its establishment, but is already involved in

the conception of an external obligation of right, on account of the

universality and consequently the reciprocity of the obligatoriness arising

from a universal Rule. Now a single will, in relation to an external and

consequently contingent possession, cannot serve as a compulsory law for all,

because that would be to do violence to the freedom which is in accordance

with universal laws. Therefore it is only a will that binds every one, and as

such a common, collective, and authoritative will, that can furnish a

guarantee of security to all. But the state of men under a universal, external,

and public legislation, conjoined with authority and power, is called the civil

state. There can therefore be an external mine and thine only in the civil state

of society.

              Consequence.— It follows, as a corollary, that, if it is juridically

possible to have an external object as one’s own, the individual subject of

possession must be allowed to compel or constrain every person with whom a

dispute as to the mine or thine of such a possession may arise, to enter along

with himself into the relations of a civil constitution. 9. There May, However, Be an External Mine and Thine Found as a Fact

                in the State of Nature, but it is only Provisory.

 

 

              Natural right in the state of a civil constitution means the forms of

right which may be deduced from principles a priori as the conditions of such

a constitution. It is therefore not to be infringed by the statutory laws of such

a constitution; and accordingly the juridical principle remains in force, that,

“Whoever proceeds upon a maxim by which it becomes impossible for me to

have an object of the exercise of my will as mine, does me a lesion or injury.”

For a civil constitution is only the juridical condition under which every one

has what is his own merely secured to him, as distinguished from its being

specially assigned and determined to him. All guarantee, therefore, assumes

that everyone to whom a thing is secured is already in possession of it as his

own. Hence, prior to the civil constitution — or apart from it — an external

mine and thine must be assumed as possible, and along with it a right to

compel everyone with whom we could come into any kind of intercourse to

enter with us into a constitution in which what is mine or thine can be

secured. There may thus be a possession in expectation or in preparation for

such a state of security, as can only be established on the law of the common

will; and as it is therefore in accordance with the possibility of such a state, it

constitutes a provisory or temporary juridical possession; whereas that

possession which is found in reality in the civil state of society will be a

peremptory or guaranteed possession. Prior to entering into this state, for

which he is naturally prepared, the individual rightfully resists those who will

not adapt themselves to it, and who would disturb him in his provisory

possession; because, if the will of all except himself were imposing upon him

an obligation to withdraw from a certain possession, it would still be only a

one-sided or unilateral will, and consequently it would have just as little legal

title — which can be properly based only on the universalized will — to

contest a claim of right as he would have to assert it. Yet be has the

advantage on his side, of being in accord with the conditions requisite to the

introduction and institution of a civil form of society. In a word, the mode in

which anything external may be held as one’s own in the state of nature, is

just physical possession with a presumption of right thus far in its favour, thatby union of the wills of all in a public legislation it will be made juridical;

and in this expectation it holds comparatively, as a kind of potential juridical

possession.

              This prerogative of right, as arising from the fact of empirical

possession, is in accordance with the formula: “It is well for those who are in

possession” (Beati possidentes). It does not consist in the fact that, because

the possessor has the presumption of being a rightful man, it is unnecessary

for him to bring forward proof that he possesses a certain thing rightfully, for

this position applies only to a case of disputed right. But it is because it

accords with the postulate of the practical reason, that everyone is invested

with the faculty of having as his own any external object upon which he has

exerted his will; and, consequently, all actual possession is a state whose

rightfulness is established upon that postulate by an anterior act of will. And

such an act, if there be no prior possession of the same object by another

opposed to it, does, therefore, provisionally justify and entitle me, according

to the law of external freedom, to restrain anyone who refuses to enter with

me into a state of public legal freedom from all pretension to the use of such

an object. For such a procedure is requisite, in conformity with the postulate

of reason, in order to subject to my proper use a thing which would otherwise

be practically annihilated, as regards all proper use of it.        CHAPTER II. The Mode of Acquiring Anything External.

 

 

            10. The General Principle of External Acquisition.

 

 

              I acquire a thing when I act (efficio) so that it becomes mine. An

external thing is originally mine when it is mine even without the

intervention of a juridical act. An acquisition is original and primary when it

is not derived from what another had already made his own.

              There is nothing external that is as such originally mine; but

anything external may be originally acquired when it is an object that no

other person has yet made his. A state in which the mine and thine are in

common cannot be conceived as having been at any time original. Such a

state of things would have to be acquired by an external juridical act,

although there may be an original and common possession of an external

object. Even if we think hypothetically of a state in which the mine and thine

would be originally in common as a communio mei et tui originaria, it would

still have to be distinguished from a primeval communion (communio

primaeva) with things in common, sometimes supposed to be founded in the

first period of the relations of right among men, and which could not be

regarded as based upon principles like the former, but only upon history.

Even under that condition the historic communio, as a supposed primeval

community, would always have to be viewed as acquired and derivative

(communio derivativa).

              The principle of external acquisition, then, may be expressed thus:

“Whatever I bring under my power according to the law of external freedom,

of which as an object of my free activity of will I have the capability of

making use according to the postulate of the practical reason, and which I

will to become mine in conformity with the idea of a possible united common

will, is mine.”

              The practical elements (momenta attendenda) constitutive of the

process of original acquisition are:              Prehension or seizure of an object which belongs to no one; for, if it

belonged already to some one, the act would conflict with the freedom of

others, that is, according to universal laws. This is the taking possession of an

object of my free activity of will in space and time; the possession, therefore,

into which I thus put myself is sensible or physical possession (possessio

phenomenon);

              Declaration of the possession of this object by formal designation

and the act of my freewill in interdicting every other person from using it as

his;

              Appropriation, as the act, in idea, of an externally legislative

common will, by which all and each are obliged to respect and act in

conformity with my act of will.

              The validity of the last element in the process of acquisition, as that

on which the conclusion that “the external object is mine” rests, is what

makes the possession valid as a purely rational and juridical possession

(possessio noumenon). It is founded upon the fact that, as all these acts are

juridical, they consequently proceed from the practical reason, and therefore,

in the question as to what is right, abstraction may be made of the empirical

conditions involved, and the conclusion, “the external object is mine,” thus

becomes a correct inference from the external fact of sensible possession to

the internal right of rational possession.

              The original primary acquisition of an external object of the action

of the will, is called occupancy. It can only take place in reference to

substances or corporeal things. Now when this occupation of an external

object does take place, the act presupposes, as a condition of such empirical

possession, its priority in time before the act of any other who may also be

willing to enter upon occupation of it. Hence the legal maxim: “qui prior

tempore, potior jure.” Such occupation as original or primary is, further, the

effect only of a single or unilateral will; for were a bilateral or twofold will

requisite for it, it would be derived from a contract of two or more persons

with each other, and consequently it would be based upon what another or

others had already made their own. It is not easy to see how such an act of

free-will as this would be could really form a foundation for every one having

his own. However, the first acquisition of a thing is on that account not quite

exactly the same as the original acquisition of it. For the acquisition of apublic juridical state by union of the wills of all in a universal legislation

would be such an original acquisition, seeing that no other of the kind could

precede it, and yet it would be derived from the particular wills of all the

individuals, and consequently become all-sided or omnilateral; for a properly

primary acquisition can only proceed from an individual or unilateral or

unilateral will.

      DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT OF THE ACQUISITION OF THE

                          EXTERNAL MINE AND THINE.

 

              In respect of the matter of object of acquisition, I acquire either a

corporeal thing (substance), or the performance of something by another

(causality), or this other as a person in respect of his state, so far as I have a

right to dispose of the same (in a relation of reciprocity with him).

              In respect of the form or mode of acquisition, it is either a real right

(jus reale), or a personal right (jus personale), or a real-personal right (jus

realiter personale), to the possession although not to the use, of another

person as if he were a thing.

              In respect of the ground of right or the title (titulus) of acquisition —

which, properly, is not a particular member of the division of rights, but

rather a constituent element of the mode of exercising them — anything

external is acquired by a certain free exercise of will that is either unilateral,

as the act of a single will (facto), or bilateral, as the act of two wills (pacto),

or omnilateral, as the act of all the wills of a community together (lege).                    SECTION I.  Principles of Real Right.

 

 

                            11. What is a Real Right?

 

 

              The usual definition of real right, or “right in a thing” (jus reale, jus

in re), is that “it is a right as against every possessor of it.” This is a correct

nominal definition. But what is it that entitles me to claim an external object

from any one who may appear as its possessor, and to compel him, per

vindicationem, to put me again, in place of himself, into possession of it? Is

this external juridical relation of my will a kind of immediate relation to an

external thing? If so, whoever might think of his right as referring not

immediately to persons but to things would have to represent it, although

only in an obscure way, somewhat thus. A right on one side has always a

duty corresponding to it on the other, so that an external thing, although away

from the hands of its first possessor, continues to be still connected with him

by a continuing obligation; and thus it refuses to fall under the claim of any

other possessor, because it is already bound to another. In this way my right,

viewed as a kind of good genius accompanying a thing and preserving it from

all external attack, would refer an alien possessor always to me! It is,

however, absurd to think of an obligation of persons towards things, and

conversely; although it may be allowed in any particular case to represent the

juridical relation by a sensible image of this kind, and to express it in this

way.

              The real definition would run thus: “Right in a thing is a right to the

private use of a thing, of which I am in possession — original or derivative

— in common with all others.” For this is the one condition under which it is

alone possible that I can exclude every others possessor from the private use

of the thing (jus contra quemlibet hujus rei possessorem). For, except by

presupposing such a common collective possession, it cannot be conceived

how, when I am not in actual possession of a thing, I could be injured or

wronged by others who are in possession of it and use it. By an individual act

of my own will I cannot oblige any other person to abstain from the use of athing in respect of which he would otherwise be under no obligation; and,

accordingly, such an obligation can only arise from the collective will of all

united in a relation of common possession. Otherwise, I would have to think

of a right in a thing, as if the thing has an obligation towards me, and as if the

right as against every possessor of it had to be derived from this obligation in

the thing, which is an absurd way of representing the subject.

              Further, by the term real right (jus reale) is meant not only the right

in a thing (jus in re), but also the constitutive principle of all the laws which

relate to the real mine and thine. It is, however, evident that a man entirely

alone upon the earth could properly neither have nor acquire any external

thing as his own; because, between him as a person and all external things as

material objects, there could be no relations of obligation. There is therefore,

literally, no direct right in a thing, but only that right is to be properly called

“real” which belongs to any one as constituted against a person, who is in

common possession of things with all others in the civil state of society.

     12. The First Acquisition of a Thing can only be that of the Soil.

 

 

              By the soil is understood all habitable Land. In relation to everything

that is moveable upon it, it is to be regarded as a substance, and the mode of

the existence of the moveables is viewed as an inherence in it. And just as, in

the theoretical acceptance, accidents cannot exist apart from their substances,

so, in the practical relation, moveables upon the soil cannot be regarded as

belonging to any one unless he is supposed to have been previously in

juridical possession of the soil, so that it is thus considered to be his.

              For, let it be supposed that the soil belongs to no one. Then I would

be entitled to remove every moveable thing found upon it from its place, even

to total loss of it, in order to occupy that place, without infringing thereby on

the freedom of any other; there being, by the hypothesis, no possessor of it at

all. But everything that can be destroyed, such as a tree, a house, and such

like — as regards its matter at least — is moveable; and if we call a thing

which cannot be moved without destruction of its form an immoveable, the

mine and thine in it is not understood as applying to its substance, but to that

which is adherent to it and which does not essentially constitute the thing

itself.13. Every Part of the Soil may be Originally Acquired; and the Principle

of the Possibility of such Acquisition is the Original Community of the

                                    Soil Generally.

 

 

              The first clause of this proposition is founded upon the postulate of

the practical reason (SS 2); the second is established by the following proof.

              All men are originally and before any juridical act of will in rightful

possession of the soil; that is, they have a right to be wherever nature or

chance has placed them without their will. Possession (possessio), which is to

be distinguished from residential settlement (sedes) as a voluntary, acquired,

and permanent possession, becomes common possession, on account of the

connection with each other of all the places on the surface of the earth as a

globe. For, had the surface of the earth been an infinite plain, men could have

been so dispersed upon it that they might not have come into any necessary

communion with each other, and a state of social community would not have

been a necessary consequence of their existence upon the earth. Now that

possession proper to all men upon the earth, which is prior to all their

particular juridical acts, constitutes an original possession in common

(communio possessionis originaria). The conception of such an original,

common possession of things is not derived from experience, nor is it

dependent on conditions of time, as is the case with the imaginary and

indemonstrable fiction of a primaeval community of possession in actual

history. Hence it is a practical conception of reason, involving in itself the

only principle according to which men may use the place they happen to

occupy on the surface of the earth, in accordance with laws of right.    14. The Juridical Act of this Original Acquisition is Occupancy.

 

 

              The act of taking possession (apprehensio), being at its beginning the

physical appropriation of a corporeal thing in space (possessionis physicae),

can accord with the law of the external freedom of all, under no other

condition than that of its priority in respect of time. In this relation it must

have the characteristic of a first act in the way of taking possession, as a free

exercise of will. The activity of will, however, as determining that the thing

— in this case a definite separate place on the surface of the earth — shall be

mine, being an act of appropriation, cannot be otherwise in the case of

original acquisition than individual or unilateral (voluntas unilateralis s.

propria). Now, occupancy is the acquisition of an external object by an

individual act of will. The original acquisition of such an object as a limited

portion of the soil can therefore only be accomplished by an act of

occupation.

              The possibility of this mode of acquisition cannot be intuitively

apprehended by pure reason in any way, nor established by its principles, but

is an immediate consequence from the postulate of the practical reason. The

will as practical reason, however, cannot justify external acquisition

otherwise than only in so far as it is itself included in an absolutely

authoritative will, with which it is united by implication; or, in other words,

only in so far as it is contained within a union of the wills of all who come

into practical relation with each other. For an individual, unilateral will —

and the same applies to a dual or other particular willcannot impose on all an

obligation which is contingent in itself. This requires an omnilateral or

universal will, which is not contingent, but a priori, and which is therefore

necessarily united and legislative. Only in accordance with such a principle

can there be agreement of the active free-will of each individual with the

freedom of all, and consequently rights in general, or even the possibility of

an external mine and thine.15. It is Only within a Civil Constitution that Anything can be Acquired

  Peremptorily, whereas in the State of Nature Acquisition can only be

                                      Provisory.

 

 

              A civil constitution is objectively necessary as a duty, although

subjectively its reality is contingent. Hence, there is connected with it a real

natural law of right, to which all external acquisition is subjected.

              The empirical title of acquisition has been shown to be constituted

by the taking physical possession (apprehensio physica) as founded upon an

original community of right in all to the soil. And because a possession in the

phenomenal sphere of sense can only be subordinated to that possession

which is in accordance with rational conceptions of right, there must

correspond to this physical act of possession a rational mode of taking

possession by elimination of all the empirical conditions in space and time.

This rational form of possession establishes the proposition that “whatever I

bring under my power in accordance with laws of external freedom, and will

that it shall be mine, becomes mine.”

              The rational title of acquisition can therefore only lie originally in

the idea of the will of all united implicitly, or necessarily to be united, which

is here tacitly assumed as an indispensable condition (conditio sine qua non).

For by a single will there cannot be imposed upon others an obligation by

which they would not have been otherwise bound. But the fact formed by

wills actually and universally united in a legislation constitutes the civil state

of society. Hence, it is only in conformity with the idea of a civil state of

society, or in reference to it and its realization, that anything external can be

acquired. Before such a state is realized, and in anticipation of it, acquisition,

which would otherwise be derived, is consequently only provisory. The

acquisition which is peremptory finds place only in the civil state.

              Nevertheless, such provisory acquisition is real acquisition. For,

according to the postulate of the juridically practical reason, the possibility of

acquisition in whatever state men may happen to be living beside one

another, and therefore in the state of nature as well, is a principle of private

right. And in accordance with this principle, every one is justified or entitledto exercise that compulsion by which it alone becomes possible to pass out of

the state of nature and to enter into that state of civil society which alone can

make all acquisition peremptory.

              It is a question as to how far the right of taking possession of the soil

extends. The answer is, So far as the capability of having it under one’s

power extends; that is, just as far as he who wills to appropriate it can defend

it, as if the soil were to say: “If you cannot protect me, neither can you

command me.” In this way the controversy about what constitutes a free or

closed sea must be decided. Thus, within the range of a cannon-shot no one

has a right to intrude on the coast of a country that already belongs to a

certain state, in order to fish or gather amber on the shore, or such like.

Further, the question is put, “Is cultivation of the soil, by building,

agriculture, drainage, etc., necessary in order to its acquisition?” No. For, as

these processes as forms of specification are only accidents, they do not

constitute objects of immediate possession and can only belong to the subject

in so far as the substance of them has been already recognized as his. When it

is a question of the first acquisition of a thing, the cultivation or modification

of it by labour forms nothing more than an external sign of the fact that it has

been taken into possession, and this can be indicated by many other signs that

cost less trouble. Again: “May any one be hindered in the act of taking

possession, so that neither one nor other of two competitors shall acquire the

right of priority, and the soil in consequence may remain for all time free as

belonging to no one?” Not at all. Such a hindrance cannot be allowed to take

place, because the second of the two, in order to be enabled to do this, would

himself have to be upon some neighbouring soil, where he also, in this

manner, could be hindered from being, and such absolute hindering would

involve a contradiction. It would, however, be quite consistent with the right

of occupation, in the case of a certain intervening piece of the soil, to let it lie

unused as a neutral ground for the separation of two neighbouring states; but

under such a condition, that ground would actually belong to them both in

common, and would not be without an owner (res nullius), just because it

would be used by both in order to form a separation between them. Again:

“May one have a thing as his, on a soil of which no one has appropriated any

part as his own?” Yes. In Mongolia, for example, any one may let lie

whatever baggage he has, or bring back the horse that has run away from him

into his possession as his own, because the whole soil belongs to the people

generally, and the use of it accordingly belongs to every individual. But thatany one can have a moveable thing on the soil of another as his own is only

possible by contract. Finally, there is the question: “May one of two

neighbouring nations or tribes resist another when attempting to impose upon

them a certain mode of using a particular soil; as, for instance, a tribe of

hunters making such an attempt in relation to a pastoral people, or the latter

to agriculturists and such like?” Certainly. For the mode in which such

peoples or tribes may settle themselves upon the surface of the earth,

provided they keep within their own boundaries, is a matter of mere pleasure

and choice on their own part (res merae facultatis).

              As a further question, it may be asked whether, when neither nature

nor chance, but merely our own will, brings us into the neighbourhood of a

people that gives no promise of a prospect of entering into civil union with

us, we are to be considered entitled in any case to proceed with force in the

intention of founding such a union, and bringing into a juridical state such

men as the savage American Indians, the Hottentots,and the New Hollanders;

or — and the case is not much better — whether we may establish colonies

by deceptive purchase, and so become owners of their soil, and, in general,

without regard to their first possession, make use at will of our superiority in

relation to them? Further, may it not be held that Nature herself, as abhorring

a vacuum, seems to demand such a procedure, and that large regions in other

continents, that are now magnificently peopled, would otherwise have

remained unpossessed by civilized inhabitants and might have for ever

remained thus, so that the end of creation would have so far been frustrated?

It is almost unnecessary to answer; for it is easy to see through all this flimsy

veil of injustice, which just amounts to the Jesuitism of making a good end

justify any means. This mode of acquiring the soil is, therefore, to be

repudiated.

              The indefiniteness of external acquirable objects in respect of their

quantity, as well as their quality, makes the problem of the sole primary

external acquisition of them one of the most difficult to solve. There must,

however, be some one first acquisition of an external object; for every

Acquisition cannot be derivative. Hence, the problem is not to be given up as

insoluble or in itself as impossible. If it is solved by reference to the original

contract, unless this contract is extended so as to include the whole human

race, acquisition under it would still remain but provisional.16. Exposition of the Conception of a Primary Acquisition of the Soil.

 

 

              All men are originally in a common collective possession of the soil

of the whole earth (communio fundi originaria), and they have naturally each

a will to use it (lex justi). But on account of the opposition of the free will of

one to that of the other in the sphere of action, which is inevitable by nature,

all use of the soil would be prevented did not every will contain at the same

time a law for the regulation of the relation of all wills in action, according to

which a particular possession can be determined to every one upon the

common soil. This is the juridical law (lex juridica). But the distributive law

of the mine and thine, as applicable to each individual on the soil, according

to the axiom of external freedom, cannot proceed otherwise than from a

primarily united will a prioriwhich does not presuppose any juridical act as

requisite for this union. This Law can only take form in the civil state (lex

justitiae distributivae); as it is in this state alone that the united common will

determines what is right, what is rightful, and what is the constitution of

Right. In reference to this state, however — and prior to its establishment and

in view of it — it is provisorily a duty for every one to proceed according to

the law of external acquisition; and accordingly it is a juridical procedure on

the part of the will to lay every one under obligation to recognise the act of

possessing and appropriating, although it be only unilaterally. Hence a

provisory acquisition of the soil, with all its juridical consequences, is

possible in the state of nature.

              Such an acquisition, however, requires and also obtains the favour of

a permissive law (lex permissiva), in respect of the determination of the

limits of juridically possible possession. For it precedes the juridical state,

and as merely introductory to it is not yet peremptory; and this favour does

not extend farther than the date of the consent of the other co-operators in the

establishment of the civil state. But if they are opposed to entering into the

civil state, as long as this opposition lasts it carries all the effect of a

guaranteed juridical acquisition with it, because the advance from the state of

nature to the civil state is founded upon a duty.

 17. Deduction of the Conception of the Original Primary Acquisition.

 

 

              We have found the title of acquisition in a universal original

community of the soil, under the conditions of an external acquisition in

space; and the mode of acquisition is contained in the empirical fact of taking

possession (apprehensio), conjoined with the will to have an external object

as one’s own. It is further necessary to unfold, from the principles of the pure

juridically practical reason involved in the conception, the juridical

acquisition proper of an object — that is, the external mine and thine that

follows from the two previous conditions, as rational possession (possessio

noumenon).

              The juridical conception of the external mine and thine, so far as it

involves the category of substance, cannot by “that which is external to me”

mean merely “in a place other than that in which I am”; for it is a rational

conception. As under the conceptions of the reason only intellectual

conceptions can be embraced, the expression in question can only signify

“something that is different and distinct from me” according to the idea of a

non-empirical possession through, as it were, a continuous activity in taking

possession of an external object; and it involves only the notion of having

something in my power, which indicates the connection of an object with

myself, as a subjective condition of the possibility of making use of it. This

forms a purely intellectual conception of the understanding. Now we can

leave out or abstract from the sensible conditions of possession, as relations

of a person to objects which have no obligation. This process of elimination

just gives the rational relation of a person to persons; and it is such that he

can bind them all by an obligation in reference to the use of things through

his act of will, so far as it is conformable to the axiom of freedom, the

postulate of right, and the universal legislation of the common will,

conceived as united a priori. This is therefore the rational intelligible

possession of things as by pure right, although they are objects of sense.

              It is evident that the first modification, limitation, or transformation

generally, of a portion of the soil cannot of itself furnish a title to its

acquisition, since possession of an accident does not form a ground for legalpossession of the substance. Rather, conversely, the inference as to the mine

and thine must be drawn from ownership of the substance according to the

rule: Accessarium sequitur suum principale. Hence one who has spent labour

on a piece of ground that was not already his own, has lost his effort and

work to the former owner. This position is so evident of itself that the old

opinion to the opposite effect, that is still spread far and wide, can hardly be

ascribed to any other than the prevailing illusion which unconsciously leads

to the personification of things; and, then, as if they could be bound under an

obligation by the labour bestowed upon them to be at the service of the

person who does the labour, to regard them as his by immediate right.

Otherwise it is probable that the natural question — already discussed —

would not have been passed over with so light a tread, namely: “How is a

right in a thing possible?” For, right as against every possible possessor of a

thing means only the claim of a particular will to the use of an object so far as

it may be included in the all-comprehending universal will, and can be

thought as in harmony with its law.

              As regards bodies situated upon a piece of ground which is already

mine, if they otherwise belong to no other person, they belong to me without

my requiring any particular juridical act for the purpose of this acquisition;

they are mine not facto, but lege. For they may be regarded as accidents

inhering in the substance of the soil, and they are thus mine jure rei meae. To

this category also belongs everything which is so connected with anything of

mine that it cannot be separated from what is mine without altering it

substantially. Examples of this are gilding on an object, mixture of a material

belonging to me with other things, alluvial deposit, or even alteration of the

adjoining bed of a stream or river in my favour so as to produce an increase

of my land, etc. By the same principles, the question must also be decided as

to whether the acquirable soil may extend farther than the existing land, so as

even to include part of the bed of the sea, with the right to fish on my own

shores, to gather amber and such like. So far as I have the mechanical

capability from my own site, as the place I occupy, to secure my soil from the

attack of others — and, therefore, as far as cannon can carry from the shore

— all is included in my possession, and the sea is thus far closed (mare

clausum). But as there is no site for occupation upon the wide sea itself,

possible possession cannot be extended so far, and the open sea is free (mare

liberum). But in the case of men, or things that belong to them, becoming

stranded on the shore, since the fact is not voluntary, it cannot be regarded bythe owner of the shore as giving him a right of acquisition. For shipwreck is

not an act of will, nor is its result a lesion to him; and things which may have

come thus upon his soil, as still belonging to some one, are not to be treated

as being without an owner or res nullius. On the other hand, a river, so far as

possession of the bank reaches, may be originally acquired, like any other

piece of ground, under the above restrictions, by one who is in possession of

both its banks.

                                      PROPERTY.

 

              An external object, which in respect of its substance can be claimed

by some one as his own, is called the property (dominium) of that person to

whom all the rights in it as a thing belong — like the accidents inhering in a

substance — and which, therefore, he as the proprietor (dominus) can dispose

of at will (jus disponendi de re sua). But from this it follows at once that such

an object can only be a corporeal thing towards which there is no direct

personal obligation. Hence a man may be his own master (sui juris) but not

the proprietor of himself (sui dominus), so as to be able to dispose of himself

at will, to say nothing of the possibility of such a relation to other men;

because he is responsible to humanity in his own person. This point,

however, as belonging to the right of humanity as such, rather than to that of

individual men, would not be discussed at its proper place here, but is only

mentioned incidentally for the better elucidation of what has just been said. It

may be further observed that there may be two full proprietors of one and the

same thing, without there being a mine and thine in common, but only in so

far as they are common possessors of what belongs only to one of them as his

own. In such a case the whole possession, without the use of the thing,

belongs to one only of the co-proprietors (condomini); while to the others

belongs all the use of the thing along with its possession. The former as the

direct proprietor (dominus directus), therefore, restricts the latter as the

proprietor in use (dominus utilis) to the condition of a certain continuous

performance, with reference to the thing itself, without limiting him in the use

of it.                  SECTION II.  Principles of Personal Right.

 

 

                18. Nature and Acquisition of Personal Right.

 

 

              The possession of the active free-will of another person, as the

power to determine it by my will to a certain action, according to laws of

freedom, is a form of right relating to the external mine and thine, as affected

by the causality of another. It is possible to have several such rights in

reference to the same person or to different persons. The principle of the

system of laws, according to which I can be in such possession, is that of

personal right, and there is only one such principle.

              The acquisition of a personal right can never be primary or arbitrary;

for such a mode of acquiring it would not be in accordance with the principle

of the harmony of the freedom of my will with the freedom of every other,

and it would therefore be wrong. Nor can such a right be acquired by means

of any unjust act of another (facto injusti alterius), as being itself contrary to

right; for if such a wrong as it implies were perpetrated on me, and I could

demand satisfaction from the other, in accordance with right, yet in such a

case I would only be entitled to maintain undiminished what was mine, and

not to acquire anything more than what I formerly had.

              Acquisition by means of the action of another, to which I determine

his will according to laws of right, is therefore always derived from what that

other has as his own. This derivation, as a juridical act, cannot be effected by

a mere negative relinquishment or renunciation of what is his (per

derelictionem aut renunciationem); because such a negative act would only

amount to a cessation of his right, and not to the acquirement of a right on the

part of another. It is therefore only by positive transference (translatio), or

conveyance, that a personal right can be acquired; and this is only possible by

means of a common will, through which objects come into the power of one

or other, so that as one renounces a particular thing which he holds under the

common right, the same object when accepted by another, in consequence of

a positive act of will, becomes his. Such transference of the property of oneto another is termed its alienation. The act of the united wills of two persons,

by which what belonged to one passes to the other, constitutes contract.                          19. Acquisition by Contract.

 

 

              In every contract there are four juridical acts of will involved; two of

them being preparatory acts, and two of them constitutive acts. The two

preparatory acts, as forms of treating in the transaction, are offer (oblatio) and

approval (approbatio); the two constitutive acts, as the forms of concluding

the transaction, are promise (promissum) and acceptance (acceptatio). For an

offer cannot constitute a promise before it can be judged that the thing

offered (oblatum) is something that is agreeable to the party to whom it is

offered, and this much is shown by the first two declarations; but by them

alone there is nothing as yet acquired.

              Further, it is neither by the particular will of the promiser nor that of

the acceptor that the property of the former passes over to the latter. This is

effected only by the combined or united wills of both, and consequently so

far only as the will of both is declared at the same time or simultaneously.

Now, such simultaneousness is impossible by empirical acts of declaration,

which can only follow each other in time and are never actually

simultaneous. For if I have promised, and another person is now merely

willing to accept, during the interval before actual acceptance, however short

it may be, I may retract my offer, because I am thus far still free; and, on the

other side, the acceptor, for the same reason, may likewise hold himself not

to be bound, up till the moment of acceptance, by his counter-declaration

following upon the promise. The external formalities or solemnities

(solemnia) on the conclusion of a contractsuch as shaking hands or breaking

a straw (stipula) laid hold of by two persons — and all the various modes of

confirming the declarations on either side, prove in fact the embarrassment of

the contracting parties as to how and in what way they may represent

declarations, which are always successive, as existing simultaneously at the

same moment; and these forms fail to do this. They are, by their very nature,

acts necessarily following each other in time, so that when the one act is, the

other either is not yet or is no longer.

              It is only the philosophical transcendental deduction of the

conception of acquisition by contract that can remove all these difficulties. Ina juridical external relation, my taking possession of the free-will of another,

as the cause that determined it to a certain act, is conceived at first

empirically by means of the declaration and counter-declaration of the free-

will of each of us in time, as the sensible conditions of taking possession; and

the two juridical acts must necessarily be regarded as following one another

in time. But because this relation, viewed as juridical, is purely rational in

itself, the will as a law-giving faculty of reason represents this possession as

intelligible or rational (possessio noumenon), in accordance with conceptions

of freedom and under abstraction of those empirical conditions. And now, the

two acts of promise and acceptance are not regarded as following one another

in time, but, in the manner of a pactum re initum, as proceeding from a

common will, which is expressed by the term “at the same time,” or

“simultaneous,” and the object promised (promissum) is represented, under

elimination of empirical conditions, as acquired according to the law of the

pure practical reason.

              That this is the true and only possible deduction of the idea of

acquisition by contract is sufficiently attested by the laborious yet always

futile striving of writers on jurisprudence such as Moses Mendelssohn in his

Jerusalem — to adduce a proof of its rational possibility. The question is put

thus: “Why ought I to keep my Promise?” For it is assumed as understood by

all that I ought to do so. It is, however, absolutely impossible to give any

further proof of the categorical imperative implied; just as it is impossible for

the geometrician to prove by rational syllogisms that in order to construct a

triangle I must take three lines — so far an analytical proposition — of which

three lines any two together must be greater than the third — a synthetical

proposition, and like the former a priori. It is a postulate of the pure reason

that we ought to abstract from all the sensible conditions of space and time in

reference to the conception of right; and the theory of the possibility of such

abstraction from these conditions, without taking away the reality of the

possession, just constitutes the transcendental deduction of the conception of

acquisition by contract. It is quite akin to what was presented under the last

title, as the theory of acquisition by occupation of the external object.                      20. What is Acquired by Contract.

 

 

              But what is that, designated as external, which I acquire by contract?

As it is only the causality of the active will of another, in respect of the

performance of something promised to me, I do not immediately acquire

thereby an external thing, but an act of the will in question, whereby a thing

is brought under my power so that I make it mine. By the contract, therefore,

I acquire the promise of another, as distinguished from the thing promised;

and yet something is thereby added to my having and possession. I have

become the richer in possession (locupletior) by the acquisition of an active

obligation that I can bring to bear upon the freedom and capability of another.

This my right, however, is only a personal right, valid only to the effect of

acting upon a particular physical person and specially upon the causality of

his will, so that he shall perform something for me. It is not a real right upon

that moral person, which is identified with the idea of the united will of all

viewed a priori, and through which alone I can acquire a right valid against

every possessor of the thing. For, it is in this that all right in a thing consists.

              The transfer or transmission of what is mine to another by contract,

takes place according to the law of continuity (lex continui). Possession of

the object is not interrupted for a moment during this act; for, otherwise, I

would acquire an object in this state as a thing that had no possessor, and it

would thus be acquired originally, which is contrary to the idea of a contract.

This continuity, however, implies that it is not the particular will of either the

promiser or the acceptor, but their united will in common, that transfers what

is mine to another. And hence it is not accomplished in such a manner that

the promiser first relinquishes (derelinquit) his possession for the benefit of

another, or renounces his right (renunciat), and thereupon the other at the

same time enters upon it; or conversely. The transfer (translatio) is therefore

an act in which the object belongs for a moment at the same time to both, just

as in the parabolic path of a projectile the object on reaching its highest point

may be regarded for a moment as at the same time both rising and falling,

and as thus passing in fact from the ascending to the falling motion.                          21. Acceptance and Delivery.

 

 

              A thing is not acquired in a case of contract by the acceptance

(acceptatio) of the promise, but only by the delivery (traditio) of the object

promised. For all promise is relative to performance; and if what was

promised is a thing, the performance cannot be executed otherwise than by an

act whereby the acceptor is put by the promiser into possession of the thing;

and this is delivery. Before the delivery and the reception of the thing, the

performance of the act required has not yet taken place; the thing has not yet

passed from the one person to the other and, consequently, has not been

acquired by that other. Hence the right arising from a contract is only a

personal right; and it only becomes a real right by delivery.

              A contract upon which delivery immediately follows (pactum re

initum) excludes any interval of time between its conclusion and its

execution; and as such it requires no further particular act in the future by

which one person may transfer to another what is his. But if there is a time —

definite or indefinite — agreed upon between them for the delivery, the

question then arises whether the thing has already before that time become

the acceptor’s by the contract, so that his right is a right in the thing; or

whether a further special contract regarding the delivery alone must be

entered upon, so that the right that is acquired by mere acceptance is only a

personal right, and thus it does not become a right in the thing until delivery?

That the relation must be determined according to the latter alternative will be

clear from what follows.

              Suppose I conclude a contract about a thing that I wish to acquire —

such as a horse — and that I take it immediately into my stable, or otherwise

into my possession; then it is mine (vi pacti re initi), and my right is a right in

the thing. But if I leave it in the hands of the seller without arranging with

him specially in whose physical possession or holding (detentio) this thing

shall be before my taking possession of it (apprehensio), and consequently,

before the actual change of possession, the horse is not yet mine; and the

right which I acquire is only a right against a particular personnamely, the

seller of the horse — to be put into possession of the object (poscenditraditionem) as the subjective condition of any use of it at my will. My right

is thus only a personal right to demand from the seller the performance of his

promise (praestatio) to put me into possession of the thing. Now, if the

contract does not contain the condition of delivery at the same time — as a

pactum re initum — and consequently an interval of time intervenes between

the conclusion of the contract and the taking possession of the object of

acquisition, I cannot obtain possession of it during this interval otherwise

than by exercising the particular juridical activity called a possessory act

(actum possessorium), which constitutes a special contract. This act consists

in my saying, “I will send to fetch the horse,” to which the seller has to agree.

For it is not self-evident or universally reasonable that any one will take a

thing destined for the use of another into his charge at his own risk. On the

contrary, a special contract is necessary for this arrangement, according to

which the alienator of a thing continues to be its owner during a certain

definite time, and must bear the risk of whatever may happen to it; while the

acquirer can only be regarded by the seller as the owner when he has delayed

to enter into possession beyond the date at which he agreed to take delivery.

Prior to the possessory act, therefore, all that is acquired by the contract is

only a personal right; and the acceptor can acquire an external thing only by

delivery.  SECTION III.  Principles of Personal Right that is Real in Kind. (Jus

                                Realiter Personale).

 

 

                22. Nature of Personal Right of a Real Kind.

 

 

              Personal right of a real kind is the right to the possession of an

external object as a thing, and to the use of it as a person. The mine and thine

embraced under this right relate specially to the family and household; and

the relations involved are those of free beings in reciprocal real interaction

with each other. Through their relations and influence as persons upon one

another, in accordance with the principle of external freedom as the cause of

it, they form a society composed as a whole of members standing in

community with each other as persons; and this constitutes the household.

The mode in which this social status is acquired by individuals, and the

functions which prevail within it, proceed neither by arbitrary individual

action (facto), nor by mere contract (pacto), but by law (lege). And this law

as being not only a right, but also as constituting possession in reference to a

person, is a right rising above all mere real and personal right. It must, in fact,

form the right of humanity in our own person; and, as such, it has as its

consequence a natural permissive law, by the favour of which such

acquisition becomes possible to us.                    23. What is acquired in the household.

 

 

              The acquisition that is founded upon this law is, as regards its

objects, threefold. The man acquires a wife; the husband and wife acquire

children, constituting a family; and the family acquire domestics. All these

objects, while acquirable, are inalienable; and the right of possession in these

objects is the most strictly personal of all rights.              The Rights of the Family as a Domestic Society

 

 

                Title I. Conjugal Right. (Husband and Wife)

 

 

                      24. The Natural Basis of Marriage.

 

 

              The domestic relations are founded on marriage, and marriage is

founded upon the natural reciprocity or intercommunity (commercium) of the
    2
sexes. This natural union of the sexes proceeds according to the mere animal

nature (vaga libido, venus vulgivaga, fornicatio), or according to the law. The

latter is marriage (matrimonium), which is the union of two persons of

different sex for life-long reciprocal possession of their sexual faculties. The

end of producing and educating children may be regarded as always the end

of nature in implanting mutual desire and inclination in the sexes; but it is not

necessary for the rightfulness of marriage that those who marry should set

this before themselves as the end of their union, otherwise the marriage

would be dissolved of itself when the production of children ceased.

        2
               Commercium sexuale est usus membrorum et facultatum

sexualium alterius. This “usus” is either natural, by which human beings may

reproduce their own kind, or unnatural, which, again, refers either to a person

of the same sex or to an animal of another species than man. These

transgressions of all law, as crimina carnis contra naturam, are even “not to

be named”; and, as wrongs against all humanity in the person, they cannot be

saved, by any limitation or exception whatever, from entire reprobation.

              And even assuming that enjoyment in the reciprocal use of the

sexual endowments is an end of marriage, yet the contract of marriage is not

on that account a matter of arbitrary will, but is a contract necessary in its

nature by the law of humanity. In other words, if a man and a woman have

the will to enter on reciprocal enjoyment in accordance with their sexual

nature, they must necessarily marry each other; and this necessity is inaccordance with the juridical laws of pure reason.                      25. The Rational Right of Marriage.

 

 

              For, this natural commercium — as a usus membrorum sexualium

alterius — is an enjoyment for which the one person is given up to the other.

In this relation the human individual makes himself a res, which is contrary

to the right of humanity in his own person. This, however, is only possible

under the one condition, that as the one person is acquired by the other as a

res, that same person also equally acquires the other reciprocally, and thus

regains and reestablishes the rational personality. The acquisition of a part of

the human organism being, on account of its unity, at the same time the

acquisition of the whole person, it follows that the surrender and acceptation

of, or by, one sex in relation to the other, is not only permissible under the

condition of marriage, but is further only really possible under that condition.

But the personal right thus acquired is, at the same time, real in kind; and this

characteristic of it is established by the fact that if one of the married persons

run away or enter into the possession of another, the other is entitled, at any

time, and incontestably, to bring such a one back to the former relation, as if

that person were a thing.                  26. Monogamy and Equality in Marriage.

 

 

              For the same reasons, the relation of the married persons to each

other is a relation of equality as regards the mutual possession of their

persons, as well as of their goods. Consequently marriage is only truly

realized in monogamy; for in the relation of polygamy the person who is

given away on the one side, gains only a part of the one to whom that person

is given up, and therefore becomes a mere res. But in respect of their goods,

they have severally the right to renounce the use of any part of them,

although only by a special contract.

              From the principle thus stated, it also follows that concubinage is as

little capable of being brought under a contract of right as the hiring of a

person on any one occasion, in the way of a pactum fornicationis. For, as

regards such a contract as this latter relation would imply, it must be admitted

by all that any one who might enter into it could not be legally held to the

fulfillment of their promise if they wished to resile from it. And as regards

the former, a contract of concubinage would also fall as a pactum turpe;

because as a contract of the hire (locatio, conductio), of a part for the use of

another, on account of the inseparable unity of the members of a person, any

one entering into such a contract would be actually surrendering as a res to

the arbitrary will of another. Hence any party may annul a contract like this if

entered into with any other, at any time and at pleasure; and that other would

have no ground, in the circumstances, to complain of a lesion of his right.

The same holds likewise of a morganatic or “left-hand” marriage, contracted

in order to turn the inequality in the social status of the two parties to

advantage in the way of establishing the social supremacy of the one over the

other; for, in fact, such a relation is not really different from concubinage,

according to the principles of natural right, and therefore does not constitute a

real marriage. Hence the question may be raised as to whether it is not

contrary to the equality of married persons when the law says in any way of

the husband in relation to the wife, “he shall be thy master,” so that he is

represented as the one who commands, and she is the one who obeys. This,

however, cannot be regarded as contrary to the natural equality of a human

pair, if such legal supremacy is based only upon the natural superiority of thefaculties of the husband compared with the wife, in the effectuation of the

common interest of the household, and if the right to command is based

merely upon this fact. For this right may thus be deduced from the very duty

of unity and equality in relation to the end involved.                27. Fulfillment of the Contract of Marriage.

 

 

              The contract of marriage is completed only by conjugal cohabitation.

A contract of two persons of different sex, with the secret understanding

either to abstain from conjugal cohabitation or with the consciousness on

either side of incapacity for it, is a simulated contract; it does not constitute a

marriage, and it may be dissolved by either of the parties at will. But if the

incapacity only arises after marriage, the right of the contract is not annulled

or diminished by a contingency that cannot be legally blamed.

              The acquisition of a spouse, either as a husband or as a wife, is

therefore not constituted facto — that is, by cohabitation — without a

preceding contract; nor even pacto — by a mere contract of marriage, without

subsequent cohabitation; but only lege, that is, as a juridical consequence of

the obligation that is formed by two persons entering into a sexual union

solely on the basis of a reciprocal possession of each other, which possession

at the same time is only effected in reality by the reciprocal usus facultatum

sexualium alterius.                Title II. Parental Right. (Parent and Child).

 

 

                    28. The Relation of Parent and Child.

 

 

              From the duty of man towards himself — that is, towards the

humanity in his own person there thus arises a personal right on the part of

the members of the opposite sexes, as persons, to acquire one another really

and reciprocally by marriage. In like manner, from the fact of procreation in

the union thus constituted, there follows the duty of preserving and rearing

children as the products of this union. Accordingly, children, as persons,

have, at the same time, an original congenital right — distinguished from

mere hereditary right — to be reared by the care of their parents till they are

capable of maintaining themselves; and this provision becomes immediately

theirs by law, without any particular juridical act being required to determine

it.

              For what is thus produced is a person, and it is impossible to think of

a being endowed with personal freedom as produced merely by a physical

process. And hence, in the practical relation, it is quite a correct and even a

necessary idea to regard the act of generation as a process by which a person

is brought without his consent into the world and placed in it by the

responsible free will of others. This act, therefore, attaches an obligation to

the parents to make their children — as far as their power goes — contented

with the condition thus acquired. Hence parents cannot regard their child as,

in a manner, a thing of their own making; for a being endowed with freedom

cannot be so regarded. Nor, consequently, have they a right to destroy it as if

it were their own property, or even to leave it to chance; because they have

brought a being into the world who becomes in fact a citizen of the world,

and they have placed that being in a state which they cannot be left to treat

with indifference, even according to the natural conceptions of right.

              We cannot even conceive how it is possible that God can create free

beings; for it appears as if all their future actions, being predetermined by that

first act, would be contained in the chain of natural necessity, and that,therefore, they could not be free. But as men we are free in fact, as is proved

by the categorical imperative in the moral and practical relation as an

authoritative decision of reason; yet reason cannot make the possibility of

such a relation of cause to effect conceivable from the theoretical point of

view, because they are both suprasensible. All that can be demanded of

reason under these conditions would merely be to prove that there is no

contradiction involved in the conception of a creation of free beings; and this

may be done by showing that contradiction only arises when, along with the

category of causality, the condition of time is transferred to the relation of

suprasensible things. This condition, as implying that the cause of an effect

must precede the effect as its reason, is inevitable in thinking the relation of

objects of sense to one another; and if this conception of causality were to

have objective reality given to it in the theoretical bearing, it would also have

to be referred to the suprasensible sphere. But the contradiction vanishes

when the pure category, apart from any sensible conditions, is applied from

the moral and practical point of view, and consequently as in a non-sensible

relation to the conception of creation.

              The philosophical jurist will not regard this investigation, when thus

carried back even to the ultimate principles of the transcendental philosophy,

as an unnecessary subtlety in a metaphysic of morals, or as losing itself in

aimless obscurity, when he takes into consideration the difficulty of doing

justice in this inquiry to the ultimate relations of the principles of right.                          29. The Rights of the Parent.

 

 

              From the duty thus indicated, there further necessarily arises the

right of the parents to the management and training of the child, so long as it

is itself incapable of making proper use of its body as an organism, and of its

mind as an understanding. This involves its nourishment and the care of its

education. This includes, in general, the function of forming and developing

it practically, that it may be able in the future to maintain and advance itself,

and also its moral culture and development, the guilt of neglecting it falling

upon the parents. All this training is to be continued till the child reaches the

period of emancipation (emancipatio), as the age of practicable self-support.

The parents then virtually renounce the parental right to command, as well as

all claim to repayment for their previous care and trouble; for which care and

trouble, after the process of education is complete, they can only appeal to the

children, by way of any claim, on the ground of the obligation of gratitude as

a duty of virtue.

              From the fact of personality in the children, it further follows that

they can never be regarded as the property of the parents, but only as

belonging to them by way of being in their possession, like other things that

are held apart from the possession of all others and that can be brought back

even against the will of the subjects. Hence the right of the parents is not a

purely real right, and it is not alienable (jus personalissimum). But neither is

it a merely personal right; it is a personal right of a real kind, that is, a

personal right that is constituted and exercised after the manner of a real

right.

              It is therefore evident that the title of a personal right of a real kind

must necessarily be added, in the science of right, to the titles of real right

and personal right, the division of rights into these two being not complete.

For, if the right of the parents to the children were treated as if it were merely

a real right to a part of what belongs to their house, they could not found only

upon the duty of the children to return to them in claiming them when they

run away, but they would be then entitled to seize them and impound them

like things or runaway cattle.            TITLE III. Household Right. (Master and Servant)

 

 

            30. Relation and Right of the Master of a Household.

 

 

              The children of the house, who, along with the parents, constitute a

family, attain majority, and become masters of themselves (majorennes, sui

juris), even without a contract of release from their previous state of

dependence, by their actually attaining to the capability of self-maintenance.

This attainment arises, on the one hand, as a state of natural majority, with

the advance of years in the general course of nature; and, on the other hand, it

takes form, as a state in accordance with their own natural condition. They

thus acquire the right of being their own masters, without the interposition of

any special juridical act, and therefore merely by law (lege); and they owe

their parents nothing by way of legal debt for their education, just as the

parents, on their side, are now released from their obligations to the children

in the same way. Parents and children thus gain or regain their natural

freedom; and the domestic society, which was necessary according to the law

of right, is thus naturally dissolved.

              Both parties, however, may resolve to continue the household, but

under another mode of obligation. It may assume the form of a relation

between the bead of the house, as its master, and the other members as

domestic servants, male or female; and the connection between them in this

new regulated domestic economy (societas herilis) may be determined by

contract. The master of the house, actually or virtually, enters into contract

with the children, now become major and masters of themselves; or, if there

be no children in the family, with other free persons constituting the

membership of the household; and thus there is established domestic

relationship not founded on social equality, but such that one commands as

master, and another obeys as servant (imperantis et subjecti domestici).

              The domestics or servants may then be regarded by the master of the

household as thus far his. As regards the form or mode of his possession of

them, they belong to him as if by a real right; for if any of them run away, heis entitled to bring them again under his power by a unilateral act of his will.

But as regards the matter of his right, or the use he is entitled to make of such

persons as his domestics, he is not entitled to conduct himself towards them

as if he was their proprietor or owner (dominus servi); because they are only

subjected to his power by contract, and by a contract under certain definite

restrictions. For a contract by which the one party renounced his whole

freedom for the advantage of the other, ceasing thereby to be a person and

consequently having no duty even to observe a contract, is self contradictory,

and is therefore of itself null and void. The question as to the right of

property in relation to one who has lost his legal personality by a crime does

not concern us here.

              This contract, then, of the master of a household with his domestics,

cannot be of such a nature that the use of them could ever rightly become an

abuse of them; and the judgement as to what constitutes use or abuse in such

circumstances the is not left merely to the master, but is also competent to the

servants, who ought never to be held in bondage or bodily servitude as slaves

or serfs. Such a contract cannot, therefore, be concluded for life, but in all

cases only for a definite period, within which one party may intimate to the

other a termination of their connection. Children, however, including even

the children of one who has become enslaved owing to a crime, are always

free. For every man is born free, because he has at birth as yet broken no law;

and even the cost of his education till his maturity cannot be reckoned as a

debt which he is bound to pay. Even a slave, if it were in his power, would be

bound to educate his children without being entitled to count and reckon with

them for the cost; and in view of his own incapacity for discharging this

function, the possessor of a slave, therefore, enters upon the obligation which

he has rendered the slave himself unable to fulfil.

              Here, again, as under the first two titles, it is clear that there is a

personal right of a real kind, in the relation of the master of a house to his

domestics. For he can legally demand them as belonging to what is externally

his, from any other possessor of them; and he is entitled to fetch them back to

his house, even before the reasons that may have led them to run away, and

their particular right in the circumstances, have been juridically investigated.  SYSTEMATIC DIVISION OF ALL THE RIGHTS CAPABLE OF

                    BEING ACQUIRED BY CONTRACT.

 

 

31. Division of Contracts: Juridical Conceptions of Money and a Book.

 

 

              It is reasonable to demand that a metaphysical science of right shall

completely and definitely determine the members of a logical division of its

conceptions a priori, and thus establish them in a genuine system. All

empirical division, on the other hand, is merely fragmentary partition, and it

leaves us in uncertainty as to whether there may not be more members still

required to complete the whole sphere of the divided conception. A division

that is made according to a principle a priori may be called, in contrast to all

empirical partitions, a dogmatic division.

              Every contract, regarded in itself objectively, consists of two

juridical acts: the promise and its acceptance. Acquisition by the latter, unless

it be a pactum re initum which requires delivery, is not a part, but the

juridically necessary consequence of the contract. Considered again

subjectively, or as to whether the acquisition, which ought to happen as a

necessary consequence according to reason, will also follow, in fact, as a

physical consequence, it is evident that I have no security or guarantee that

this will happen by the mere acceptance of a promise. There is, therefore,

something externally required connected with the mode of the contract, in

reference to the certainty of acquisition by it; and this can only be some

element completing and determining the means necessary to the attainment of

acquisition as realizing the purpose of the contract. And in his connection and

behoof, three persons are required to intervene — the promiser, the acceptor,

and the cautioner or surety. The importance of the cautioner is evident; but by

his intervention and his special contract with the promiser, the acceptor gains

nothing in respect of the object but the means of compulsion that enable him

to obtain what is his own.

              According to these rational principles of logical division, there are

properly only three pure and simple modes of contract. There are, however,innumerable mixed and empirical modes, adding statutory and conventional

forms to the principles of mine and thine that are in accordance with rational

laws. But they lie outside of the circle of the metaphysical science of right,

whose rational modes of contract can alone be indicated here.

              All contracts are founded upon a purpose of acquisition, and are

either:

              Gratuitous contracts, with unilateral acquisition; or

              Onerous contracts, with reciprocal acquisition; or

              Cautionary contracts, with no acquisition, but only guarantee of what

has been already acquired. These contracts may be gratuitous on the one side,

and yet, at the same time, onerous on the other.

              The gratuitous contracts (pacta gratuita) are: Depositation

(depositum), involving the preservation of some valuable deposited in trust;

Commodate (commodatum) a loan of the use of a thing; Donation (donatio),

a free gift.

              The onerous contracts are contracts either of permutation or of

hiring. Contracts of permutation or reciprocal exchange (permutatio late sic

dicta): Barter, or strictly real exchange (permutatio stricte sic dicta). Goods

exchanged for goods.

Purchase and sale (emptio venditio). Goods exchanged for money.

Loan (mutuum). Loan of a fungible under condition of its being returned in

kind: corn for corn, or money for money. Contracts of letting and hiring

(locatio conductio): Letting of a thing on hire to another person who is to

make use of it (locatio rei). If the thing can only be restored in specie, it may

be the subject of an onerous contract combining the consideration of interest

with it (pactum usurarium).

Letting of work on hire (locatio operae). Consent to the use of my powers by

another for a certain price (merces). The worker under this contract is a hired

servant (mercenarius).

Mandate (mandatum). The contract of mandate is an engagement to perform

or execute a certain business in place and in name of another person. If the

action is merely done in the place of another, but not, at the same time, in his

name, it is performance without commission (gestio negotii); but if it is

rightfully performed in name of the other, it constitutes mandate, which as acontract of procuration is an onerous contract (mandatum onerosum).

              The cautionary contracts (cautiones) are: Pledge (pignus). Caution

by a moveable deposited as security.

Suretyship (fidejussio). Caution for the fulfillment of the promise of another.

Personal security (praestatio obsidis). Guarantee of personal performance.

              This list of all modes in which the property of one person may be

transferred or conveyed to another includes conceptions of certain objects or

instruments required for such transference (translatio). These appear to be

entirely empirical, and it may therefore seem questionable whether they are

entitled to a place in a metaphysical science of right. For, in such a science,

the divisions must be made according to principles a priori; and hence the

matter of the juridical relation, which may be conventional, ought to be left

out of account, and only its form should be taken into consideration.

              Such conceptions may be illustrated by taking the instance of

money, in contradistinction from all other exchangeable things as wares and

merchandise; or by the case of a book. And considering these as illustrative

examples in this connection, it will be shown that the conception of money as

the greatest and most useable of all the means of human intercommunication

through things, in the way of purchase and sale in commerce, as well as that

of books as the greatest means of carrying on the interchange of thought,

resolve themselves into relations that are purely intellectual and rational. And

hence it will be made evident that such conceptions do not really detract from

the purity of the given scheme of pure rational contracts, by empirical

admixture.Illustration of Relations of Contract by the Conceptions of Money and a

                                          Book

 

 

                                I. What is Money?

 

 

              Money is a thing which can only be made use of, by being alienated

or exchanged. This is a good nominal definition, as given by Achenwall; and

it is sufficient to distinguish objects of the will of this kind from all other

objects. But it gives us no information regarding the rational possibility of

such a thing as money is. Yet we see thus much by the definition: (1) that the

alienation in this mode of human intercommunication and exchange is not

viewed as a gift, but is intended as a mode of reciprocal acquisition by an

onerous contract; and (2) that it is regarded as a mere means of carrying on

commerce, universally adopted by the people, but having no value as such of

itself, in contrast to other things as mercantile goods or wares which have a

particular value in relation to special wants existing among the people. It

therefore represents all exchangeable things.

              A bushel of corn has the greatest direct value as a means of

satisfying human wants. Cattle may be fed by it; and these again are

subservient to our nourishment and locomotion, and they even labour in our

stead. Thus, by means of corn, men are multiplied and supported, who not

only act again in reproducing such natural products, but also by other

artificial products they can come to the relief of all our proper wants. Thus

are men enabled to build dwellings, to prepare clothing, and to supply all the

ingenious comforts and enjoyments which make up the products of industry.

On the other hand, the value of money is only indirect. It cannot be itself

enjoyed, nor be used directly for enjoyment; it is, however, a means towards

this, and of all outward things it is of the highest utility.

              We may found a real definition of money provisionally upon these

considerations. It may thus be defined as the universal means of carrying on

the industry of men in exchanging intercommunications with each other.

Hence national wealth, in so far as it can be acquired by means of money, isproperly only the sum of the industry or applied labour with which men pay

each other, and which is represented by the money in circulation among the

people.

              The thing which is to be called money must, therefore, have cost as

much industry to produce it, or even to put it into the hands of others, as may

be equivalent to the industry or labour required for the acquisition of the

goods or wares or merchandise, as natural or artificial products, for which it

is exchanged. For if it were easier to procure the material which is called

money than the goods that are required, there would be more money in the

market than goods to be sold; and because the seller would then have to

expend more labour upon his goods than the buyer on the equivalent, the

money coming in to him more rapidly, the labour applied to the preparation

of goods and industry generally, with the industrial productivity which is the

source of the public wealth, would at the same time dwindle and be cut down.

Hence bank notes and assignations are not to be regarded as money, although

they may take its place by way of representing it for a time; because it costs

almost no labour to prepare them, and their value is based merely upon the

opinion prevailing as to the further continuance of the previous possibility of

changing them into ready money. But on its being in any way found out that

there is not ready money in sufficient quantity for easy and safe conversion of

such notes or assignations, the opinion gives way, and a fall in their value

becomes inevitable. Thus the industrial labour of those who work the gold

and silver mines in Peru and Mexicoespecially on account of the frequent

failures in the application of fruitless efforts to discover new veins of these

precious metals — is probably even greater than what is expended in the

manufacture of goods in Europe. Hence such mining labour, as unrewarded

in the circumstances, would be abandoned of itself, and the countries

mentioned would in consequence soon sink into poverty, did not the industry

of Europe, stimulated in turn by these very metals, proportionally expand at

the same time so as constantly to keep up the zeal of the miners in their work

by the articles of luxury thereby offered to them. It is thus that the

concurrence of industry with industry, and of labour with labour, is always

maintained.

              But how is it possible that what at the beginning constituted only

goods or wares, at length became money? This has happened wherever a

sovereign as great and powerful consumer of a particular substance, which heat first used merely for the adornment and decoration of his servants and

court, has enforced the tribute of his subjects in this kind of material. Thus it

may have been gold, or silver, or copper, or a species of beautiful shells

called cowries, or even a sort of mat called makutes, as in Congo; or ingots of

iron, as in Senegal; or Negro slaves, as on the Guinea Coast. When the ruler

of the country demanded such things as imposts, those whose labour had to

be put in motion to procure them were also paid by means of them, according

to certain regulations of commerce then established, as in a market or

exchange. As it appears to me, it is only thus that a particular species of

goods came to be made a legal means of carrying on the industrial labour of

the subjects in their commerce with each other, and thereby forming the

medium of the national wealth. And thus it practically became money.

              The rational conception of money, under which the empirical

conception is embraced, is therefore that of a thing which, in the course of the

public permutation or exchange of possessions (permutatio publica),

determines the price of all the other things that form products or goods —

under which term even the sciences are included, in so far as they are not

taught gratis to others. The quantity of it among a people constitutes their

wealth (opulentia). For price (pretium) is the public judgement about the

value of a thing, in relation to the proportionate abundance of what forms the

universal representative means in circulation for carrying on the reciprocal
                                                        3
interchange of the products of industry or labour. The precious metals, when

they are not merely weighed but also stamped or provided with a sign

indicating how much they are worth, form legal money, and are called coin.

        3
               Hence where commerce is extensive neither gold nor copper is

specially used as money, but only as constituting wares; because there is too

little of the first and too much of the second for them to be easily brought into

circulation, so as at once to have the former in such small pieces as are

necessary in payment for particular goods and not to have the latter in great

quantity in case of the smallest acquisitions. Hence silver — more or less

alloyed with copper — is taken as the proper material of money and the

measure of the calculation of all prices in the great commercial

intercommunications of the world; and the other metals — and still more

non-metalic substancescan only take its place in the case of a people of

limited commerce.

              According to Adam Smith: “Money has become, in all civilizednations, the universal instrument of commerce, by the intervention of which

goods of all kinds are bought and sold or exchanged for one another.” This

definition expands the empirical conception of money to the rational idea of

it, by taking regard only to the implied form of the reciprocal performances in

the onerous contracts, and thus abstracting from their matter. It is thus

conformable to the conception of right in the permutation and exchange of

the mine and thine generally (commutatio late sic dicta). The definition,

therefore, accords with the representation in the above synopsis of a dogmatic

division of contracts a priori, and consequently with the metaphysical

principle of right in general.                                II. What is a Book?

 

 

              A book is a writing which contains a discourse addressed by some

one to the public, through visible signs of speech. It is a matter of

indifference to the present considerations whether it is written by a pen or

imprinted by types, and on few or many pages. He who speaks to the public

in his own name is the author. He who addresses the writing to the public in

the name of the author is the publisher. When a publisher does this with the

permission or authority of the author, the act is in accordance with right, and

he is the rightful publisher; but if this is done without such permission or

authority, the act is contrary to right, and the publisher is a counterfeiter or

unlawful publisher. The whole of a set of copies of the original document is

called an edition.The Unauthorized Publishing of Books is Contrary to the Principles of

                        Right, and is Rightly Prohibited.

 

 

              A writing is not an immediate direct presentation of a conception, as

is the case, for instance, with an engraving that exhibits a portrait, or a bust or

cast by a sculptor. It is a discourse addressed in a particular form to the

public; and the author may be said to speak publicly by means of his

publisher. The publisher, again, speaks by the aid of the printer as his

workman (operarius), yet not in his own name, for otherwise he would be the

author, but in the name of the author; and he is only entitled to do so in virtue

of a mandate given him to that effect by the author. Now the unauthorized

printer and publisher speaks by an assumed authority in his publication; in

the name indeed of the author, but without a mandate to that effect (gerit se

mandatarium absque mandato). Consequently such an unauthorized

publication is a wrong committed upon the authorized and only lawful

publisher, as it amounts to a pilfering of the profits which the latter was

entitled and able to draw from the use of his proper right (furtum usus).

Unauthorized printing and publication of books is, therefore, forbidden — as

an act of counterfeit and piracyon the ground of right.

              There seems, however, to be an impression that there is a sort of

common right to print and publish books; but the slightest reflection must

convince any one that this would be a great injustice. The reason of it is

found simply in the fact that a book, regarded from one point of view, is an

external product of mechanical art (opus mechanicum), that can be imitated

by any one who may be in rightful possession of a copy; and it is therefore

his by a real right.

              But, from another point of view, a book is not merely an external

thing, but is a discourse of the publisher to the public, and he is only entitled

to do this publicly under the mandate of the author (praestatio operae); and

this constitutes a personal right. The error underlying the impression referred

to, therefore, arises from an interchange and confusion of these two kinds of

right in relation to books.                  Confusion of Personal Right and Real Right.

 

 

              The confusion of personal right with real right may be likewise

shown by reference to a difference of view in connection with another

contract, falling under the head of contracts of hiring (B II. I), namely, the

contract of lease (jus incolatus). The question is raised as to whether a

proprietor when he has sold a house or a piece of ground held on lease,

before the expiry of the period of lease, was bound to add the condition of the

continuance of the lease to the contract of purchase; or whether it should be

held that “purchase breaks hire,” of course under reservation of a period of

warning determined by the nature of the subject in use. In the former view, a

house or farm would be regarded as having a burden lying upon it,

constituting a real right acquired in it by the lessee; and this might well

enough be carried out by a clause merely indorsing or ingrossing the contract

of lease in the deed of sale. But as it would no longer then be a simple lease;

another contract would properly be required to be conjoined, a matter which

few lessors would be disposed to grant. The proposition, then, that “Purchase

breaks hire” holds in principle; for the full right in a thing as a property

overbears all personal right, which is inconsistent with it. But there remains a

right of action to the lessee, on the ground of a personal right for

indemnification on account of any loss arising from breaking of the contract.EPISODICAL SECTION. The Ideal Acquisition of External Objects of

                                      the Will.

 

               32. The Nature and Modes of Ideal Acquisition.

 

 

              I call that mode of acquisition ideal which involves no causality in

time, and which is founded upon a mere idea of pure reason. It is nevertheless

actual, and not merely imaginary acquisition: and it is not called real only

because the act of acquisition is not empirical. This character of the act arises

from the peculiarity that the person acquiring acquires from another who

either is not yet, and who can only be regarded as a possible being, or who is

just ceasing to be, or who no longer is. Hence such a mode of attaining to

possession is to be regarded as a mere practical idea of reason.

              There are three modes of ideal acquisition:

              I. Acquisition by usucapion;

II. Acquisition by inheritance or succession;

III. Acquisition by undying merit (meritum immortale), or the claim by right

to a good name at death.

              These three modes of acquisition can, as a matter of fact, only have

effect in a public juridical state of existence, but they are not founded merely

upon the civil constitution or upon arbitrary statutes; they are already

contained a priori in the conception of the state of nature, and are thus

necessarily conceivable prior to their empirical manifestation. The laws

regarding them in the civil constitution ought to be regulated by that rational

conception.    33. I. Acquisition by Usucapion. (Acquisitio per Usucapionem).

 

 

              I may acquire the property of another merely by long possession and

use of it (usucapio). Such property is not acquired, because I may

legitimately presume that his consent is given to this effect (per consensum

praesumptum); nor because I can assume that, as he does not oppose my

acquisition of it, he has relinquished or abandoned it as his (rem derelictam).

But I acquire it thus because, even if there were any one actually raising a

claim to this property as its true owner, I may exclude him on the ground of

my long possession of it, ignore his previous existence, and proceed as if he

existed during the time of my possession as a mere abstraction, although I

may have been subsequently apprized of his reality as well as of his claim.

This mode of acquisition is not quite correctly designated acquisition by

prescription (per praescriptionem); for the exclusion of all other claimants is

to be regarded as only the consequence of the usucapion; and the process of

acquisition must have gone before the right of exclusion. The rational

possibility of such a mode of acquisition has now to be proved.

              Any one who does not exercise a continuous possessory activity

(actus possessorius) in relation to a thing as his is regarded with good right as

one who does not at all exist as its possessor. For he cannot complain of

lesion so long as he does not qualify himself with a title as its possessor. And

even if he should afterwards lay claim to the thing when another has already

taken possession of it, he only says he was once on a time owner of it, but not

that he is so still, or that his possession has continued without interruption as

a juridical fact. It can, therefore, only be a juridical process of possession,

that has been maintained without interruption and is proveable by

documentary fact, that any one can secure for himself what is his own after

ceasing for a long time to make use of it.

              For, suppose that the neglect to exercise this possessory activity had

not the effect of enabling another to found upon his hitherto lawful,

undisputed and bona fide possession, and irrefragable right to continue in its

possession so that he may regard the thing that is thus in his possession as

acquired by him. Then no acquisition would ever become peremptory andsecured, but all acquisition would only be provisory and temporary. This is

evident on the ground that there are no historical records available to carry

the investigation of a title back to the first possessor and his act of

acquisition. The presumption upon which acquisition by usucapion is

founded is, therefore, not merely its conformity to right as allowed and just,

but also the presumption of its being right (praesumtio juris et de jure), and

its being assumed to be in accordance with compulsory laws (suppositio

legalis). Anyone who has neglected to embody his possessory act in a

documentary title has lost his claim to the right of being possessor for the

time; and the length of the period of his neglecting to do so — which need

not necessarily be particularly defined — can be referred to only as

establishing the certainty of this neglect. And it would contradict the

postulate of the juridically practical reason to maintain that one hitherto

unknown as a possessor, and whose possessory activity has at least been

interrupted, whether by or without fault of his own, could always at any time

re-acquire a property; for this would be to make all ownership uncertain

(dominia rerum incerta facere).

              But if he is a member of the commonwealth or civil union, the state

may maintain his possession for him vicariously, although it may be

interrupted as private possession; and in that case the actual possessor will

not be able to prove a title of acquisition even from a first occupation, nor to

found upon a title of usucapion. But, in the state of nature, usucapion is

universally a rightful ground of holding, not properly as a juridical mode of

requiring a thing, but as a ground for maintaining oneself in possession of it

where there are no juridical acts. A release from juridical claims is commonly

also called acquisition. The prescriptive title of the older possessor, therefore,

belongs to the sphere of natural right (est juris naturae).      34. II. Acquisition by Inheritance. (Acquisitio haereditatis).

 

 

              Inheritance is constituted by the transfer (translatio) of the property

or goods of one who is dying to a survivor, through the consent of the will of

both. The acquisition of the heir who takes the estate (haeredis instituti) and

the relinquishment of the testator who leaves it, being the acts that constitute

the exchange of the mine and thine, take place in the same moment of time

— in articulo mortisand just when the testator ceases to be. There is therefore

no special act of transfer (translatio) in the empirical sense; for that would

involve two successive acts, by which the one would first divest himself of

his possession, and the other would thereupon enter into it. Inheritance as

constituted by a simultaneous double act is, therefore, an ideal mode of

acquisition. Inheritance is inconceivable in the state of nature without a

testamentary disposition (dispositio ultimae voluntatis); and the question

arises as to whether this mode of acquisition is to be regarded as a contract of

succession, or a unilateral act instituting an heir by a will (testamentum). The

determination of this question depends on the further question, whether and

how, in the very same moment in which one individual ceases to be, there

can be a transition of his property to another person. Hence the problem, as to

how a mode of acquisition by inheritance is possible, must be investigated

independently of the various possible forms in which it is practically carried

out, and which can have place only in a commonwealth.

              “It is possible to acquire by being instituted or appointed heir in a

testamentary disposition.” For the testator Caius promises and declares in his

last will to Titius, who knows nothing of this promise, to transfer to him his

estate in case of death, but thus continuing as long as he lives sole owner of

it. Now by a mere unilateral act of will, nothing can in fact be transmitted to

another person, as in addition to the promise of the one party there is required

acceptance (acceptatio) on the part of the other, and a simultaneous bilateral

act of will (voluntas simultanea) which, however, is here awanting. So long

as Caius lives, Titius cannot expressly accept in order to enter on acquisition,

because Caius has only promised in case of death; otherwise the property

would be for a moment at least in common possession, which is not the will

of the testator. However, Titius acquires tacitly a special right to theinheritance as a real right. This is constituted by the sole and exclusive right

to accept the estate (jus in re jacente), which is therefore called at that point

of time a haereditas jacens. Now as every man — because he must always

gain and never lose by itnecessarily, although tacitly, accepts such a right,

and as Titius after the death of Caius is in this position, he may acquire the

succession as heir by acceptance of the promise. And the estate is not in the

meantime entirely without an owner (res nullius), but is only in abeyance or

vacant (vacua); because he has exclusively the right of choice as to whether

he will actually make the estate bequeathed to him his own or not.

              Hence testaments are valid according to mere natural right (sunt juris

naturae). This assertion however, is to be understood in the sense that they

are capable and worthy of being introduced and sanctioned in the civil state,

whenever it is instituted. For it is only the common will in the civil state that

maintains the possession of the inheritance or succession, while it hangs

between acceptance or rejection and specially belongs to no particular

individual.35. III. The Continuing Right of a Good Name after Death. (Bona fama

                                        Defuncti).

 

 

              It would be absurd to think that a dead person could possess

anything after his death, when he no longer exists in the eye of the law, if the

matter in question were a mere thing. But a good name is a congenital and

external, although merely ideal, possession, which attaches inseparably to the

individual as a person. Now we can and must abstract here from all

consideration as to whether the persons cease to be after death or still

continue as such to exist; because, in considering their juridical relation to

others, we regard persons merely according to their humanity and as rational

beings (homo noumenon). Hence any attempt to bring the reputation or good

name of a person into evil and false repute after death, is always

questionable, even although a well-founded charge may be allowed — for to
                                                        4
that extent the brocard “De mortuis nil nisi bene” is wrong. Yet to spread

charges against one who is absent and cannot defend himself, shows at least a

want of magnanimity.

        4
               [Let nothing be said of the dead but what is favourable.]

              By a blameless life and a death that worthily ends it, nothing ends it,

it is admitted that a man may acquire a (negatively) good reputation

constituting something that is his own, even when he no longer exists in the

world of sense as a visible person (homo phaenomenon). It is further held

that his survivors and successorswhether relatives or strangers — are entitled

to defend his good name as a matter of right, on the ground that unproved

accusations subject them all to the danger of similar treatment after death.

Now that a man when dead can yet acquire such a right is a peculiar and,

nevertheless, an undeniable manifestation in fact, of the a priori law-giving

reason thus extending its law of command or prohibition beyond the limits of

the present life. If some one then spreads a charge regarding a dead person

that would have dishonoured him when living, or even made him despicable,

any one who can adduce a proof that this accusation is intentionally false and

untrue may publicly declare him who thus brings the dead person into ill

repute to be a calumniator, and affix dishonour to him in turn. This would notbe allowable unless it were legitimate to assume that the dead person was

injured by the accusation, although he is dead, and that a certain just

satisfaction was done to him by an apology, although he no longer sensibly

exists. A title to act the part the vindicator of the dead person does not require

to be established; for every one necessarily claims this of himself, not merely

as a duty of virtue regarded ethically, but as a right belonging to him in virtue

of his humanity. Nor does the vindicator require to show any special personal

damage, accruing to him as a friend or relative, from a stain on the character

of the deceased, to justify him in proceeding to censure it. That such a form

of ideal acquisition, and even a right in an individual after death against

survivors, is thus actually founded, cannot, therefore, be disputed, although

the possibility of such a right is not capable of logical deduction.

              There is no ground for drawing visionary inferences from what has

just been stated, to the presentiment of a future life and invisible relations to

departed souls. For the considerations connected with this right turn on

nothing more than the purely moral and juridical relation which subsists

among men, even in the present life, as rational beings. Abstraction is,

however, made from all that belongs physically to their existence in space

and time; that is, men are considered logically apart from these physical

concomitants of their nature, not as to their state when actually deprived of

them, but only in so far as being spirits they are in a condition that might

realize the injury done them by calumniators. Any one who may falsely say

something against me a hundred years hence injures me even now. For in the

pure juridical relation, which is entirely rational and surprasensible,

abstraction is made from the physical conditions of time, and the calumniator

is as culpable as if he had committed the offence in my lifetime; only this will

not be tried by a criminal process, but he will only be punished with that loss

of honour he would have caused to another, and this is inflicted upon him by

public opinion according to the lex talionis. Even a plagiarism from a dead

author, although it does not tarnish the honour of the deceased, but only

deprives him of a part of his property, is yet properly regarded as a lesion of

his human right.  CHAPTER III.  Acquisition Conditioned by the Sentence of a Public

                                      Judicatory.

 

 

  36. How and What Acquisition is Subjectively Conditioned by the

                            Principle of a Public Court.

 

 

              Natural right, understood simply as that right which is not statutory,

and which is knowable purely a priori, by every man’s reason, will include

distributive justice as well as commutative justice. It is manifest that the

latter, as constituting the justice that is valid between persons in their

reciprocal relations of intercourse with one another, must belong to natural

right. But this holds also of distributive justice, in so far as it can be known a

priori; and decisions or sentences regarding it must be regulated by the law of

natural right.

              The moral person who presides in the sphere of justice and

administers it is called the Court of justice, and, as engaged in the process of

official duty, the judicatory; the sentence delivered in a case, is the judgement

(judicium). All this is to be here viewed a priori, according to the rational

conditions of right, without taking into consideration how such a constitution

is to be actually established or organized, for which particular statutes, and

consequently empirical principles, are requisite.

              The question, then, in this connection, is not merely “What is right in

itself?” in the sense in which every man must determine it by the judgement

of reason; but “What is right as applied to this case?” that is, “What is right

and just as viewed by a court?” The rational and the judicial points of view

are therefore to be distinguished; and there are four cases in which the two

forms of judgement have a different and opposite issue. And yet they may co-

exist with each other, because they are delivered from two different, yet

respectively true, points of view: the one from regard to private right, the

other from the idea of public right. They are: I. The contract of donation

(pactum donationis); II. The contract of loan (commodatum); III. The action

of real revindication (vindicatio); and IV. Guarantee by oath (juramentum).              It is a common error on the part of the jurist to fall here into the

fallacy of begging the question by a tacit assumption (vitium subreptionis).

This is done by assuming as objective and absolute the juridical principle

which a public court of justice is entitled and even bound to adopt in its own

behoof, and only from the subjective purpose of qualifying itself to decide

and judge upon all the rights pertaining to individuals. It is therefore of no

small importance to make this specific difference intelligible, and to draw

attention to it.          37. I. The Contract of Donation. (Pactum Donationis).

 

 

              The contract of donation signifies the gratuitous alienation (gratis) of

a thing or right that is mine. It involves a relation between me as the donor

(donans), and another person as the donatory (donatarius), in accordance with

the principle of private right, by which what is mine is transferred to the

latter, on his acceptance of it, as a gift (donum). However, it is not to be

presumed that I have voluntarily bound myself thereby so as to be compelled

to keep my promise, and that I have thus given away my freedom

gratuitously, and, as it were, to that extent thrown myself away. Nemo suum

jactare praesumitur. But this is what would happen, under such

circumstances, according to the principle of right in the civil state; for in this

sphere the donatory can compel me, under certain conditions, to perform my

promise. If, then, the case comes before a court, according to the conditions

of public right, it must either be presumed that the donor has consented to

such compulsion, or the court would give no regard, in the sentence, to the

consideration as to whether he intended to reserve the right to resile from his

promise or not; but would only refer to what is certain, namely, the condition

of the promise and the acceptance of the donatory. Although the promiser,

therefore, thought — as may easily be supposed — that he could not be

bound by his promise in any case, if he “rued” it before it was actually

carried out, yet the court assumes that he ought expressly to have reserved

this condition if such was his mind; and if he did not make such an express

reservation, it will be held that he can be compelled to implement his

promise. And this principle is assumed by the court, because the

administration of justice would otherwise be endlessly impeded, or even

made entirely impossible.                38. II. The Contract of Loan. (Commodatum).

 

 

              In the contract of commodate-loan (commodatum) I give some one

the gratuitous use of something that is mine. If it is a thing that is given on

loan, the contracting parties agree that the borrower will restore the very

same thing to the power of the lender, But the receiver of the loan

(commodatarius) cannot, at the same time, assume that the owner of the thing

lent (commodans) will take upon himself all risk (casus) of any possible loss

of it, or of its useful quality, that may arise from having given it into the

possession of the receiver. For it is not to be understood of itself that the

owner, besides the use of the thing, which he has granted to the receiver, and

the detriment that is inseparable from such use, also gives a guarantee or

warrandice against all damage that may arise from such use. On the contrary,

a special accessory contract would have to be entered into for this purpose.

The only question, then, that can be raised is this: “Is it incumbent on the

lender or the borrower to add expressly the condition of undertaking the risk

that may accrue to the thing lent; or, if this is not done, which of the parties is

to be presumed to have consented and agreed to guarantee the property of the

lender, up to restoration of the very same thing or its equivalent?” Certainly

not the lender; because it cannot be presumed that he has gratuitously agreed

to give more than the mere use of the thing, so that he cannot be supposed to

have also undertaken the risk of loss of his property. But this may be assumed

on the side of the borrower; because he thereby undertakes and performs

nothing more than what is implied in the contract.

              For example, I enter a house, when overtaken by a shower of rain,

and ask the loan of a cloak. But through accidental contact with colouring

matter, it becomes entirely spoiled while in my possession; or on entering

another house, I lay it aside and it is stolen. Under such circumstances,

everybody would think it absurd for me to assert that I had no further concern

with the cloak but to return it as it was, or, in the latter case, only to mention

the fact of the theft; and that, in any case, anything more required would be

but an act of courtesy in expressing sympathy with the owner on account of

his loss, seeing he can claim nothing on the ground of right. It would be

otherwise, however, if, on asking the use of an article, I discharged myselfbeforehand from all responsibility, in case of its coming to grief while in my

hands, on the ground of my being poor and unable to compensate any

incidental loss. No one could find such a condition superfluous or ludicrous,

unless the borrower were, in fact, known to be a well-to-do and well-disposed

man; because in such a case it would almost be an insult not to act on the

presumption of generous compensation for any loss sustained.

              Now by the very nature of this contract, the possible damage (casus)

which the thing lent may undergo cannot be exactly determined in any

agreement. Commodate is therefore an uncertain contract (pactum incertum),

because the consent can only be so far presumed. The judgement, in any case,

deciding upon whom the incidence of any loss must fall, cannot therefore be

determined from the conditions of the contract in itself, but only by the

principle of the court before which it comes, and which can only consider

what is certain in the contract; and the only thing certain is always the fact as

to the possession of the thing as property. Hence the judgement passed in the

state of nature will be different from that given by a court of justice in the

civil state. The judgement from the standpoint of natural right will be

determined by regard to the inner rational quality of the thing, and will run

thus: “Loss arising from damage accruing to a thing lent falls upon the

borrower” (casum sentit commodatarius); whereas the sentence of a court of

justice in the civil state will run thus: “The loss falls upon the lender” (casum

sentit dominus). The latter judgement turns out differently from the former as

the sentence of the mere sound reason, because a public judge cannot found

upon presumptions as to what either party may have thought; and thus the

one who has not obtained release from all loss in the thing, by a special

accessory contract, must bear the loss. Hence the difference between the

judgement as the court must deliver it and the form in which each individual

is entitled to hold it for himself, by his private reason, is a matter of

importance, and is not to be overlooked in the consideration of juridical

judgements.      39. III. The Revindication of what has been Lost. (Vindicatio).

 

 

              It is clear from what has been already said that a thing of mine which

continues to exist remains mine, although I may not be in continuous

occupation of it; and that it does not cease to be mine without a juridical act

of dereliction or alienation. Further, it is evident that a right in this thing (jus

reale) belongs in consequence to me (jus personale), against every holder of

it, and not merely against some particular person. But the question now arises

as to whether this right must be regarded by every other person as a

continuous right of property per se, if I have not in any way renounced it,

although the thing is in the possession of another.

              A thing may be lost (res amissa) and thus come into other hands in

an honourable bona fide way as a supposed “find”; or it may come to me by

formal transfer on the part of one who is in possession of it, and who

professes to be its owner, although he is not so. Taking the latter case, the

question arises whether, since I cannot acquire a thing from one who is not its

owner (a non domino), I am excluded by the fact from all right in the thing

itself, and have merely a personal right against a wrongful possessor? This is

manifestly so, if the acquisition is judged purely according to its inner

justifying grounds and viewed according to the state of nature, and not

according to the convenience of a court of justice.

              For everything alienable must be capable of being acquired by

anyone. The rightfulness of acquisition, however, rests entirely upon the form

in accordance with which what is in possession of another, is transferred to

me and accepted by me. In other words, rightful acquisition depends upon the

formality of the juridical act of commutation or interchange between the

possessor of the thing and the acquirer of it, without its being required to ask

how the former came by it; because this would itself be an injury, on the

ground that: Quilibet praesumitur bonus. Now suppose it turned out that the

said possessor was not the real owner, I cannot admit that the real owner is

entitled to hold me directly responsible, or so entitled with regard to any one

who might be holding the thing. For I have myself taken nothing away from

him, when, for example, I bought his horse according to the law (titulo emptivenditi) when it was offered for sale in the public market. The title of

acquisition is therefore unimpeachable on my side; and as buyer I am not

bound, nor even have I the right, to investigate the title of the seller; for this

process of investigation would have to go on in an ascending series ad

infinitum. Hence on such grounds I ought to be regarded, in virtue of a

regular and formal purchase, as not merely the putative, but the real owner of

the horse.

              But against this position, there immediately start up the following

juridical principles. Any acquisition derived from one who is not the owner

of the thing in question is null and void. I cannot derive from another

anything more than what he himself rightfully has; and although as regards

the form of the acquisition the modus acquirendi — I may proceed in

accordance with all the conditions of right when I deal in a stolen horse

exposed for sale in the market, yet a real title warranting the acquisition was

awanting; for the horse was not really the property of the seller in question.

However I may be a bona fide possessor of a thing under such conditions, I

am still only a putative owner, and the real owner has the right of vindication

against me (rem suam vindicandi).

              Now, it may be again asked, what is right and just in itself regarding

the acquisition of external things among men in their intercourse with one

another — viewed in the state of nature according to the principles of

commutative justice? And it must be admitted in this connection that

whoever has a purpose of acquiring anything must regard it as absolutely

necessary to investigate whether the thing which he wishes to acquire does

not already belong to another person. For although he may carefully observe

the formal conditions required for appropriating what may belong to the

property of another, as in buying a horse according to the usual terms in a

market, yet he can, at the most, acquire only a personal right in relation to a

thing (jus ad rem) so long as it is still unknown to him whether another than

the seller may not be the real owner. Hence, if some other person were to

come forward and prove by documentary evidence a prior right of property in

the thing, nothing would remain for the putative new owner but the advantage

which he has drawn as a bona fide possessor of it up to that moment. Now it

is frequently impossible to discover the absolutely first original owner of a

thing in the series of putative owners, who derive their right from one

another. Hence no mere exchange of external things, however well it mayagree with the formal conditions of commutative justice, can ever guarantee

an absolutely certain acquisition.

              Here, however, the juridically law-giving reason comes in again with

the principle of distributive justice; and it adopts as a criterion of the

rightfulness of possession, not what is in itself in reference to the private will

of each individual in the state of nature, but only the consideration of how it

would be adjudged by a court of justice in a civil state, constituted by the

united will of all. In this connection, fulfillment of the formal conditions of

acquisition, that in themselves only establish a personal right, is postulated as

sufficient; and they stand as an equivalent for the material conditions which

properly establish the derivation of property from a prior putative owner, to

the extent of making what is in itself only a personal right, valid before a

court, as a real right. Thus the horse which I bought when exposed for sale in

the public market, under conditions regulated by the municipal law, becomes

my property if all the conditions of purchase and sale have been exactly

observed in the transaction; but always under the reservation that the real

owner continues to have the right of a claim against the seller, on the ground

of his prior unalienated possession. My otherwise personal right is thus

transmuted into a real right, according to which I may take and vindicate the

object as mine wherever I may find it, without being responsible for the way

in which the Seller had come into possession of it.

              It is therefore only in behoof of the requirements of juridical

decision in a court (in favorem justitae distributivae) that the right in respect

of a thing is regarded, not as personal, which it is in itself, but as real,

because it can thus be most easily and certainly adjudged; and it is thus

accepted and dealt with according to a pure principle a priori. Upon this

principle, various statutory laws come to be founded which specially aim at

laying down the conditions under which alone a mode of acquisition shall be

legitimate, so that the judge may be able to assign every one his own as easily

and certainly as possible. Thus, in the brocard, “Purchase breaks hire,” what

by the nature of the subject is a real right — namely the hire — is taken to

hold as a merely personal right; and, conversely, as in the case referred to

above, what is in itself merely a personal right is held to be valid as a real

right. And this is done only when the question arises as to the principles by

which a court of justice in the civil state is to be guided, in order to proceed

with all possible safety in delivering judgement on the rights of individuals.    40. IV. Acquisition of Security by the Taking of an Oath. (Cautio

                                      Juratoria).

 

 

              Only one ground can be assigned on which it could be held that men

are bound in the juridical relation to believe and to confess that there are

gods, or that there is a God. It is that they may be able to swear an oath; and

that thus by the fear of an all-seeing Supreme Power, whose revenge they

must solemnly invoke upon themselves in case their utterance should be

false, they may be constrained to be truthful in statement and faithful in

promising. It is not morality but merely blind superstition that is reckoned

upon in this process; for it is evident it implies that no certainty is to be

expected from a mere solemn declaration in matters of right before a court,

although the duty of truthfulness must have always appeared self-evident to

all, in a matter which concerns the holiest that can be among men — namely,

the right of man. Hence recourse has been had to a motive founded on mere

myths and fables as imaginary guarantees. Thus among the Rejangs, a

heathen people in Sumatra, it is the customaccording to the testimony of

Marsden — to swear by the bones of their dead relatives, although they have

no belief in a life after death. In like manner the negroes of Guinea swear by

their fetish, a bird’s feather, which they imprecate under the belief that it will

break their neck. And so in other cases. The belief underlying these oaths is

that an invisible power — whether it has understanding or notby its very

nature possesses magical power that can be put into action by such

invocations. Such a belief — which is commonly called religion, but which

ought to be called superstition — is, however, indispensable for the

administration of justice; because, without referring to it, a court of justice

would not have adequate means to ascertain facts otherwise kept secret, and

to determine rights. A law making an oath obligatory is therefore only given

in behoof of the judicial authority.

              But then the question arises as to what the obligation could be

founded upon that would bind any one in a court of justice to accept the oath

of another person as a right and valid proof of the truth of his statements

which are to put an end to all dispute. In other words, what obliges me

juridically to believe that another person when taking an oath has any religionat all, so that I should subordinate or entrust my right to his oath? And, on

like grounds, conversely, can I be bound at all to take an oath? It is evident

that both these questions point to what is in itself morally wrong.

              But in relation to a court of justice — and generally in the civil state

— if it be assumed there are no other means of getting to the truth in certain

cases than by an oath, it must be adopted. In regard to religion, under the

supposition that every one has it, it may be utilized as a necessary means (in

causu necessitatis), in behoof of the legitimate procedure of a court of justice.

The court uses this form of spiritual compulsion (tortura spiritualis) as an

available means, in conformity with the superstitious propensity of mankind,

for the ascertainment of what is concealed; and therefore holds itself justified

in so doing. The legislative power, however, is fundamentally wrong in

assigning this authority to the judicial power, because even in the civil state

any compulsion with regard to the taking of oaths is contrary to the

inalienable freedom of man.

              Official oaths, which are usually promissory, being taken on entering

upon an office, to the effect that the individual has sincere intention to

administer his functions dutifully, might well be changed into assertory oaths,

to be taken at the end of a year or more of actual administration, the official

swearing to the faithfulness of his discharge of duty during that time. This

would bring the conscience more into action than the promissory oath, which

always gives room for the internal pretext that, with the best intention, the

difficulties that arose during the administration of the official function were

not foreseen. And, further, violations of duty, under the prospect of their

being summed up by future censors, would give rise to more anxiety as to

censure than when they are merely represented, one after the other, and

forgotten.

              As regards an oath taken concerning a matter of belief (de

credulitate), it is evident that no such oath can be demanded by a court. 1.

For, first, it contains in itself a contradiction. Such belief, as intermediate

between opinion and knowledge, is a thing on which one might venture to lay

a wager but not to swear an oath. 2. And, second, the judge who imposes an

oath of belief, in order to ascertain anything pertinent to his own purpose or

even to the common good, commits a great offence against the

conscientiousness of the party taking such an oath. This he does in regard

both to the levity of mind, which he thereby helps to engender, and to thestings of conscience which a man must feel who to-day regards a subject

from a certain point of view, but who will very probably to-morrow find it

quite improbable from another point of view. Any one, therefore, who is

compelled to take such an oath, is subjected to an injury.Transition from the Mine and Thine in the State of Nature to the Mine

                  and Thine in the Juridical State Generally.

 

 

    41. Public Justice as Related to the Natural and the Civil State.

 

 

              The juridical state is that relation of men to one another which

contains the conditions under which it is alone possible for every one to

obtain the right that is his due. The formal principle of the possibility of

actually participating in such right, viewed in accordance with the idea of a

universally legislative will, is public justice. Public justice may be considered

in relation either to the possibility, or actuality, or necessity of the possession

of objects — regarded as the matter of the activity of the will — according to

laws. It may thus be divided into protective justice (justitia testatrix),

commutative justice (justitia commutativa), and distributive justice (justitia

distributiva), in the first mode of justice, the law declares merely what

relation is internally right in respect of form (lex justi); in the second, it

declares what is likewise externally in accord with a law in respect of the

object, and what possession is rightful (lex juridica); and in the third, it

declares what is right, and what is just, and to what extent, by the judgement

of a court in any particular case coming under the given law. In this latter

relation, the public court is called the justice of the country; and the question

whether there actually is or is not such an administration of public justice

may be regarded as the most important of all juridical interests.

              The non-juridical state is that condition of society in which there is

no distributive justice. It is commonly called the natural state (status

naturalis), or the state of nature. It is not the social state, as Achenwall puts it,

for this may be in itself an artificial state (status artificialis), that is to be

contradistinguished from the “natural” state. The opposite of the state of

nature is the civil state (status civilis) as the condition of a society standing

under a distributive justice. In the state of nature, there may even be juridical

forms of society such as marriage, parental authority, the household, and such

like. For none of these, however, does any law a priori lay it down as anincumbent obligation: “Thou shalt enter into this state.” But it may be said of

the juridical state that: “All men who may even involuntarily come into

relations of right with one another ought to enter into this state.”

              The natural or non-juridical social state may be viewed as the sphere

of private right, and the civil state may be specially regarded as the sphere of

public right. The latter state contains no more and no other duties of men

towards each other than what may be conceived in connection with the

former state; the matter of private right is, in short, the very same in both. The

laws of the civil state, therefore, only turn upon the juridical form of the

coexistence of men under a common constitution; and, in this respect, these

laws must necessarily be regarded and conceived as public laws.

              The civil union (unio civilis) cannot, in the strict sense, be properly

called a society; for there is no sociality in common between the ruler

(imperans) and the subject (subditus) under a civil constitution. They are not

co-ordinated as associates in a society with each other, but the one is

subordinated to the other. Those who may be co-ordinated with one another

must consider themselves as mutually equal, in so far as they stand under

common laws. The civil union may therefore be regarded not so much as

being, but rather as making a society.                        42. The Postulate of Public Right.

 

 

              From the conditions of private right in the natural state, there arises

the postulate of public right. It may be thus expressed: “In the relation of

unavoidable coexistence with others, thou shalt pass from the state of nature

into a juridical union constituted under the condition of a distributive justice.”

The principle of this postulate may be unfolded analytically from the

conception of right in the external relation, contradistinguished from mere

might as violence.

              No one is under obligation to abstain from interfering with the

possession of others, unless they give him a reciprocal guarantee for the

observance of a similar abstention from interference with his possession. Nor

does he require to wait for proof by experience of the need of this guarantee,

in view of the antagonistic disposition of others. He is therefore under no

obligation to wait till he acquires practical prudence at his own cost; for he

can perceive in himself evidence of the natural inclination of men to play the

master over others, and to disregard the claims of the right of others, when

they feel themselves their superiors by might or fraud. And thus it is not

necessary to wait for the melancholy experience of actual hostility; the

individual is from the first entitled to exercise a rightful compulsion towards

those who already threaten him by their very nature. Quilibet praesumitur

malus, donec securitatem dederit oppositi.

              So long as the intention to live and continue in this state of

externally lawless freedom prevails, men may be said to do no wrong or

injustice at all to one another, even when they wage war against each other.

For what seems competent as good for the one is equally valid for the other,

as if it were so by mutual agreement. Uti partes de jure suo disponunt, ita jus

est. But generally they must be considered as being in the highest state of

wrong, as being and willing to be in a condition which is not juridical, and in

which, therefore, no one can be secured against violence, in the possession of

his own.

              The distinction between what is only formally and what is also

materially wrong, and unjust, finds frequent application in the science ofright. An enemy who, on occupying a besieged fortress, instead of

honourably fulfilling the conditions of a capitulation, maltreats the garrison

on marching out, or otherwise violates the agreement, cannot complain of

injury or wrong if on another occasion the same treatment is inflicted upon

themselves. But, in fact, all such actions fundamentally involve the

commission of wrong and injustice, in the highest degree; because they take

all validity away from the conception of right, and give up everything, as it

were by law itself, to savage violence, and thus overthrow the rights of men

generally.

 

                   SECOND PART. PUBLIC RIGHT.

 

 

    The System of those Laws which require Public Promulgation.

 

 

                    The Principles of Right in Civil Society.

 

 

                  43. Definition and Division of Public Right.

 

 

              Public right embraces the whole of the laws that require to be

universally promulgated in order to produce juridical state of society. It is

therefore a system of those laws that are requisite for a people as a multitude

of men forming a nation, or for a number of nations, in their relations to each

other. Men and nations, on account of their mutual influence on one another,

require a juridical constitution uniting them under one will, in order that they

may participate in what is right. This relation of the individuals of a nation to

each other constitutes the civil union in the social state; and, viewed as a

whole in relation to its constituent members, it forms the political state

(civitas).

              1. The state, as constituted by the common interest of all to live in a

juridical union, is called, in view of its form, the commonwealth or the

republic in the wider sense of the term (res publica latius sic dicta). The

principles of right in this sphere thus constitute the first department of public

right as the right of the state (jus civitatis) or national right. 2. The state,

again, viewed in relation to other peoples, is called a power (potentia),

whence arises the idea of potentates. Viewed in relation to the supposed

hereditary unity of the people composing it, the state constitutes a nation

(gens). Under the general conception of public right, in addition to the right

of the individual state, there thus arises another department of right,

constituting the right of nations (jus gentium) or international right. 3.

Further, as the surface of the earth is not unlimited in extent, but iscircumscribed into a unity, national right and international right necessarily

culminate in the idea of a universal right of mankind, which may be called

Cosmopolitical Right (jus cosmopoliticum). And national, international, and

cosmopolitical right are so interconnected, that, if any one of these three

possible forms of the juridical relation fails to embody the essential principles

that ought to regulate external freedom by law, the structure of legislation

reared by the others will also be undermined, and the whole system would at

last fall to pieces.      I. Right of the State and Constitutional Law. (Jus Civitatis).

 

 

              44. Origin Of the Civil Union and Public Right.

 

 

              It is not from any experience prior to the appearance of an external

authoritative legislation that we learn of the maxim of natural violence among

men and their evil tendency to engage in war with each other. Nor is it

assumed here that it is merely some particular historical condition or fact, that

makes public legislative constraint necessary; for however well-disposed or

favourable to right men may be considered to be of themselves, the rational

idea of a state of society not yet regulated by right, must be taken as our

starting-point. This idea implies that before a legal state of society can be

publicly established, individual men, nations, and states, can never be safe

against violence from each other; and this is evident from the consideration

that every one of his own will naturally does what seems good and right in

his own eyes, entirely independent of the opinion of others. Hence, unless the

institution of right is to be renounced, the first thing incumbent on men is to

accept the principle that it is necessary to leave the state of nature, in which

every one follows his own inclinations, and to form a union of all those who

cannot avoid coming into reciprocal communication, and thus subject

themselves in common to the external restraint of public compulsory laws.

Men thus enter into a civil union, in which every one has it determined by

law what shall be recognized as his; and this is secured to him by a competent

external power distinct from his own individuality. Such is the primary

obligation, on the part of all men, to enter into the relations of a civil state of

society.

              The natural condition of mankind need not, on this ground, be

represented as a state of absolute injustice, as if there could have been no

other relation originally among men but what was merely determined by

force. But this natural condition must be regarded, if it ever existed, as a state

of society that was void of regulation by right (status justitiae vacuus), so that

if a matter of right came to be in dispute (jus controversum), no competentjudge was found to give an authorized legal decision upon it. It is therefore

reasonable that any one should constrain another by force, to pass from such

a nonjuridical state of life and enter within the jurisdiction of a civil state of

society. For, although on the basis of the ideas of right held by individuals as

such, external things may be acquired by occupancy or contract, yet such

acquisition is only provisory so long as it has not yet obtained the sanction of

a public law. Till this sanction is reached, the condition of possession is not

determined by any public distributive justice, nor is it secured by any power

exercising public right.

              If men were not disposed to recognize any acquisition at all as

rightful — even in a provisional way — prior to entering into the civil state,

this state of society would itself be impossible. For the laws regarding the

mine and thine in the state of nature, contain formally the very same thing as

they prescribe in the civil state, when it is viewed merely according to

rational conceptions: only that in the forms of the civil state the conditions

are laid down under which the formal prescriptions of the state of nature

attain realization conformable to distributive justice. Were there, then, not

even provisionally, an external meum and tuum in the state of nature, neither

would there be any juridical duties in relation to them; and, consequently,

there would be no obligation to pass out of that state into another.              45. The Form of the State and its Three Powers.

 

 

              A state (civitas) is the union of a number of men under juridical

laws. These laws, as such, are to be regarded as necessary a priorithat is, as

following of themselves from the conceptions of external right generally —

and not as merely established by statute. The form of the state is thus

involved in the idea of the state, viewed as it ought to be according to pure

principles of right; and this ideal form furnishes the normal criterion of every

real union that constitutes a commonwealth.

              Every state contains in itself three powers, the universal united will

of the people being thus personified in a political triad. These are the

legislative power, the executive power, and the judiciary power. 1. The

legislative power of the sovereignty in the state is embodied in the person of

the lawgiver; 2. the executive power is embodied in the person of the ruler

who administers the Law; and 3. the judiciary power, embodied in the person

of the judge, is the function of assigning every one what is his own,

according to the law (potestas legislatoria, rectoria, et judiciaria). These three

powers may be compared to the three propositions in a practical syllogism:

the major as the sumption laying down the universal law of a will, the minor

presenting the command applicable to an action according to the law as the

principle of the subsumption, and the conclusion containing the sentence, or

judgement of right, in the particular case under consideration.        46. The Legislative Power and the Members of the State.

 

 

              The legislative power, viewed in its rational principle, can only

belong to the united will of the people. For, as all right ought to proceed from

this power, it is necessary that its laws should be unable to do wrong to any

one whatever. Now, if any one individual determines anything in the state in

contradistinction to another, it is always possible that he may perpetrate a

wrong on that other; but this is never possible when all determine and decree

what is to be Law to themselves. Volenti non fit injuria. Hence it is only the

united and consenting will of all the people — in so far as each of them

determines the same thing about all, and all determine the same thing about

each — that ought to have the power of enacting law in the state.

              The members of a civil society thus united for the purpose of

legislation, and thereby constituting a state, are called its citizens; and there

are three juridical attributes that inseparably belong to them by right. These

are: 1. constitutional freedom, as the right of every citizen to have to obey no

other law than that to which he has given his consent or approval; 2. civil

equality, as the right of the citizen to recognise no one as a superior among

the people in relation to himself, except in so far as such a one is as subject to

his moral power to impose obligations, as that other has power to impose

obligations upon him; and 3. political independence, as the light to owe his

existence and continuance in society not to the arbitrary will of another, but

to his own rights and powers as a member of the commonwealth, and,

consequently, the possession of a civil personality, which cannot be

represented by any other than himself.

              The capability of voting by possession of the suffrage properly

constitutes the political qualification of a citizen as a member of the state. But

this, again, presupposes the independence or self-sufficiency of the individual

citizen among the people, as one who is not a mere incidental part of the

commonwealth, but a member of it acting of his own will in community with

others. The last of the three qualities involved necessarily constitutes the

distinction between active and passive citizenship; although the latter

conception appears to stand in contradiction to the definition of a citizen assuch. The following examples may serve to remove this difficulty. The

apprentice of a merchant or tradesman, a servant who is not in the employ of

the state, a minor (naturaliter vel civiliter), all women, and, generally, every

one who is compelled to maintain himself not according to his own industry,

but as it is arranged by others (the state excepted), are without civil

personality, and their existence is only, as it were, incidentally included in the

state. The woodcutter whom I employ on my estate; the smith in India who

carries his hammer, anvil, and bellows into the houses where he is engaged to

work in iron, as distinguished from the European carpenter or smith, who can

offer the independent products of his labour as wares for public sale; the

resident tutor as distinguished from the schoolmaster; the ploughman as

distinguished from the farmer and such like, illustrate the distinction in

question. In all these cases, the former members of the contrast are

distinguished from the latter by being mere subsidiaries of the

commonwealth and not active independent members of it, because they are of

necessity commanded and protected by others, and consequently possess no

political self-sufficiency in themselves. Such dependence on the will of

others and the consequent inequality are, however, not inconsistent with the

freedom and equality of the individuals as men helping to constitute the

people. Much rather is it the case that it is only under such conditions that a

people can become a state and enter into a civil constitution. But all are not

equally qualified to exercise the right of suffrage under the constitution, and

to be full citizens of the state, and not mere passive subjects under its

protection. For, although they are entitled to demand to be treated by all the

other citizens according to laws of natural freedom and equality, as passive

parts of the state, it does not follow that they ought themselves to have the

right to deal with the state as active members of it, to reorganize it, or to take

action by way of introducing certain laws. All they have a right in their

circumstances to claim may be no more than that whatever be the mode in

which the positive laws are enacted, these laws must not be contrary to the

natural laws that demand the freedom of all the people and the equality that is

conformable thereto; and it must therefore be made possible for them to raise

themselves from this passive condition in the state to the condition of active

citizenship.            47. Dignities in the State and the Original Contract.

 

 

              All these three powers in the state are dignities; and, as necessarily

arising out of the idea of the state and essential generally to the foundation of

its constitution, they are to be regarded as political dignities. They imply the

relation between a universal sovereign as head of the state — which

according to the laws of freedom can be none other than the people itself

united into a nation — and the mass of the individuals of the nation as

subjects. The former member of the relation is the ruling power, whose

function is to govern (imperans); the latter is the ruled constituents of the

state, whose function is to obey (subditi).

              The act by which a people is represented as constituting itself into a

state, is termed the original contract. This is properly only an outward mode

of representing the idea by which the rightfulness of the process of

organizing the constitution may be made conceivable. According to this

representation, all and each of the people give up their external freedom in

order to receive it immediately again as members of a commonwealth. The

commonwealth is the people viewed as united altogether into a state. And

thus it is not to be said that the individual in the state has sacrificed a part of

his inborn external freedom for a particular purpose; but he has abandoned

his wild lawless freedom wholly, in order to find all his proper freedom again

entire and undiminished, but in the form of a regulated order of dependence,

that is, in a civil state regulated by laws of right. This relation of dependence

thus arises out of his own regulative law giving will.    48. Mutual Relations and Characteristics of the Three Powers.

 

 

              The three powers in the state, as regards their relations to each other,

are, therefore: (1) coordinate with one another as so many moral persons, and

the one is thus the complement of the other in the way of completing the

constitution of the state; (2) they are likewise subordinate to one another, so

that the one cannot at the same time usurp the function of the other by whose

side it moves, each having its own principle and maintaining its authority in a

particular person, but under the condition of the will of a superior; and

further, (3) by the union of both these relations, they assign distributively to

every subject in the state his own rights.

              Considered as to their respective dignity, the three powers may be

thus described. The will of the sovereign legislator, in respect of what

constitutes the external mine and thine, is to be regarded as irreprehensible;

the executive function of the supreme ruler is to be regarded as irresistible;

and the judicial sentence of the supreme judge is to be regarded as

irreversible, being beyond appeal.  49. Distinct Functions of the Three Powers. Autonomy of the State

 

 

              1. The executive power belongs to the governor or regent of the

state, whether it assumes the form of a moral or individual person, as the king

or prince (rex, princeps). This executive authority, as the supreme agent of

the state, appoints the magistrates, and prescribes the rules to the people, in

accordance with which individuals may acquire anything or maintain what is

their own conformably to the law, each case being brought under its

application. Regarded as a moral person, this executive authority constitutes

the government. The orders issued by the government to the people and the

magistrates, as well as to the higher ministerial administrators of the state

(gubernatio), are rescripts or decrees, and not laws; for they terminate in the

decision of particular cases, and are given forth as unchangeable. A

government acting as an executive, and at the same time laying down the law

as the legislative power, would be a despotic government, and would have to

be contradistinguished from a patriotic government. A patriotic government,

again, is to be distinguished from a paternal government (regimen paternale)

which is the most despotic government of all, the citizens being dealt with by

it as mere children. A patriotic government, however, is one in which the

state, while dealing with the subjects as if they were members of a family,

still treats them likewise as citizens, and according to laws that recognize

their independence, each individual possessing himself and not being

dependent on the absolute will of another beside him or above him.

              2. The legislative authority ought not at the same time to be the

executive or governor; for the governor, as administrator, should stand under

the authority of the law, and is bound by it under the supreme control of the

legislator. The legislative authority may therefore deprive the governor of his

power, depose him, or reform his administration, but not punish him. This is

the proper and only meaning of the common saying in England, “The King

— as the supreme executive power — can do no wrong.” For any such

application of punishment would necessarily be an act of that very executive

power to which the supreme right to compel according to law pertains, and

which would itself be thus subjected to coercion; which is self-contradictory.              3. Further, neither the legislative power nor the executive power

ought to exercise the judicial function, but only appoint judges as magistrates.

It is the people who ought to judge themselves, through those of the citizens

who are elected by free choice as their representatives for this purpose, and

even specially for every process or cause. For the judicial sentence is a

special act of public distributive justice performed by a judge or court as a

constitutional administrator of the law, to a subject as one of the people. Such

an act is not invested inherently with the power to determine and assign to

any one what is his. Every individual among the people being merely passive

in this relation to the supreme power, either the executive or the legislative

authority might do him wrong in their determinations in cases of dispute

regarding the property of individuals. It would not be the people themselves

who thus determined, or who pronounced the judgements of “guilty” or “not

guilty” regarding their fellow-citizens. For it is to the determination of this

issue in a cause that the court has to apply the law; and it is by means of the

executive authority, that the judge holds power to assign to every one his

own. Hence it is only the people that properly can judge in a cause —

although indirectly representatives elected and deputed by themselves, as in a

jury. It would even be beneath the dignity of the sovereign head of the state

to play the judge; for this would be to put himself into a position in which it

would be possible to do wrong, and thus to subject himself to the demand for

an appeal to a still higher power (a rege male informato ad regem melius

informandum).

              It is by the co-operation of these three powers — the legislative, the

executive, and the judicial — that the state realizes its autonomy. This

autonomy consists in its organizing, forming, and maintaining itself in

accordance with the laws of freedom. In their union the welfare of the state is
                                              5
realized. Salus reipublicae suprema lex. By this is not to be understood

merely the individual well-being and happiness of the citizens of the state; for

— as Rousseau asserts — this end may perhaps be more agreeably and more

desirably attained in the state of nature, or even under a despotic government.

But the welfare of the state, as its own highest good, signifies that condition

in which the greatest harmony is attained between its constitution and the

principles of right — a condition of the state which reason by a categorical

imperative makes it obligatory upon us to strive after.

        5
               [“The health of the state is the highest law.”]  Constitutional and Juridical Consequences arising from the Nature of

                                  the Civil Union.

 

 

A. Right of the Supreme Power; Treason; Dethronement; Revolution;

                                        Reform.

 

 

              The origin of the supreme power is practically inscrutable by the

people who are placed under its authority. In other words, the subject need

not reason too curiously in regard to its origin in the practical relation, as if

the right of the obedience due to it were to be doubted (jus controversum).

For as the people, in order to be able to abjudicate with a title of right

regarding the supreme power in the state, must be regarded as already united

under one common legislative will, it cannot judge otherwise than as the

present supreme head of the state (summus imperans) wills. The question has

been raised as to whether an actual contract of subjection (pactum

subjectionis civilis) originally preceded the civil government as a fact; or

whether the power arose first, and the law only followed afterwards, or may

have followed in this order. But such questions, as regards the people already

actually living under the civil law, are either entirely aimless, or even fraught

with subtle danger to the state. For, should the subject, after having dug down

to the ultimate origin of the state, rise in opposition to the present ruling

authority, he would expose himself as a citizen, according to the law and with

full right, to be punished, destroyed, or outlawed. A law which is so holy and

inviolable that it is practically a crime even to cast doubt upon it, or to

suspend its operation for a moment, is represented of itself as necessarily

derived from some supreme, unblameable lawgiver. And this is the meaning

of the maxim, “All authority is from God”, which proposition does not

express the historical foundation of the civil constitution, but an ideal

principle of the practical reason. It may be otherwise rendered thus: “It is a

duty to obey the law of the existing legislative power, be its origin what it

may.”

              Hence it follows, that the supreme power in the state has only rights,

and no (compulsory) duties towards the subject. Further, if the ruler or regent,

as the organ of the supreme power, proceeds in violation of the laws, as inimposing taxes, recruiting soldiers, and so on, contrary to the law of equality

in the distribution of the political burdens, the subject may oppose complaints

and objections (gravamina) to this injustice, but not active resistance.

              There cannot even be an Article contained in the political

constitution that would make it possible for a power in the state, in case of

the transgression of the constitutional laws by the supreme authority, to resist

or even to restrict it in so doing. For, whoever would restrict the supreme

power of the state must have more, or at least equal, power as compared with

the power that is so restricted; and if competent to command the subjects to

resist, such a one would also have to be able to protect them, and if he is to be

considered capable of judging what is right in every case, he may also

publicly order resistance. But such a one, and not the actual authority, would

then be the supreme power; which is contradictory. The supreme sovereign

power, then, in proceeding by a minister who is at the same time the ruler of

the state, consequently becomes despotic; and the expedient of giving the

people to imagine — when they have properly only legislative influence —

that they act by their deputies by way of limiting the sovereign authority,

cannot so mask and disguise the actual despotism of such a government that

it will not appear in the measures and means adopted by the minister to carry

out his function. The people, while represented by their deputies in

parliament, under such conditions, may have in these warrantors of their

freedom and rights, persons who are keenly interested on their own account

and their families, and who look to such a minister for the benefit of his

influence in the army, navy, and public offices. And hence, instead of

offering resistance to the undue pretensions of the government — whose

public declarations ought to carry a prior accord on the part of the people,

which, however, cannot be allowed in peace, they are rather always ready to

play into the hands of the government. Hence the so-called limited political

constitution, as a constitution of the internal rights of the state, is an unreality;

and instead of being consistent with right, it is only a principle of expediency.

And its aim is not so much to throw all possible obstacles in the way of a

powerful violator of popular rights by his arbitrary influence upon the

government, as rather to cloak it over under the illusion of a right of

opposition conceded to the people.

              Resistance on the part of the people to the supreme legislative power

of the state is in no case legitimate; for it is only by submission to theuniversal legislative will, that a condition of law and order is possible. Hence

there is no right of sedition, and still less of rebellion, belonging to the

people. And least of all, when the supreme power is embodied in an

individual monarch, is there any justification, under the pretext of his abuse

of power, for seizing his person or taking away his life (monarchomachismus

sub specie tyrannicidii). The slightest attempt of this kind is high treason

(proditio eminens); and a traitor of this sort who aims at the overthrow of his

country may be punished, as a political parricide, even with death. It is the

duty of the people to bear any abuse of the supreme power, even then though

it should be considered to be unbearable. And the reason is that any

resistance of the highest legislative authority can never but be contrary to the

law, and must even be regarded as tending to destroy the whole legal

constitution. In order to be entitled to offer such resistance, a public law

would be required to permit it. But the supreme legislation would by such a

law cease to be supreme, and the people as subjects would be made sovereign

over that to which they are subject; which is a contradiction. And the

contradiction becomes more apparent when the question is put: “Who is to be

the judge in a controversy between the people and the sovereign?” For the

people and the sovereign are to be constitutionally or juridically regarded as

two different moral persons; but the question shows that the people would

then have to be the judge in their own cause.

              The dethronement of a monarch may be also conceived as a

voluntary abdication of the crown, and a resignation of his power into the

hands of the people; or it might be a deliberate surrender of these without any

assault on the royal person, in order that the monarch may be relegated into

private life. But, however it happen, forcible compulsion of it, on the part of

the people, cannot be justified under the pretext of a right of necessity (casus

necessitatis); and least of all can the slightest right be shown for punishing

the sovereign on the ground of previous maladministration. For all that has

been already done in the quality of a sovereign must be regarded as done

outwardly by right; and, considered as the source of the laws, the sovereign

himself can do no wrong. Of all the abominations in the overthrow of a state

by revolution, even the murder or assassination of the monarch is not the

worst. For that may be done by the people out of fear, lest, if he is allowed to

live, he may again acquire power and inflict punishment upon them; and so it

may be done, not as an act of punitive justice, but merely from regard to self-

preservation. It is the formal execution of a monarch that horrifies a soulfilled with ideas of human right; and this feeling occurs again and again as of

as the mind realizes the scenes that terminated the fate of Charles I or Louis

XVI. Now how is this feeling to be explained? It is not a mere aesthetic

feeling, arising from the working of the imagination, nor from sympathy,

produced by fancying ourselves in the place of the sufferer. On the contrary,

it is a moral feeling arising from the entire subversion of all our notions of

right. Regicide, in short, is regarded as a crime which always remains such

and can never be expiated (crimen immortale, inexpiabile); and it appears to

resemble that sin which the theologians declare can neither be forgiven in this

world nor in the next. The explanation of this phenomenon in the human

mind appears to be furnished by the following reflections upon it; and they

even shed some light upon the principles of political right.

              Every transgression of a law only can and must be explained as

arising from a maxim of the transgressor making such wrong-doing his rule

of action; for were it not committed by him as a free being, it could not be

imputed to him. But it is absolutely impossible to explain how any rational

individual forms such a maxim against the clear prohibition of the law-giving

reason; for it is only events which happen according to the mechanical laws

of nature that are capable of explanation. Now a transgressor or criminal may

commit his wrong-doing either according to the maxim of a rule supposed to

be valid objectively and universally, or only as an exception from the rule by

dispensing with its obligation for the occasion. In the latter case, he only

diverges from the law, although intentionally. He may, at the same time,

abhor his own transgression, and without formally renouncing his obedience

to the law only wish to avoid it. In the former case, however, he rejects the

authority of the law itself, the validity of which, however, he cannot repudiate

before his own reason, even while he makes it his rule to act against it. His

maxim is, therefore, not merely defective as being negatively contrary to the

law, but it is even positively illegal, as being diametrically contrary and in

hostile opposition to it. So far as we can see into and understand the relation,

it would appear as if it were impossible for men to commit wrongs and

crimes of a wholly useless form of wickedness, and yet the idea of such

extreme perversity cannot be overlooked in a system of moral philosophy.

              There is thus a feeling of horror at the thought of the formal

execution of a monarch by his people. And the reason it is that, whereas an

act of assassination must be considered as only an exception from the rulewhich has been constituted a maxim, such an execution must be regarded as a

complete perversion of the principles that should regulate the relation

between a sovereign and his people. For it makes the people, who owe their

constitutional existence to the legislation that issued from the sovereign, to be

the ruler over him. Hence mere violence is thus elevated with bold brow, and

as it were by principle, above the holiest right; and, appearing like an abyss to

swallow up everything without recall, it seems like suicide committed by the

state upon itself and a crime that is capable of no atonement. There is

therefore reason to assume that the consent that is accorded to such

executions is not really based upon a supposed principle of right, but only

springs from fear of the vengeance that would be taken upon the people were

the same power to revive again in the state. And hence it may be held that the

formalities accompanying them have only been put forward in order to give

these deeds a look of punishment from the accompaniment of a judicial

process, such as could not go along with a mere murder or assassination. But

such a cloaking of the deed entirely fails of its purpose, because this

pretension on the part of the people is even worse than murder itself, as it

implies a principle which would necessarily make the restoration of a state,

when once overthrown, an impossibility.

              An alteration of the still defective constitution of the state may

sometimes be quite necessary. But all such changes ought only to proceed

from the sovereign power in the way of reform, and are not to be brought

about by the people in the way of revolution; and when they take place, they

should only effect the executive, and not the legislative, power. A political

constitution which is so modified that the people by their representatives in

parliament can legally resist the executive power, and its representative

minister, is called a limited constitution. Yet even under such a constitution

there is no right of active resistance, as by an arbitrary combination of the

people to coerce the government into a certain active procedure; for this

would be to assume to perform an act of the executive itself. All that can

rightly be allowed, is only a negative resistance, amounting to an act of

refusal on the part of the people to concede all the demands which the

executive may deem it necessary to make in behoof of the political

administration. And if this right were never exercised, it would be a sure sign

that the people were corrupted, their representatives venal, the supreme head

of the government despotic, and his ministers practically betrayers of the

people.              Further, when on the success of a revolution a new constitution has

been founded, the unlawfulness of its beginning and of its institution cannot

release the subjects from the obligation of adapting themselves, as good

citizens, to the new order of things; and they are not entitled to refuse

honourably to obey the authority that has thus attained the power in the state.

A dethroned monarch, who has survived such a revolution, is not to be called

to account on the ground of his former administration; and still less may he

be punished for it, when with drawing into the private life of a citizen he

prefers his own quiet and the peace of the state to the uncertainty of exile,

with the intention of maintaining his claims for restoration at all hazards, and

pushing these either by secret counter-revolution or by the assistance of other

powers. However, if he prefers to follow the latter course, his rights remain,

because the rebellion that drove him from his position was inherently unjust.

But the question then emerges as to whether other powers have the right to

form themselves into an alliance in behalf of such a dethroned monarch

merely in order not to leave the crime committed by the people unavenged, or

to do away with it as a scandal to all the states; and whether they are therefore

justified and called upon to restore by force to another state a formerly

existing constitution that has been removed by a revolution. The discussion

of this question, however, does not belong to this department of public right,

but to the following section, concerning the right of nations.

    B. Land Rights. Secular and Church Lands, Rights of Taxation;

                            Finance; Police; Inspection.

 

 

              Is the sovereign, viewed as embodying the legislative power, to be

regarded as the supreme proprietor of the soil, or only as the highest ruler of

the people by the laws? As the soil is the supreme condition under which it is

alone possible to have external things as one’s own, its possible possession

and use constitute the first acquirable basis of external right. Hence it is that

all such rights must be derived from the sovereign as overlord and paramount

superior of the soil, or, as it may be better put, as the supreme proprietor of

the land (dominus territorii). The people, as forming the mass of the subjects,

belong to the sovereign as a people; not in the sense of his being their

proprietor in the way of real right, but as their supreme commander or chief

in the way of personal right. This supreme proprietorship, however, is only an

idea of the civil constitution, objectified to represent, in accordance withjuridical conceptions, the necessary union of the private property of all the

people under a public universal possessor. The relation is so represented in

order that it may form a basis for the determination of particular rights in

property. It does not proceed, therefore, upon the principle of mere

aggregation, which advances empirically from the parts to the whole, but

from the necessary formal principle of a division of the soil according to

conceptions of right. In accordance with this principle, the supreme universal

proprietor cannot have any private property in any part of the soil; for

otherwise he would make himself a private person. Private property in the

soil belongs only to the people, taken distributively and not collectively; from

which condition, however, a nomadic people must be excepted as having no

private property at all in the soil. The supreme proprietor accordingly ought

not to hold private estates, either for private use or for the support of the

court. For, as it would depend upon his own pleasure how far these should

extend, the state would be in danger of seeing all property in the land taken

into the hands of the government, and all the subjects treated as bondsmen of

the soil (glebae adscripti). As possessors only of what was the private

property of another, they might thus be deprived of all freedom and regarded

as serfs or slaves. Of the supreme proprietor of the land, it may be said that

he possesses nothing as his own, except himself; for if he possessed things in

the state alongside of others, dispute and litigation would be possible with

these others regarding those things, and there would be no independent judge

to settle the cause. But it may also be said that he possesses everything; for he

has the supreme right of sovereignty over the whole people, to whom all

external things severally (divisim) belong; and as such he assigns

distributively to every one what is to be his.

              Hence there cannot be any corporation in the state, nor any class or

order, that as proprietors can transmit the land for a sole exclusive use to the

following generations for all time (ad infinitum), according to certain fixed

statutes. The state may annul and abrogate all such statutes at any time, only

under the condition of indemnifying survivors for their interests. The order of

knights, constituting the nobility regarded as a mere rank or class of specially

titled individuals, as well as the order of the clergy, called the church, are

both subject to this relation. They can never be entitled by any hereditary

privileges with which they may be favoured, to acquire an absolute property

in the soil transmissible to their successors. They can only acquire the use of

such property for the time being. If public opinion has ceased, on account ofother arrangements, to impel the state to protect itself from negligence in the

national defence by appeal to the military honour of the knightly order, the

estates granted on that condition may be recalled. And, in like manner, the

church lands or spiritualities may be reclaimed by the state without scruple, if

public opinion has ceased to impel the members of the state to maintain

masses for the souls of the dead, prayers for the living, and a multitude of

clergy, as means to protect themselves from eternal fire. But in both cases,

the condition of indemnifying existing interests must be observed. Those who

in this connection fall under the movement of reform are not entitled to

complain that their property is taken from them; for the foundation of their

previous possession lay only in the opinion of the people, and it can be valid

only so long as this opinion lasts. As soon as this public opinion in favour of

such institutions dies out, or is even extinguished in the judgement of those

who have the greatest claim by their acknowledged merit to lead and

represent it, the putative proprietorship in question must cease, as if by a

public appeal made regarding it to the state (a rege male informato ad regem

melius informandum).

              On this primarily acquired supreme proprietorship in the land rests

the right of the sovereign, as universal proprietor of the country, to assess the

private proprietors of the soil, and to demand taxes, excise, and dues, or the

performance of service to the state such as may be required in war. But this is

to be done so that it is actually the people that assess themselves, this being

the only mode of proceeding according to laws of right. This may be effected

through the medium of the body of deputies who represent the people. It is

also permissible, in circumstances in which the state is in imminent danger,

to proceed by a forced loan, as a right vested in the sovereign, although this

may be a divergence from the existing law.

              Upon this principle is also founded the right of administering the

national economy, including the finance and the police. The police has

specially to care for the public safety, convenience, and decency. As regards

the last of these — the feeling or negative taste for public propriety — it is

important that it be not deadened by such influences as begging, disorderly

noises, offensive smells, public prostitution (Venus vulgivaga), or other

offences against the moral sense, as it greatly facilitates the government in

the task of regulating the life of the people by law.

              For the preservation of the state there further belongs to it a right ofinspection (jus inspectionis), which entitles the public authority to see that no

secret society, political or religious, exists among the people that can exert a

prejudicial influence upon the public weal. Accordingly, when it is required

by the police, no such secret society may refuse to lay open its constitution.

But the visitation and search of private houses by the police can only be

justified in a case of necessity; and in every particular instance, it must be

authorized by a higher authority.

        C. Relief of the Poor. Foundling Hospitals. The Church.

 

 

              The sovereign, as undertaker of the duty of the people, has the right

to tax them for purposes essentially connected with their own preservation.

Such are, in particular, the relief of the poor, foundling asylums, and

ecclesiastical establishments, otherwise designated charitable or pious

foundations.

              1. The people have in fact united themselves by their common will

into a society, which has to be perpetually maintained; and for this purpose

they have subjected themselves to the internal power of the state, in order to

preserve the members of this society even when they are not able to support

themselves. By the fundamental principle of the state, the government is

justified and entitled to compel those who are able, to furnish the means

necessary to preserve those who are not themselves capable of providing for

the most necessary wants of nature. For the existence of persons with

property in the state implies their submission under it for protection and the

provision by the state of what is necessary for their existence; and

accordingly the state founds a right upon an obligation on their part to

contribute of their means for the preservation of their fellow citizens. This

may be carried out by taxing the property or the commercial industry of the

citizens, or by establishing funds and drawing interest from them, not for the

wants of the state as such, which is rich, but for those of the people. And this

is not to be done merely by voluntary contributions, but by compulsory

exactions as state-burdens, for we are here considering only the right of the

state in relation to the people. Among the voluntary modes of raising such

contributions, lotteries ought not to be allowed, because they increase the

number of those who are poor, and involve danger to the public property. It

may be asked whether the relief of the poor ought to be administered out ofcurrent contributions, so that every age should maintain its own poor; or

whether this were better done by means of permanent funds and charitable

institutions, such as widows’ homes, hospitals, etc.? And if the former

method is the better, it may also be considered whether the means necessary

are to be raised by a legal assessment rather than by begging, which is

generally nigh akin to robbing. The former method must in reality be

regarded as the only one that is conformable to the right of the state, which

cannot withdraw its connection from any one who has to live. For a legal

current provision does not make the profession of poverty a means of gain for

the indolent, as is to be feared is the case with pious foundations when they

grow with the number of the poor; nor can it be charged with being an unjust

or unrighteous burden imposed by the government on the people.

              2. The state has also a right to impose upon the people the duty of

preserving children exposed from want or shame, and who would otherwise

perish; for it cannot knowingly allow this increase of its power to be

destroyed, however unwelcome in some respects it may be. But it is a

difficult question to determine how this may most justly be carried out. It

might be considered whether it would not be right to exact contributions for

this purpose from the unmarried persons of both sexes who are possessed of

means, as being in part responsible for the evil; and further, whether the end

in view would be best carried out by foundling hospitals, or in what other

way consistent with right. But this is a problem of which no solution has yet

been offered that does not in some measure offend against right or morality.

              3. The church is here regarded as an ecclesiastical establishment

merely, and as such it must be carefully distinguished from religion, which as

an internal mode of feeling lies wholly beyond the sphere of the action of the

civil power. Viewed as an institution for public worship founded for the

people — to whose opinion or conviction it owes its origin — the church

establishment responds to a real want in the state. This is the need felt by the

people to regard themselves as also subjects of a Supreme Invisible Power to

which they must pay homage, and which may of be brought into a very

undesirable collision with the civil power. The state has therefore a right in

this relation; but it is not to be regarded as the right of constitutional

legislation in the church, so as to organize it as may seem most advantageous

for itself, or to prescribe and command its faith and ritual forms of worship

(ritus); for all this must be left entirely to the teachers and rulers which thechurch has chosen for itself. The function of the state in this connection, only

includes the negative right of regulating the influence of these public teachers

upon the visible political commonwealth, that it may not be prejudicial to the

public peace and tranquility. Consequently the state has to take measures, on

occasion of any internal conflict in the church, or on occasion of any collision

of the several churches with each other, that civil concord is not endangered;

and this right falls within the province of the police. It is beneath the dignity

of the supreme power to interpose in determining what particular faith the

church shall profess, or to decree that a certain faith shall be unalterably held,

and that the church may not reform itself. For in doing so, the supreme power

would be mixing itself up in a scholastic wrangle, on a footing of equality

with its subjects; the monarch would be making himself a priest; and the

churchmen might even reproach the supreme power with understanding

nothing about matters of faith. Especially would this hold in respect of any

prohibition of internal reform in the church; for what the people as a whole

cannot determine upon for themselves cannot be determined for the people by

the legislator. But no people can ever rationally determine that they will

never advance farther in their insight into matters of faith, or resolve that they

will never reform the institutions of the church; because this would be

opposed to the humanity in their own persons and to their highest rights. And

therefore the supreme power cannot of itself resolve and decree in these

matters for the people. As regards the cost of maintaining the ecclesiastical

establishment, for similar reasons this must be derived not from the public

funds of the state, but from the section of the people who profess the

particular faith of the church; and thus only ought it to fall as a burden on the

community.

      D. The Right of Assigning Offices and Dignities in the State.

 

 

              The right of the supreme authority in the state also includes:

              1. The distribution of offices, as public and paid employments;

              2. The conferring of dignities, as unpaid distinctions of rank,

founded merely on honour, but establishing a gradation of higher and lower

orders in the political scale; the latter, although free in themselves, being

under obligation determined by the public law to obey the former so far as

they are also entitled to command;              3. Besides these relatively beneficent rights, the supreme power in

the state is also invested with the right of administering punishment.

              As regards civil offices, the question arises as to whether the

sovereign has the right, after bestowing an office on an individual, to take it

again away at his mere pleasure, without any crime having been committed

by the holder of the office. I say, “No.” For what the united will of the people

would never resolve, regarding their civil officers, cannot (constitutionally)

be determined by the sovereign regarding them. The people have to bear the

cost incurred by the appointment of an official, and undoubtedly it must be

their will that any one in office should be completely competent for its duties.

But such competency can only be acquired by a long preparation and

training, and this process would necessarily occupy the time that would be

required for acquiring the means of support by a different occupation.

Arbitrary and frequent changes would therefore, as a rule, have the effect of

filling offices with functionaries who have not acquired the skill required for

their duties, and whose judgements had not attained maturity by practice. All

this is contrary to the purpose of the state. And besides it is requisite in the

interest of the people that it should be possible for every individual to rise

from a lower office to the higher offices, as these latter would otherwise fall

into incompetent hands, and that competent officials generally should have

some guarantee of life-long provision.

              Civil dignities include not only such as are connected with a public

office, but also those which make the possessors of them, without any

accompanying services to the state, members of a higher class or rank. The

latter constitute the nobility, whose members are distinguished from the

common citizens who form the mass of the people. The rank of the nobility is

inherited by male descendants; and these again communicate it to wives who

are not nobly born. Female descendants of noble families, however, do not

communicate their rank to husbands who are not of noble birth, but they

descend themselves into the common civil status of the people. This being so,

the question then emerges as to whether the sovereign has the right to found a

hereditary rank and class, intermediate between himself and the other

citizens? The import of this question does not turn on whether it is

conformable to the prudence of the sovereign, from regard to his own and the

people’s interests, to have such an institution; but whether it is in accordance

with the right of the people that they should have a class of persons abovethem, who, while being subjects like themselves, are yet born as their

commanders, or at least as privileged superiors? The answer to this question,

as in previous instances, is to be derived from the principle that “what the

people, as constituting the whole mass of the subjects, could not determine

regarding themselves and their associated citizens, cannot be constitutionally

determined by the sovereign regarding the people.” Now a hereditary nobility

is a rank which takes precedence of merit and is hoped for without any good

reason — a thing of the imagination without genuine reality. For if an

ancestor had merit, he could not transmit it to his posterity, but they must

always acquire it for themselves. Nature has in fact not so arranged that the

talent and will which give rise to merit in the state, are hereditary. And

because it cannot be supposed of any individual that he will throw away his

freedom, it is impossible that the common will of all the people should agree

to such a groundless prerogative, and hence the sovereign cannot make it

valid. It may happen, however, that such an anomaly as that of subjects who

would be more than citizens, in the manner of born officials, or hereditary

professors, has slipped into the mechanism of government in olden times, as

in the case of the feudal system, which was almost entirely organized with

reference to war. Under such circumstances, the state cannot deal otherwise

with this error of a wrongly instituted rank in its midst, than by the remedy of

a gradual extinction through hereditary positions being left unfilled as they

fall vacant. The state has therefore the right provisorily to let a dignity in title

continue, until the public opinion matures on the subject. And this will thus

pass from the threefold division into sovereign, nobles, and people, to the

twofold and only natural division into sovereign and people.

              No individual in the state can indeed be entirely without dignity; for

he has at least that of being a citizen, except when he has lost his civil status

by a crime. As a criminal he is still maintained in life, but he is made the

mere instrument of the will of another, whether it be the state or a particular

citizen. In the latter position, in which he could only be placed by a juridical

judgement, he would practically become a slave, and would belong as

property (dominium) to another, who would be not merely his master (herus)

but his owner (dominus). Such an owner would be entitled to exchange or

alienate him as a thing, to use him at will except for shameful purposes, and

to dispose of his powers, but not of his life and members. No one can bind

himself to such a condition of dependence, as he would thereby cease to be a

person, and it is only as a person that he can make a contract. It may,however, appear that one man may bind himself to another by a contract of

hire, to discharge a certain service that is permissible in its kind, but is left

entirely undetermined as regards its measure or amount; and that as receiving

wages or board or protection in return, he thus becomes only a servant

subject to the will of a master (subditus) and not a slave (servus). But this is

an illusion. For if masters are entitled to use the powers of such subjects at

will, they may exhaust these powers — as has been done in the case of

Negroes in the Sugar Islandand they may thus reduce their servants to despair

and death. But this would imply that they had actually given themselves away

to their masters as property; which, in the case of persons, is impossible. A

person can, therefore, only contract to perform work that is defined both in

quality and quantity, either as a day-labourer or as a domiciled subject. In the

latter case he may enter into a contract of lease for the use of the land of a

superior, giving a definite rent or annual return for its utilization by himself,

or he may contract for his service as a labourer upon the land. But he does not

thereby make himself a slave, or a bondsman, or a serf attached to the soil

(glebae adscriptus), as he would thus divest himself of his personality; he can

only enter into a temporary or at most a heritable lease. And even if by

committing a crime he has personally become subjected to another, this

subject-condition does not become hereditary; for he has only brought it upon

himself by his own wrongdoing. Neither can one who has been begotten by a

slave be claimed as property on the ground of the cost of his rearing, because

such rearing is an absolute duty naturally incumbent upon parents; and in

case the parents be slaves, it devolves upon their masters or owners, who, in

undertaking the possession of such subjects, have also made themselves

responsible for the performance of their duties.

                E. The Right of Punishing and of Pardoning.

 

 

                            I. The Right of Punishing.

 

 

              The right of administering punishment is the right of the sovereign

as the supreme power to inflict pain upon a subject on account of a crime

committed by him. The head of the state cannot therefore be punished; but

his supremacy may be withdrawn from him. Any transgression of the public

law which makes him who commits it incapable of being a citizen,constitutes a crime, either simply as a private crime (crimen), or also as a

public crime (crimen publicum). Private crimes are dealt with by a civil

court; public crimes by a criminal court. Embezzlement or speculation of

money or goods entrusted in trade, fraud in purchase or sale, if done before

the eyes of the party who suffers, are private crimes. On the other hand,

coining false money or forging bills of exchange, theft, robbery, etc., are

public crimes, because the commonwealth, and not merely some particular

individual, is endangered thereby. Such crimes may be divided into those of a

base character (indolis abjectae) and those of a violent character (indolis

violentiae).

              Judicial or juridical punishment (poena forensis) is to be

distinguished from natural punishment (poena naturalis), in which crime as

vice punishes itself, and does not as such come within the cognizance of the

legislator. juridical punishment can never be administered merely as a means

for promoting another good either with regard to the criminal himself or to

civil society, but must in all cases be imposed only because the individual on

whom it is inflicted has committed a crime. For one man ought never to be

dealt with merely as a means subservient to the purpose of another, nor be

mixed up with the subjects of real right. Against such treatment his inborn

personality has a right to protect him, even although he may be condemned to

lose his civil personality. He must first be found guilty and punishable, before

there can be any thought of drawing from his punishment any benefit for

himself or his fellow-citizens. The penal law is a categorical imperative; and

woe to him who creeps through the serpent-windings of utilitarianism to

discover some advantage that may discharge him from the justice of

punishment, or even from the due measure of it, according to the Pharisaic

maxim: “It is better that one man should die than that the whole people

should perish.” For if justice and righteousness perish, human life would no

longer have any value in the world. What, then, is to be said of such a

proposal as to keep a criminal alive who has been condemned to death, on his

being given to understand that, if he agreed to certain dangerous experiments

being performed upon him, he would be allowed to survive if he came

happily through them? It is argued that physicians might thus obtain new

information that would be of value to the commonweal. But a court of justice

would repudiate with scorn any proposal of this kind if made to it by the

medical faculty; for justice would cease to be justice, if it were bartered away

for any consideration whatever.              But what is the mode and measure of punishment which public

justice takes as its principle and standard? It is just the principle of equality,

by which the pointer of the scale of justice is made to incline no more to the

one side than the other. It may be rendered by saying that the undeserved evil

which any one commits on another is to be regarded as perpetrated on

himself. Hence it may be said: “If you slander another, you slander yourself;

if you steal from another, you steal from yourself; if you strike another, you

strike yourself; if you kill another, you kill yourself.” This is the right of

retaliation (jus talionis); and, properly understood, it is the only principle

which in regulating a public court, as distinguished from mere private

judgement, can definitely assign both the quality and the quantity of a just

penalty. All other standards are wavering and uncertain; and on account of

other considerations involved in them, they contain no principle conformable

to the sentence of pure and strict justice. It may appear, however, that

difference of social status would not admit the application of the principle of

retaliation, which is that of “like with like.” But although the application may

not in all cases be possible according to the letter, yet as regards the effect it

may always be attained in practice, by due regard being given to the

disposition and sentiment of the parties in the higher social sphere. Thus a

pecuniary penalty on account of a verbal injury may have no direct

proportion to the injustice of slander; for one who is wealthy may be able to

indulge himself in this offence for his own gratification. Yet the attack

committed on the honour of the party aggrieved may have its equivalent in

the pain inflicted upon the pride of the aggressor, especially if he is

condemned by the judgement of the court, not only to retract and apologize,

but to submit to some meaner ordeal, as kissing the hand of the injured

person. In like manner, if a man of the highest rank has violently assaulted an

innocent citizen of the lower orders, he may be condemned not only to

apologize but to undergo a solitary and painful imprisonment, whereby, in

addition to the discomfort endured, the vanity of the offender would be

painfully affected, and the very shame of his position would constitute an

adequate retaliation after the principle of “like with like.” But how then

would we render the statement: “If you steal from another, you steal from

yourself?” In this way, that whoever steals anything makes the property of all

insecure; he therefore robs himself of all security in property, according to

the right of retaliation. Such a one has nothing, and can acquire nothing, but

he has the will to live; and this is only possible by others supporting him. Butas the state should not do this gratuitously, he must for this purpose yield his

powers to the state to be used in penal labour; and thus he falls for a time, or

it may be for life, into a condition of slavery. But whoever has committed

murder, must die. There is, in this case, no juridical substitute or surrogate,

that can be given or taken for the satisfaction of justice. There is no likeness

or proportion between life, however painful, and death; and therefore there is

no equality between the crime of murder and the retaliation of it but what is

judicially accomplished by the execution of the criminal. His death, however,

must be kept free from all maltreatment that would make the humanity

suffering in his person loathsome or abominable. Even if a civil society

resolved to dissolve itself with the consent of all its members — as might be

supposed in the case of a people inhabiting an island resolving to separate

and scatter themselves throughout the whole world — the last murderer lying

in the prison ought to be executed before the resolution was carried out. This

ought to be done in order that every one may realize the desert of his deeds,

and that blood-guiltiness may not remain upon the people; for otherwise they

might all be regarded as participators in the murder as a public violation of

justice.

              The equalization of punishment with crime is therefore only possible

by the cognition of the judge extending even to the penalty of death,

according to the right of retaliation. This is manifest from the fact that it is

only thus that a sentence can be pronounced over all criminals proportionate

to their internal wickedness; as may be seen by considering the case when the

punishment of death has to be inflicted, not on account of a murder, but on

account of a political crime that can only be punished capitally. A

hypothetical case, founded on history, will illustrate this. In the last Scottish

rebellion there were various participators in it — such as Balmerino and

others — who believed that in taking part in the rebellion they were only

discharging their duty to the house of Stuart; but there were also others who

were animated only by private motives and interests. Now, suppose that the

judgement of the supreme court regarding them had been this: that every one

should have liberty to choose between the punishment of death or penal

servitude for life. In view of such an alternative, I say that the man of honour

would choose death, and the knave would choose servitude. This would be

the effect of their human nature as it is; for the honourable man values his

honour more highly than even life itself, whereas a knave regards a life,

although covered with shame, as better in his eyes than not to be. The formeris, without gainsaying, less guilty than the other; and they can only be

proportionately punished by death being inflicted equally upon them both;

yet to the one it is a mild punishment when his nobler temperament is taken

into account, whereas it is a hard punishment to the other in view of his baser

temperament. But, on the other hand, were they all equally condemned to

penal servitude for life, the honourable man would be too severely punished,

while the other, on account of his baseness of nature, would be too mildly

punished. In the judgement to be pronounced over a number of criminals

united in such a conspiracy, the best equalizer of punishment and crime in the

form of public justice is death. And besides all this, it has never been heard of

that a criminal condemned to death on account of a murder has complained

that the sentence inflicted on him more than was right and just; and any one

would treat him with scorn if he expressed himself to this effect against it.

Otherwise it would be necessary to admit that, although wrong and injustice

are not done to the criminal by the law, yet the legislative power is not

entitled to administer this mode of punishment; and if it did so, it would be in

contradiction with itself.

              However many they may be who have committed a murder, or have

even commanded it, or acted as art and part in it, they ought all to suffer

death; for so justice wills it, in accordance with the idea of the juridical

power, as founded on the universal laws of reason. But the number of the

accomplices (correi) in such a deed might happen to be so great that the state,

in resolving to be without such criminals, would be in danger of soon also

being deprived of subjects. But it will not thus dissolve itself, neither must it

return to the much worse condition of nature, in which there would be no

external justice. Nor, above all, should it deaden the sensibilities of the

people by the spectacle of justice being exhibited in the mere carnage of a

slaughtering bench. In such circumstances the sovereign must always be

allowed to have it in his power to take the part of the judge upon himself as a

case of necessity — and to deliver a judgement which, instead of the penalty

of death, shall assign some other punishment to the criminals and thereby

preserve a multitude of the people. The penalty of deportation is relevant in

this connection. Such a form of judgement cannot be carried out according to

a public law, but only by an authoritative act of the royal prerogative, and it

may only be applied as an act of grace in individual cases.

              Against these doctrines, the Marquis Beccaria has given forth adifferent view. Moved by the compassionate sentimentality of a humane

feeling, he has asserted that all capital punishment is wrong in itself and

unjust. He has put forward this view on the ground that the penalty of death

could not be contained in the original civil contract; for, in that case, every

one of the people would have had to consent to lose his life if be murdered

any of his fellow citizens. But, it is argued, such a consent is impossible,

because no one can thus dispose of his own life. All this is mere sophistry

and perversion of right. No one undergoes punishment because he has willed

to be punished, but because he has willed a punishable action; for it is in fact

no punishment when any one experiences what he wills, and it is impossible

for any one to will to be punished. To say, “I will to be punished, if I murder

any one,” can mean nothing more than, “I submit myself along with all the

other citizens to the laws”; and if there are any criminals among the people,

these laws will include penal laws. The individual who, as a co-legislator,

enacts penal law cannot possibly be the same person who, as a subject, is

punished according to the law; for, qua criminal, he cannot possibly be

regarded as having a voice in the legislation, the legislator being rationally

viewed as just and holy. If any one, then, enact a penal law against himself as

a criminal, it must be the pure juridically law-giving reason (homo

noumenon), which subjects him as one capable of crime, and consequently as

another person (homo phenomenon), along with all the others in the civil

union, to this penal law. In other words, it is not the people taken

distributively, but the tribunal of public justice, as distinct from the criminal,

that prescribes capital punishment; and it is not to be viewed as if the social

contract contained the promise of all the individuals to allow themselves to

be punished, thus disposing of themselves and their lives. For if the right to

punish must be grounded upon a promise of the wrongdoer, whereby he is to

be regarded as being willing to be punished, it ought also to be left to him to

find himself deserving of the punishment; and the criminal would thus be his

own judge. The chief error (proton pseudos) of this sophistry consists in

regarding the judgement of the criminal himself, necessarily determined by

his reason, that he is under obligation to undergo the loss of his life, as a

judgement that must be grounded on a resolution of his will to take it away

himself; and thus the execution of the right in question is represented as

united in one and the same person with the adjudication of the right.

              There are, however, two crimes worthy of death, in respect of which

it still remains doubtful whether the legislature have the right to deal withthem capitally. It is the sentiment of honour that induces their perpetration.

The one originates in a regard for womanly honour, the other in a regard for

military honour; and in both cases there is a genuine feeling of honour

incumbent on the individuals as a duty. The former is the crime of maternal

infanticide (infanticidium maternale); the latter is the crime of killing a

fellow-soldier in a duel (commilitonicidium). Now legislation cannot take

away the shame of an illegitimate birth, nor wipe off the stain attaching from

a suspicion of cowardice, to an officer who does not resist an act that would

bring him into contempt, by an effort of his own that is superior to the fear of

death. Hence it appears that, in such circumstances, the individuals concerned

are remitted to the state of nature; and their acts in both cases must be called

homicide, and not murder, which involves evil intent (homicidium dolosum).

In all instances the acts are undoubtedly punishable; but they cannot be

punished by the supreme power with death. An illegitimate child comes into

the world outside of the law which properly regulates marriage, and it is thus

born beyond the pale or constitutional protection of the law. Such a child is

introduced, as it were, like prohibited goods, into the commonwealth, and as

it has no legal right to existence in this way, its destruction might also be

ignored; nor can the shame of the mother, when her unmarried confinement is

known, be removed by any legal ordinance. A subordinate officer, again, on

whom an insult is inflicted, sees himself compelled by the public opinion of

his associates to obtain satisfaction; and, as in the state of nature, the

punishment of the offender can only be effected by a duel, in which his own

life is exposed to danger, and not by means of the law in a court of justice.

The duel is therefore adopted as the means of demonstrating his courage as

that characteristic upon which the honour of his profession essentially rests;

and this is done even if it should issue in the killing of his adversary. But as

such a result takes place publicly and under the consent of both parties,

although it may be done unwillingly, it cannot properly be called murder

(homicidium dolosum). What then is the right in both cases as relating to

criminal justice? Penal justice is here in fact brought into great straits, having

apparently either to declare the notion of honour, which is certainly no mere

fancy here, to ‘be nothing in the eye of the law, or to exempt the crime from

its due punishment; and thus it would become either remiss or cruel. The knot

thus tied is to be resolved in the following way. The categorical imperative of

penal justice, that the killing of any person contrary to the law must be

punished with death, remains in force; but the legislation itself and the civilconstitution generally, so long as they are still barbarous and incomplete, are

at fault. And this is the reason why the subjective motive-principles of honour

among the people do not coincide with the standards which are objectively

conformable to another purpose; so that the public justice issuing from the

state becomes injustice relatively to that which is upheld among the people

themselves.

                          II. The Right of Pardoning.

 

 

              The right of pardoning (jus aggratiandi), viewed in relation to the

criminal, is the right of mitigating or entirely remitting his punishment. On

the side of the sovereign this is the most delicate of all rights, as it may be

exercised so as to set forth the splendour of his dignity, and yet so as to do a

great wrong by it. It ought not to be exercised in application to the crimes of

the subjects against each other; for exemption from punishment (impunitas

criminis) would be the greatest wrong that could be done to them. It is only

an occasion of some form of treason (crimen laesae majestatis), as a lesion

against himself, that the sovereign should make use of this right. And it

should not be exercised even in this connection, if the safety of the people

would be endangered by remitting such punishment. This right is the only

one which properly deserves the name of a “right of majesty.”    50. Juridical Relations of the Citizen to his Country and to Other

        Countries. Emigration; Immigration; Banishment; Exile.

 

 

              The land or territory whose inhabitants — in virtue of its political

constitution and without the necessary intervention of a special juridical act

— are, by birth, fellow-citizens of one and the same commonwealth, is called

their country or fatherland. A foreign country is one in which they would not

possess this condition, but would be living abroad. If a country abroad form

part of the territory under the same government as at home, it constitutes a

province, according to the Roman usage of the term. It does not constitute an

incorporated portion of the empire (imperii) so as to be the abode of equal

fellow-citizens, but is only a possession of the government, like a lower

house; and it must therefore honour the domain of the ruling state as the

“mother country” (regio domina).

              1. A subject, even regarded as a citizen, has the right of emigration;

for the state cannot retain him as if he were its property. But he may only

carry away with him his moveables as distinguished from his fixed

possessions. However, he is entitled to sell his immovable property, and take

the value of it in money with him.

              2. The supreme power, as master of the country, has the right to

favour immigration and the settlement of strangers and colonists. This will

hold even although the natives of the country may be unfavourably disposed

to it, if their private property in the soil is not diminished or interfered with.

              3. In the case of a subject who has committed a crime that renders all

society of his fellow-citizens with him prejudicial to the state, the supreme

power has also the right of inflicting banishment to a country abroad. By such

deportation, he does not acquire any share in the rights of citizens of the

territory to which he is banished.

              4. The supreme power has also the right of imposing exile generally

(jus exilii), by which a citizen is sent abroad into the wide world as the “out-

land.” And because the supreme authority thus withdraws all legal protection

from the citizen, this amounts to making him an “outlaw” within the territoryof his own country.51. The Three Forms of the State: Autocracy; Aristocracy; Democracy.

 

 

              The three powers in the state, involved in the conception of a public

government generally (res publica latius dicta), are only so many relations of

the united will of the people which emanates from the a priori reason; and

viewed as such it is the objective practical realization of the pure idea of a

supreme head of the state. This supreme head is the sovereign; but conceived

only as a representation of the whole people, the idea still requires physical

embodiment in a person, who may exhibit the supreme power of the state and

bring the idea actively to bear upon the popular will. The relation of the

supreme power to the people is conceivable in three different forms: either

one in the state rules over all; or some, united in relation of equality with each

other, rule over all the others; or all together rule over each and all

individually, including themselves. The form of the state is therefore either

autocratic, or aristocratic, or democratic. The expression monarchic is not so

suitable as autocratic for the conception here intended; for a monarch is one

who has the highest power, an autocrat is one who has all power, so that this

latter is the sovereign, whereas the former merely represents the sovereignty.

              It is evident that an autocracy is the simplest form of government in

the state, being constituted by the relation of one, as king, to the people, so

that there is one only who is the lawgiver. An aristocracy, as a form of

government, is, however, compounded of the union of two relations: that of

the nobles in relation to one another as the lawgivers, thereby constituting the

sovereignty, and that of this sovereign power to the people. A democracy,

again, is the most complex of all the forms of the state, for it has to begin by

uniting the will of all so as to form a people; and then it has to appoint a

sovereign over this common union, which sovereign is no other than the

united will itself. The consideration of the ways in which these forms are

adulterated by the intrusion of violent and illegitimate usurpers of power, as

in oligarchy and ochlocracy, as well as the discussion of the so called mixed

constitutions, may be passed over here as not essential, and as leading into

too much detail.

              As regards the administration of right in the state, it may be said thatthe simplest mode is also the best; but as regards its bearing on right itself, it

is also the most dangerous for the people, in view of the despotism to which

simplicity of administration so naturally gives rise. It is undoubtedly a

rational maxim to aim at simplification in the machinery which is to unite the

people under compulsory laws, and this would be secured were all the people

to be passive and to obey only one person over them; but the method would

not give subjects who were also citizens of the state. It is sometimes said that

the people should be satisfied with the reflection that monarchy, regarded as

an autocracy, is the best political constitution, if the monarch is good, that is,

if be has the judgement as well as the will to do right. But this is a mere

evasion and belongs to the common class of wise tautological phrases. It only

amounts to saying that “the best constitution is that by which the supreme

administrator of the state is made the best ruler”; that is, that the best

constitution is the best!  52. Historical Origin and Changes. A Pure Republic. Representative

                                      Government.

 

 

              It is vain to inquire into the historical origin of the political

mechanism; for it is no longer possible to discover historically the point of

time at which civil society took its beginning. Savages do not draw up a

documentary record of their having submitted themselves to law; and it may

be inferred from the nature of uncivilized men that they must have set out

from a state of violence. To prosecute such an inquiry in the intention of

finding a pretext for altering the existing constitution by violence is no less

than penal. For such a mode of alteration would amount to revolution, that

could only be carried out by an insurrection of the people, and not by

constitutional modes of legislation. But insurrection against an already

existing constitution, is an overthrow of all civil and juridical relations, and

of right generally; and hence it is not a mere alteration of the civil

constitution, but a dissolution of it. It would thus form a mode of transition to

a better constitution by palingenesis and not by mere metamorphosis; and it

would require a new social contract, upon which the former original contract,

as then annulled, would have no influence.

              It must, however, be possible for the sovereign to change the

existing constitution, if it is not actually consistent with the idea of the

original contract. In doing so it is essential to give existence to that form of

government which will properly constitute the people into a state. Such a

change cannot be made by the state deliberately altering its constitution from

one of the three forms to one of the other two. For example, political changes

should not be carried out by the aristocrats combining to subject themselves

to an autocracy, or resolving to fuse all into a democracy, or conversely; as if

it depended on the arbitrary choice and liking of the sovereign what

constitution he may impose on the people. For, even if as sovereign he

resolved to alter the constitution into a democracy, he might be doing wrong

to the people, because they might hold such a constitution in abhorrence, and

regard either of the other two as more suitable to them in the circumstances.

              The forms of the state are only the letter (littera) of the originalconstitution in the civil union; and they may therefore remain so long as they

are considered, from ancient and long habit (and therefore only subjectively),

to be necessary to the machinery of the political constitution. But the spirit of

that original contract (anima pacti originarii) contains and imposes the

obligation on the constituting power to make the mode of the government

conformable to its idea; and, if this cannot be effected at once, to change it

gradually and continuously till it harmonize in its working with the only

rightful constitution, which is that of a pure republic. Thus the old empirical

and statutory forms, which serve only to effect the political subjection of the

people, will be resolved into the original and rational forms which alone take

freedom as their principle, and even as the condition of all compulsion and

constraint. Compulsion is in fact requisite for the realization of a juridical

constitution, according to the proper idea of the state; and it will lead at last to

the realization of that idea, even according to the letter. This is the only

enduring political constitution, as in it the law is itself sovereign, and is no

longer attached to a particular person. This is the ultimate end of all public

right, and the state in which every citizen can have what is his own

peremptorily assigned to him. But so long as the form of the state has to be

represented, according to the letter, by many different moral persons invested

with the supreme power, there can only be a provisory internal right, and not

an absolutely juridical state of civil society.

              Every true republic is and can only be constituted by a representative

system of the people. Such a representative system is instituted in name of

the people, and is constituted by all the citizens being united together, in

order, by means of their deputies, to protect and secure their rights. But as

soon as a supreme head of the state in person — be it as king, or nobility, or

the whole body of the people in a democratic union — becomes also

representative, the united people then does not merely represent the

sovereignty; but they are themselves sovereign. It is in the people that the

supreme power originally resides, and it is accordingly from this power that

all the rights of individual citizens as mere subjects, and especially as

officials of the state, must be derived. When the sovereignty of the people

themselves is thus realized, the republic is established; and it is no longer

necessary to give up the reins of government into the hands of those by

whom they have been hitherto held, especially as they might again destroy all

the new institutions by their arbitrary and absolute will.              It was therefore a great error in judgement on the part of a powerful

ruler in our time, when he tried to extricate himself from the embarrassment

arising from great public debts, by transferring this burden to the people, and

leaving them to undertake and distribute them among themselves as they

might best think fit. It thus became natural that the legislative power, not only

in respect of the taxation of the subjects, but in respect of the government,

should come into the hands of the people. It was requisite that they should be

able to prevent the incurring of new debts by extravagance or war; and in

consequence, the supreme power of the monarch entirely disappeared, not by

being merely suspended, but by passing over in fact to the people, to whose

legislative will the property of every subject thus became subjected. Nor can

it be said that a tacit and yet obligatory promise must be assumed as having,

under such circumstances, been given by the national assembly, not to

constitute themselves into a sovereignty, but only to administer the affairs of

the sovereign for the time, and after this was done to deliver the reins of the

government again into the monarch’s hands. Such a supposed contract would

be null and void. The right of the supreme legislation in the commonwealth is

not an alienable right, but is the most personal of all rights. Whoever

possesses it can only dispose by the collective will of the people, in respect of

the people; he cannot dispose in respect of the collective will itself, which is

the ultimate foundation of all public contracts. A contract, by which the

people would be bound to give back their authority again, would not be

consistent with their position as a legislative power, and yet it would be made

binding upon the people; which, on the principle that “No one can serve two

masters,” is a contradiction.

    II. The Right of Nations and International Law. (Jus Gentium).

 

               53. Nature and Division of the Right of Nations.

 

 

              The individuals, who make up a people, may be regarded as natives

of the country sprung by natural descent from a common ancestry

(congeniti), although this may not hold entirely true in detail. Again, they

may be viewed according to the intellectual and juridical relation, as born of a

common political mother, the republic, so that they constitute, as it were, a

public family or nation (gens, natio) whose members are all related to each

other as citizens of the state. As members of a state, they do not mix with

those who live beside them in the state of nature, considering such to be

ignoble. Yet these savages, on account of the lawless freedom they have

chosen, regard themselves as superior to civilized peoples; and they

constitute tribes and even races, but not states. The public right of states (jus

publicum civitatum), in their relations to one another, is what we have to

consider under the designation of the “right of nations.” Wherever a state,

viewed as a moral person, acts in relation to another existing in the condition

of natural freedom, and consequently in a state of continual war, such right

takes it rise.

              The right of nations in relation to the state of war may be divided

into: 1. the right of going to war; 2. right during war; and 3. right after war,

the object of which is to constrain the nations mutually to pass from this state

of war and to found a common constitution establishing perpetual peace. The

difference between the right of individual men or families as related to each

other in the state of nature, and the right of the nations among themselves,

consists in this, that in the right of nations we have to consider not merely a

relation of one state to another as a whole, but also the relation of the

individual persons in one state to the individuals of another state, as well as to

that state as a whole. This difference, however, between the right of nations

and the right of individuals in the mere state of nature, requires to be

determined by elements which can easily be deduced from the conception of

the latter.                      54. Elements of the Right of Nations.

 

 

              The elements of the right of nations are as follows:

              1. States, viewed as nations, in their external relations to one another

— like lawless savages — are naturally in a non-juridical condition;

              2. This natural condition is a state of war in which the right of the

stronger prevails; and although it may not in fact be always found as a state

of actual war and incessant hostility, and although no real wrong is done to

any one therein, yet the condition is wrong in itself in the highest degree, and

the nations which form states contiguous to each other are bound mutually to

pass out of it;

              3. An alliance of nations, in accordance with the idea of an original

social contract, is necessary to protect each other against external aggression

and attack, but not involving interference with their several internal

difficulties and disputes;

              4. This mutual connection by alliance must dispense with a distinct

sovereign power, such as is set up in the civil constitution; it can only take

the form of a federation, which as such may be revoked on any occasion, and

must consequently be renewed from time to time.

              This is therefore a right which comes in as an accessory (in

subsidium) of another original right, in order to prevent the nations from

falling from right and lapsing into the state of actual war with each other. It

thus issues in the idea of a foedus amphictyonum.    55. Right of Going to War as related to the Subjects of the State.

 

 

              We have then to consider, in the first place, the original right of free

states to go to war with each other as being still in a state of nature, but as

exercising this right in order to establish some condition of society

approaching the juridical And, first of all, the question arises as to what right

the state has in relation to its own subjects, to use them in order to make war

against other states, to employ their property and even their lives for this

purpose, or at least to expose them to hazard and danger; and all this in such a

way that it does not depend upon their own personal judgement whether they

will march into the field of war or not, but the supreme command of the

sovereign claims to settle and dispose of them thus.

              This right appears capable of being easily established. It may be

grounded upon the right which every one has to do with what is his own as he

will. Whatever one has made substantially for himself, he holds as his

incontestable property. The following, then, is such a deduction as a mere

jurist would put forward.

              There are various natural products in a country which, as regards the

number and quantity in which they exist, must be considered as specially

produced (artefacta) by the work of the state; for the country would not yield

them to such extent were it not under the constitution of the state and its

regular administrative government, or if the inhabitants were still living in the

state of nature. Sheep, cattle, domestic fowl the most useful of their kind —

swine, and such like, would either be used up as necessary food or destroyed

by beasts of prey in the district in which I live, so that they would entirely

disappear, or be found in very scant supplies, were it not for the government

securing to the inhabitants their acquisitions and property. This holds

likewise of the population itself, as we see in the case of the American

deserts; and even were the greatest industry applied in those regions — which

is not yet done — there might be but a scanty population. The inhabitants of

any country would be but sparsely sown here and there were it not for the

protection of government; because without it they could not spread

themselves with their households upon a territory which was always indanger of being devastated by enemies or by wild beasts of prey; and further,

so great a multitude of men as now live in any one country could not

otherwise obtain sufficient means of support. Hence, as it can be said of

vegetable growths, such as potatoes, as well as of domesticated animals, that

because the abundance in which they are found is a product of human labour,

they may be used, destroyed, and consumed by man; so it seems that it may

be said of the sovereign, as the supreme power in the state, that he has the

right to lead his subjects, as being for the most part productions of his own, to

war, as if it were to the chase, and even to march them to the field of battle,

as if it were on a pleasure excursion.

              This principle of right may be supposed to float dimly before the

mind of the monarch, and it certainly holds true at least of the lower animals

which may become the property of man. But such a principle will not at all

apply to men, especially when viewed as citizens who must be regarded as

members of the state, with a share in the legislation, and not merely as means

for others but as ends in themselves. As such they must give their free

consent, through their representatives, not only to the carrying on of war

generally, but to every separate declaration of war; and it is only under this

limiting condition that the state has a right to demand their services in

undertakings so full of danger.

              We would therefore deduce this right rather from the duty of the

sovereign to the people than conversely. Under this relation, the people must

be regarded as having given their sanction; and, having the right of voting,

they may be considered, although thus passive in reference to themselves

individually, to be active in so far as they represent the sovereignty itself.          56. Right of Going to War in relation to Hostile States.

 

 

              Viewed as in the state of nature, the right of nations to go to war and

to carry on hostilities is the legitimate way by which they prosecute their

rights by their own power when they regard themselves as injured; and this is

done because in that state the method of a juridical process, although the only

one proper to settle such disputes, cannot be adopted.

              The threatening of war is to be distinguished from the active injury

of a first aggression, which again is distinguished from the general outbreak

of hostilities. A threat or menace may be given by the active preparation of

armaments, upon which a right of prevention (jus praeventionis) is founded

on the other side, or merely by the formidable increase of the power of

another state (potestas tremenda) by acquisition of territory. Lesion of a less

powerful country may be involved merely in the condition of a more

powerful neighbour prior to any action at all; and in the state of nature an

attack under such circumstances would be warrantable. This international

relation is the foundation of the right of equilibrium, or of the “balance of

power,” among all the states that are in active contiguity to each other.

              The right to go to war is constituted by any overt act of injury. This

includes any arbitrary retaliation or act of reprisal (retorsio) as a satisfaction

taken by one people for an offence committed by another, without any

attempt being made to obtain reparation in a peaceful way. Such an act of

retaliation would be similar in kind to an outbreak of hostilities without a

previous declaration of war. For if there is to be any right at all during the

state of war, something analogous to a contract must be assumed, involving

acceptance on the side of the declaration on the other, and amounting to the

fact that they both will to seek their right in this way.                              57. Right during War.

 

 

              The determination of what constitutes right in war, is the most

difficult problem of the right of nations and international law. It is very

difficult even to form a conception of such a right, or to think of any law in
                                                                                          6
this lawless state without falling into a contradiction. Inter arma silent leges.

It must then be just the right to carry on war according to such principles as

render it always still possible to pass out of that natural condition of the states

in their external relations to each other, and to enter into a condition of right.

        6
               [“In the midst of arms the laws are silent.” Cicero.]

              No war of independent states against each other can rightly be a war

of punishment (bellum punitivum). For punishment is only in place under the

relation of a superior (imperantis) to a subject (subditum); and this is not the

relation of the states to one another. Neither can an international war be “a

war of extermination” (bellum internicinum), nor even “a war of subjugation”

(bellum subjugatorium); for this would issue in the moral extinction of a state

by its people being either fused into one mass with the conquering state, or

being reduced to slavery. Not that this necessary means of attaining to a

condition of peace is itself contradictory to the right of a state; but because

the idea of the right of nations includes merely the conception of an

antagonism that is in accordance with principles of external freedom, in order

that the state may maintain what is properly its own, but not that it may

acquire a condition which, from the aggrandizement of its power, might

become threatening to other states.

              Defensive measures and means of all kinds are allowable to a state

that is forced to war, except such as by their use would make the subjects

using them unfit to be citizens; for the state would thus make itself unfit to be

regarded as a person capable of participating in equal rights in the

international relations according to the right of nations. Among these

forbidden means are to be reckoned the appointment of subjects to act as

spies, or engaging subjects or even strangers to act as assassins, or poisoners

(in which class might well be included the so called sharpshooters who lurk

in ambush for individuals), or even employing agents to spread false news. Ina word, it is forbidden to use any such malignant and perfidious means as

would destroy the confidence which would be requisite to establish a lasting

peace thereafter.

              It is permissible in war to impose exactions and contributions upon a

conquered enemy; but it is not legitimate to plunder the people in the way of

forcibly depriving individuals of their property. For this would be robbery,

seeing it was not the conquered people but the state under whose government

they were placed that carried on the war by means of them. All exactions

should be raised by regular requisition, and receipts ought to be given for

them, in order that when peace is restored the burden imposed on the country

or the province may be proportionately borne.                                58. Right after War.

 

 

              The right that follows after war, begins at the moment of the treaty

of peace and refers to the consequences of the war. The conqueror lays down

the conditions under which he will agree with the conquered power to form

the conclusion of peace. Treaties are drawn up; not indeed according to any

right that it pertains to him to protect, on account of an alleged lesion by his

opponent, but as taking this question upon himself, he bases the right to

decide it upon his own power. Hence the conqueror may not demand

restitution of the cost of the war; because he would then have to declare the

war of his opponent to be unjust. And even although he should adopt such an

argument, he is not entitled to apply it; because he would have to declare the

war to be punitive, and he would thus in turn inflict an injury. To this right

belongs also the exchange of prisoners, which is to be carried out without

ransom and without regard to equality of numbers.

              Neither the conquered state nor its subjects lose their political liberty

by conquest of the country, so as that the former should be degraded to a

colony, or the latter to slaves; for otherwise it would have been a penal war,

which is contradictory in itself. A colony or a province is constituted by a

people which has its own constitution, legislation, and territory, where

persons belonging to another state are merely strangers, but which is

nevertheless subject to the supreme executive power of another state. This

other state is called the mother-country. It is ruled as a daughter, but has at

the same time its own form of government, as in a separate parliament under

the presidency of a viceroy (civitas hybrida). Such was Athens in relation to

different islands; and such is at present (1796) the relation of Great Britain to

Ireland.

              Still less can slavery be deduced as a rightful institution, from the

conquest of a people in war; for this would assume that the war was of a

punitive nature. And least of all can a basis be found in war for a hereditary

slavery, which is absurd in itself, since guilt cannot be inherited from the

criminality of another.

              Further, that an amnesty is involved in the conclusion of a treaty ofpeace is already implied in the very idea of a peace.                              59. The Rights of Peace.

 

 

              The rights of peace are:

              1. The right to be in peace when war is in the neighbourhood, or the

right of neutrality.

              2. The right to have peace secured so that it may continue when it

has been concluded, that is, the right of guarantee.

              3. The right of the several states to enter into a mutual alliance, so as

to defend themselves in common against all external or even internal attacks.

This right of federation, however, does not extend to the formation of any

league for external aggression or internal aggrandizement.                    60. Right as against an Unjust Enemy.

 

 

              The right of a state against an unjust enemy has no limits, at least in

respect of quality as distinguished from quantity or degree. In other words,

the injured state may use — not, indeed any means, but yet — all those

means that are permissible and in reasonable measure in so far as they are in

its power, in order to assert its right to what is its own. But what then is an

unjust enemy according to the conceptions of the right of nations, when, as

holds generally of the state of nature, every state is judge in its own cause? It

is one whose publicly expressed will, whether in word or deed, betrays a

maxim which, if it were taken as a universal rule, would make a state of

peace among the nations impossible, and would necessarily perpetuate the

state of nature. Such is the violation of public treaties, with regard to which it

may be assumed that any such violation concerns all nations by threatening

their freedom, and that they are thus summoned to unite against such a wrong

and to take away the power of committing it. But this does not include the

right to partition and appropriate the country, so as to make a state as it were

disappear from the earth; for this would be an injustice to the people of that

state, who cannot lose their original right to unite into a commonwealth, and

to adopt such a new constitution as by its nature would be unfavourable to the

inclination for war.

              Further, it may be said that the expression “an unjust enemy in the

state of nature” is pleonastic; for the state of nature is itself a state of

injustice. A just enemy would be one to whom I would do wrong in offering

resistance; but such a one would really not be my enemy.        61. Perpetual Peace and a Permanent Congress of Nations.

 

 

              The natural state of nations as well as of individual men is a state

which it is a duty to pass out of, in order to enter into a legal state. Hence,

before this transition occurs, all the right of nations and all the external

property of states acquirable or maintainable by war are merely provisory;

and they can only become peremptory in a universal union of states

analogous to that by which a nation becomes a state. It is thus only that a real

state of peace could be established. But with the too great extension of such a

union of states over vast regions, any government of it, and consequently the

protection of its individual members, must at last become impossible; and

thus a multitude of such corporations would again bring round a state of war.

Hence the perpetual peace, which is the ultimate end of all the right of

nations, becomes in fact an impracticable idea. The political principles,

however, which aim at such an end, and which enjoin the formation of such

unions among the states as may promote a continuous approximation to a

perpetual peace, are not impracticable; they are as practicable as this

approximation itself, which is a practical problem involving a duty, and

founded upon the right of individual men and states.

              Such a union of states, in order to maintain peace, may be called a

permanent congress of nations; and it is free to every neighbouring state to

join in it. A union of this kind, so far at least as regards the formalities of the

right of nations in respect of the preservation of peace, was presented in the

first half of this century, in the Assembly of the States-General at the Hague.

In this Assembly most of the European courts, and even the smallest

republics, brought forward their complaints about the hostilities which were

carried on by the one against the other. Thus the whole of Europe appeared

like a single federated state, accepted as umpire by the several nations in their

public differences. But in place of this agreement, the right of nations

afterwards survived only in books; it disappeared from the cabinets, or, after

force had been already used, it was relegated in the form of theoretical

deductions to the obscurity of archives.

              By such a congress is here meant only a voluntary combination ofdifferent states that would be dissoluble at any time, and not such a union as

is embodied in the United States of America, founded upon a political

constitution, and therefore indissoluble. It is only by a congress of this kind

that the idea of a public right of nations can be established, and that the

settlement of their differences by the mode of a civil process, and not by the

barbarous means of war, can be realized.      III. The Universal Right of Mankind. (Jus Cosmopoliticum)

 

 

            62. Nature and Conditions of Cosmopolitical Right.

 

 

              The rational idea of a universal, peaceful, if not yet friendly, union

of all the nations upon the earth that may come into active relations with each

other, is a juridical principle, as distinguished from philanthropic or ethical

principles. Nature has enclosed them altogether within definite boundaries, in

virtue of the spherical form of their abode as a globus terraqueus; and the

possession of the soil upon which an inhabitant of the earth may live can only

be regarded as possession of a part of a limited whole and, consequently, as a

part to which every one has originally a right. Hence all nations originally

hold a community of the soil, but not a juridical community of possession

(communio), nor consequently of the use or proprietorship of the soil, but

only of a possible physical intercourse (commercium) by means of it. In other

words, they are placed in such thoroughgoing relations of each to all the rest

that they may claim to enter into intercourse with one another, and they have

a right to make an attempt in this direction, while a foreign nation would not

be entitled to treat them on this account as enemies. This right, in so far as it

relates to a possible union of all nations, in respect of certain laws universally

regulating their intercourse with each other, may be called “cosmopolitical

right” (jus cosmopoliticum).

              It may appear that seas put nations out of all communion with each

other. But this is not so; for by means of commerce, seas form the happiest

natural provision for their intercourse. And the more there are of

neighbouring coastlands, as in the case of the Mediterranean Sea, this

intercourse becomes the more animated. And hence communications with

such lands, especially where there are settlements upon them connected with

the mother countries giving occasion for such communications, bring it about

that evil and violence committed in one place of our globe are felt in all. Such

possible abuse cannot, however, annul the right of man as a citizen of the

world to attempt to enter into communion with all others, and for this purposeto visit all the regions of the earth, although this does not constitute a right of

settlement upon the territory of another people (jus incolatus), for which a

special contract is required.

              But the question is raised as to whether, in the case of newly

discovered countries, a people may claim the right to settle (accolatus), and to

occupy possessions in the neighbourhood of another people that has already

settled in that region; and to do this without their consent.

              Such a right is indubitable, if the new settlement takes place at such

a distance from the seat of the former that neither would restrict or injure the

other in the use of their territory. But in the case of nomadic peoples, or tribes

of shepherds and hunters (such as the Hottentots, the Tungusi, and most of

the American Indians), whose support is derived from wide desert tracts, such

occupation should never take place by force, but only by contract; and any

such contract ought never to take advantage of the ignorance of the original

dwellers in regard to the cession of their lands. Yet it is commonly alleged

that such acts of violent appropriation may be justified as subserving the

general good of the world. It appears as if sufficiently justifying grounds

were furnished for them, partly by reference to the civilization of barbarous

peoples (as by a pretext of this kind even Busching tries to excuse the bloody

introduction of the Christian religion into Germany), and partly by founding

upon the necessity of purging one’s own country from depraved criminals,

and the hope of their improvement or that of their posterity, in another

continent like New Holland. But all these alleged good purposes cannot wash

out the stain of injustice in the means employed to attain them. It may be

objected that, had such scrupulousness about making a beginning in founding

a legal state with force been always maintained, the whole earth would still

have been in a state of lawlessness. But such an objection would as little

annul the conditions of right in question as the pretext of the political

revolutionaries that, when a constitution has become degenerate, it belongs to

the people to transform it by force. This would amount generally to being

unjust once and for all, in order thereafter to found justice the more surely,

and to make it flourish.                                      Conclusion.

 

 

              If one cannot prove that a thing is, he may try to prove that it is not.

And if he succeeds in doing neither (as often occurs), he may still ask

whether it is in his interest to accept one or other of the alternatives

hypothetically, from the theoretical or the practical point of view. In other

words, a hypothesis may be accepted either in order to explain a certain

phenomenon (as in astronomy to account for the retrogression and

stationariness of the planets), or in order to attain a certain end, which again

may be either pragmatic, as belonging merely to the sphere of art, or moral,

as involving a purpose which it is a duty to adopt as a maxim of action. Now

it is evident that the assumption (suppositio) of the practicability of such an

end, though presented merely as a theoretical and problematical judgement,

may be regarded as constituting a duty; and hence it is so regarded in this

case. For although there may be no positive obligation to believe in such an

end, yet even if there were not the least theoretical probability of action being

carried out in accordance with it, so long as its impossibility cannot be

demonstrated, there still remains a duty incumbent upon us with regard to it.

              Now, as a matter of fact, the morally practical reason utters within us

its irrevocable veto: There shall be no war. So there ought to be no war,

neither between me and you in the condition of nature, nor between us as

members of states which, although internally in a condition of law, are still

externally in their relation to each other in a condition of lawlessness; for this

is not the way by which any one should prosecute his right. Hence the

question no longer is as to whether perpetual peace is a real thing or not a real

thing, or as to whether we may not be deceiving ourselves when we adopt the

former alternative, but we must act on the supposition of its being real. We

must work for what may perhaps not be realized, and establish that

constitution which yet seems best adapted to bring it about (mayhap

republicanism in all states, together and separately). And thus we may put an

end to the evil of wars, which have been the chief interest of the internal

arrangements of all the states without exception. And although the realization

of this purpose may always remain but a pious wish, yet we do certainly not

deceive ourselves in adopting the maxim of action that will guide us inworking incessantly for it; for it is a duty to do this. To suppose that the

moral law within us is itself deceptive, would be sufficient to excite the

horrible wish rather to be deprived of all reason than to live under such

deception, and even to see oneself, according to such principles, degraded

like the lower animals to the level of the mechanical play of nature.

              It may be said that the universal and lasting establishment of peace

constitutes not merely a part, but the whole final purpose and end of the

science of right as viewed within the limits of reason. The state of peace is

the only condition of the mine and thine that is secured and guaranteed by

laws in the relationship of men living in numbers contiguous to each other,

and who are thus combined in a constitution whose rule is derived not from

the mere experience of those who have found it the best as a normal guide for

others, but which must be taken by the reason a priori from the ideal of a

juridical union of men under public laws generally. For all particular

examples or instances, being able only to furnish illustration but not proof,

are deceptive, and at all events require a metaphysic to establish them by its

necessary principles. And this is conceded indirectly even by those who turn

metaphysics into ridicule, when they say, as they often do: “The best

constitution is that in which not men but laws exercise the power.” For what

can be more metaphysically sublime in its own way than this very idea of

theirs, which according to their own assertion has, notwithstanding, the most

objective reality? This may be easily shown by reference to actual instances.

And it is this very idea, which alone can be carried out practically, if it is not

forced on in a revolutionary and sudden way by violent overthrow of the

existing defective constitution; for this would produce for the time the

momentary annihilation of the whole juridical state of society. But if the idea

is carried forward by gradual reform and in accordance with fixed principles,

it may lead by a continuous approximation to the highest political good, and

to perpetual peace.

 

 

 

 

  